2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/False Claims and Statements


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


False Claims and Statements 
Chapter 47 of Title 18, U.S. Code, contains a number of related provisions that punish false 
or fraudulent statements, orally or in writing, made to various federal agencies and 
departments.  
 
The principal federal false statements statute is 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Briefly stated, section 1001 
prohibits a person from lying to or concealing information from a federal official; however, 
this statute overlaps with many of the more specific laws, such as 18 U.S.C. § 1014, which 
apply to false statements made on certain loan and credit applications. 
 
A statement is false for the purposes of section 1001 if it was known to be untrue when it 
was made, and it is fraudulent if it was known to be untrue and was made with the intent to 
deceive a government agency. For a violation to occur, the agency need not actually have 
been deceived, nor must it have in fact relied upon the false statement. The statement must 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.239 
have been capable, however, of influencing the agency involved. 
The elements of a typical section 1001 violation are set forth below: 
• The defendant made a false statement (or used a false document) 
• That was material 
• Regarding a matter within the jurisdiction of any agency of the United States 
• With knowledge of its falsity 
• Knowingly and willfully (or with reckless disregard for truth or falsity) 
 
Section 1001 is most often used to prosecute false statements to law enforcement or 
regulatory officials not made under oath, in the course of an official investigation, or on an 
application for such things as federal employment, credit, and visa applications. The 
statute — a felony — also may be used in lieu of the misdemeanor provisions of the IRS Code 
for filing false documents with tax returns. (See the Financial Transactions Section for 
additional information on tax fraud.) 
 
In recent years, we have seen more instances of prosecution under this statute. Take, for 
example, the infamous case of Martha Stewart in 2003. In Stewart’s case, the SEC was 
conducting an investigation into an insider-trading scheme based upon Stewart’s disposal of 
ImClone stock shares in 2001. Rather than prosecuting Stewart for insider trading, she was 
charged with and convicted of, among other crimes, providing the government with false 
statements. Another prominent example of a prosecution under this statute involved Lewis 
“Scooter” Libby, a former senior White House official. On March 6, 2007, Libby was found 
guilty of, among other crimes, lying to the FBI about information he disbursed regarding a 
CIA operative’s employment. 
 
The false statement statutes of greatest importance to the fraud examiner follow. 
 



:


fals claim and statement
chapter 47 of titl 18 us code contain a number of relat provis that punish fals
or fraudul statement oral or in write made to variou feder agenc and
depart
the princip feder fals statement statut is 18 usc 1001 briefli state section 1001
prohibit a person from ly to or conceal inform from a feder offici howev
thi statut overlap with mani of the more specif law such as 18 usc 1014 which
appli to fals statement made on certain loan and credit applic
a statement is fals for the purpos of section 1001 if it wa known to be untru when it
wa made and it is fraudul if it wa known to be untru and wa made with the intent to
deceiv a govern agenc for a violat to occur the agenc need not actual have
been deceiv nor must it have in fact reli upon the fals statement the statement must
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2239
have been capabl howev of influenc the agenc involv
the element of a typic section 1001 violat ar set forth below
the defend made a fals statement or us a fals document
that wa materi
regard a matter within the jurisdict of ani agenc of the unit state
with knowledg of it falsiti
knowingli and willfulli or with reckless disregard for truth or falsiti
section 1001 is most often us to prosecut fals statement to law enforc or
regulatori offici not made under oath in the cours of an offici investig or on an
applic for such thing as feder employ credit and visa applic the
statut a feloni also mai be us in lieu of the misdemeanor provis of the ir code
for file fals document with tax return see the financi transact section for
addit inform on tax fraud
in recent year we have seen more instanc of prosecut under thi statut take for
exampl the infam case of martha stewart in 2003 in stewart case the sec wa
conduct an investig into an insidertrad scheme base upon stewart dispos of
imclon stock share in 2001 rather than prosecut stewart for insid trade she wa
charg with and convict of among other crime provid the govern with fals
statement anoth promin exampl of a prosecut under thi statut involv lewi
scooter libbi a former senior white hous offici on march 6 2007 libbi wa found
guilti of among other crime ly to the fbi about inform he disburs regard a
cia oper employ
the fals statement statut of greatest import to the fraud examin follow
