2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Civil False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. § 3729, et seq.)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Civil False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. § 3729, et seq.) 
The Civil False Claims Act is the civil counterpart to the criminal False Claims Act. It 
provides a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal 
prosecution. 
 
The Civil False Claims Act provides in part that a person who commits the following acts is 
liable to the government for treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to 
$10,000 per false claim: 
• Knowingly presents or causes to be presented a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval (§ 3729(a)(1)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used a false record or statement to get a 
false or fraudulent claim paid or approved (§ 3729(a)(2)) 
• Conspires to defraud the government by getting a false or fraudulent claim allowed or 
paid (§ 3729(a)(3)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used a false record or statement to 
conceal, avoid, or decrease an obligation to pay or transmit money or property to the 
government (§ 3729(a)(7)) 
 
Knowing and knowingly are defined as the person having actual knowledge of the information; 
acting in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the information; or acting in reckless 
disregard of the truth or falsity of the information. No proof of specific intent to defraud is 
required.  
 
A claim is defined as any request or demand, whether under a contract or otherwise, for 
money or property that is made to a contractor, grantee, or other recipient if the U.S. 
government provides any portion of the money or property which is requested or 
demanded, or if the government will reimburse such contractor, grantee, or other recipient 
for any portion of the money or property which is requested or demanded. 
 
On May 20, 2009, President Obama signed into law the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery 
Act (FERA), which enacts several changes that expand liability under the False Claims Act. 
Among other significant changes, FERA amends the False Claims Act in the following ways:  
• FERA eliminates the requirement that a false claim be presented to a federal official or 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.245 
that it directly involve federal funds. Before FERA, the False Claims Act required that 
allegedly false claims for payment be presented directly to an officer or employee of the 
government. The legislation broadens the definition of a claim under the False Claims 
Act to include any request or demand for property, even if the United States does not 
have title to the money or property.  
• FERA also reduces the intent required to establish liability under section 3729(a) by 
removing the to get language from the statute. By removing the words to get, FERA 
overturns the Supreme Court’s 2008 holding in Allison Engine Co. v. United States that a 
defendant must intend to get a false claim paid by the government. As a result, liability can 
attach even if the defendant did not intend to get a false claim paid by the government.  
 
The False Claims Act also allows a private person to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a qui tam action. Once the suit is 
filed, the federal government may take over prosecution or leave the case to the private 
individual. If the government joins the case, the Justice Department has primary 
responsibility, but the plaintiff continues to be a party to the action. If the government 
successfully prosecutes the suit, the private party may be awarded 15–25 percent of the 
recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.  If the government does not take over 
the prosecution, and the qui tam plaintiff successfully wins the case on his own, the court 
may award the plaintiff 25–30 percent of the recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and 
costs.  
 



:


civil fals claim act 31 usc 3729 et seq
the civil fals claim act is the civil counterpart to the crimin fals claim act it
provid a separ civil caus of action that mai be taken in addit to a crimin
prosecut
the civil fals claim act provid in part that a person who commit the follow act is
liabl to the govern for trebl damag it sustain and a civil penalti of 5000 to
10000 per fals claim
knowingli present or caus to be present a fals or fraudul claim for payment or
approv 3729a1
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to get a
fals or fraudul claim paid or approv 3729a2
conspir to defraud the govern by get a fals or fraudul claim allow or
paid 3729a3
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to
conceal avoid or decreas an oblig to pai or transmit monei or properti to the
govern 3729a7
know and knowingli ar defin as the person have actual knowledg of the inform
act in deliber ignor of the truth or falsiti of the inform or act in reckless
disregard of the truth or falsiti of the inform no proof of specif intent to defraud is
requir
a claim is defin as ani request or demand whether under a contract or otherwis for
monei or properti that is made to a contractor grante or other recipi if the us
govern provid ani portion of the monei or properti which is request or
demand or if the govern will reimburs such contractor grante or other recipi
for ani portion of the monei or properti which is request or demand
on mai 20 2009 presid obama sign into law the fraud enforc and recoveri
act fera which enact sever chang that expand liabil under the fals claim act
among other signific chang fera amend the fals claim act in the follow wai
fera elimin the requir that a fals claim be present to a feder offici or
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2245
that it directli involv feder fund befor fera the fals claim act requir that
allegedli fals claim for payment be present directli to an offic or employe of the
govern the legisl broaden the definit of a claim under the fals claim
act to includ ani request or demand for properti even if the unit state doe not
have titl to the monei or properti
fera also reduc the intent requir to establish liabil under section 3729a by
remov the to get languag from the statut by remov the word to get fera
overturn the suprem court 2008 hold in allison engin co v unit state that a
defend must intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern as a result liabil can
attach even if the defend did not intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern
the fals claim act also allow a privat person to prosecut a civil action against the
perpetr on behalf of the govern thi is call a qui tam action onc the suit is
file the feder govern mai take over prosecut or leav the case to the privat
individu if the govern join the case the justic depart ha primari
respons but the plaintiff continu to be a parti to the action if the govern
successfulli prosecut the suit the privat parti mai be award 1525 percent of the
recoveri plu reason attornei fee and cost if the govern doe not take over
the prosecut and the qui tam plaintiff successfulli win the case on hi own the court
mai award the plaintiff 2530 percent of the recoveri plu reason attornei fee and
cost
