2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
As part of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), 
Congress made a number of changes to the federal criminal code. The Act established 
several criminal statutes related specifically to health care fraud. Specifically, under HIPAA, 
there are five federal crimes directed at health care fraud. 
 
HIPAA made it illegal for anyone to knowingly and willfully: 
• Defraud any health care benefit program or obtain by means of false representations any 
money or property of a health care benefit program (18 U.S.C. § 1347) 
• Embezzle, convert, or steal any funds, property, or assets of a health care benefit 
program (18 U.S.C. § 669) 
• Make “false statements,” which criminalizes any false or fictitious statements “in any 
matter involving a health care benefit program” (18 U.S.C. § 1035) 
• Obstruct, delay, prevent, or mislead the investigation of federal health care offenses (18 U.S.C. § 1518) 
 
The term health care benefit program as used in these statutes is defined to mean “any public or 
private plan or contract, affecting commerce, under which any medical benefit, item, or 
service is provided to any individual, and includes any individual or entity who is providing a 
medical benefit, item, or service for which payment may be made under the plan or 
contract” (18 U.S.C. § 24(b)). 
 
HIPAA also provides that a judge may order a person convicted of a federal health care 
offense to forfeit any property that can be traced from the proceeds received from the 
offense. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.264  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For information on HIPAA’s privacy protections for consumers’ health care information,  
see the Identity Theft section below.  
 
False Claims and Statements  
In addition to HIPAA, the federal false claims statutes, including the criminal False Claims 
Act, false statements under section 1001, and the Civil False Claims Act, may be used to 
combat certain types of health care fraud.  
 
These statutes are discussed in more detail in the False Claims and Statements section below.  
 



:


health insur portabl and account act of 1996
as part of the health insur portabl and account act of 1996 hipaa
congress made a number of chang to the feder crimin code the act establish
sever crimin statut relat specif to health care fraud specif under hipaa
there ar five feder crime direct at health care fraud
hipaa made it illeg for anyon to knowingli and willfulli
defraud ani health care benefit program or obtain by mean of fals represent ani
monei or properti of a health care benefit program 18 usc 1347
embezzl convert or steal ani fund properti or asset of a health care benefit
program 18 usc 669
make fals statement which crimin ani fals or fictiti statement in ani
matter involv a health care benefit program 18 usc 1035
obstruct delai prevent or mislead the investig of feder health care offens 18 usc 1518
the term health care benefit program as us in these statut is defin to mean ani public or
privat plan or contract affect commerc under which ani medic benefit item or
servic is provid to ani individu and includ ani individu or entiti who is provid a
medic benefit item or servic for which payment mai be made under the plan or
contract 18 usc 24b
hipaa also provid that a judg mai order a person convict of a feder health care
offens to forfeit ani properti that can be trace from the proce receiv from the
offens
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2264 2011 fraud examin manual
for inform on hipaa privaci protect for consum health care inform
see the ident theft section below
fals claim and statement
in addit to hipaa the feder fals claim statut includ the crimin fals claim
act fals statement under section 1001 and the civil fals claim act mai be us to
combat certain type of health care fraud
these statut ar discuss in more detail in the fals claim and statement section below
