2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (18 U.S.C. § 1028)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (18 U.S.C. § 1028) 
The growth of identity theft led Congress to pass the Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act, which makes identity theft a federal crime. The Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act (outlaws the intentional and unauthorized use of another 
individual’s identification, with the intent to commit a crime. The Act carries a maximum 
term of 15 years of imprisonment, a fine, and criminal forfeiture of any personal property 
used or intended to be used to commit the offense. (The penalty is increased to a maximum 
of 30 years of imprisonment if the offense is committed to facilitate an act of terrorism.) 
Identity theft schemes may also involve other violations such as mail fraud, wire fraud, credit 
card fraud, computer fraud, or financial institution fraud. 
 
In addition, this legislation enables the Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
and other law enforcement agencies to combat this crime. It allows the identity theft victim 
to seek restitution if there is a conviction. It also establishes the Federal Trade Commission 
as a central agency to act as a clearinghouse for complaints (against credit reporting agencies 
and credit grantors), referrals, and resources for assistance for victims of identity theft.  
 



:


ident theft and assumpt deterr act of 1998 18 usc 1028
the growth of ident theft led congress to pass the ident theft and assumpt
deterr act which make ident theft a feder crime the ident theft and
assumpt deterr act outlaw the intent and unauthor us of anoth
individu identif with the intent to commit a crime the act carri a maximum
term of 15 year of imprison a fine and crimin forfeitur of ani person properti
us or intend to be us to commit the offens the penalti is increas to a maximum
of 30 year of imprison if the offens is commit to facilit an act of terror
ident theft scheme mai also involv other violat such as mail fraud wire fraud credit
card fraud comput fraud or financi institut fraud
in addit thi legisl enabl the secret servic the feder bureau of investig
and other law enforc agenc to combat thi crime it allow the ident theft victim
to seek restitut if there is a convict it also establish the feder trade commiss
as a central agenc to act as a clearinghous for complaint against credit report agenc
and credit grantor referr and resourc for assist for victim of ident theft
