2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Introduction to the Mortgage Industry


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Introduction to the Mortgage Industry 
After the U.S. housing market collapsed during the Great Depression, Congress created the 
National Housing Act to strengthen the deeply troubled housing market. An important 
element of this legislation was to make mortgage funds available to more Americans by 
protecting lenders from the risk of default loans. 
 
To this end, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) was created through this Act with 
the following goals: 
• To provide mortgage insurance on residential loans, thus affording lenders protection 
against losses as the result of homeowner default. Lenders would bear less risk because 
the FHA would pay claims to the lender in the event of a default. 
• To regulate the rate of interest and the terms of mortgages that it insured. 
 
Similarly, the Veteran’s Administration (VA) Home Loan Guaranty Service was founded in 
1944 to assist veterans in purchasing homes. VA loans were also insured against default by 
the U.S. government. 
 
In 1937, the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) was chartered by the 
FHA. Fannie Mae was created to purchase FHA-guaranteed loans in the secondary market 
and pool them for sale as mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) to investors on the open 
market. 
 
However, as recently as 1968, there was no secondary market for nongovernment loans (also 
called conventional loans). Banks still carried conventional loans in their portfolios, and 
accessibility to conventional loans by homeowners was still largely dictated by local 
economies and markets. A secondary market for conventional loans was needed to stabilize 
the conventional lending market. This could be done by adding liquidity so that there would 
be a steady supply of funds available to lenders who originated conventional loans. 
 
In 1968, Fannie Mae’s charter was amended to allow purchases of conventional mortgages in 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.302  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the secondary market. Congress chartered the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Company 
(Freddie Mac) in 1970 as an additional resource for purchasing conventional mortgages at a 
time when demand was high for savings-and-loan financing. 
 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are shareholder-owned, publicly traded, profit-making 
corporations — or government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) — regulated by the Office of 
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). GSEs have loan limits established by law 
and set each January by Congress. 
 
In 1968, along with amending Fannie Mae’s charter, Congress established the Government 
National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) as a government-owned corporation within the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Lenders pool packages of 
qualifying FHA or VA mortgages and convert them into securities, and Ginnie Mae 
guarantees investors the timely payment of principal and interest on these securities. 
 
A final component of the secondary market comprises private investors, such as Wall Street 
firms. Because GSEs typically underwrite prime loans only, private investors are the main 
secondary market for subprime loans. Secondary market investors play an important role in 
dictating loan products, as lenders use secondary market underwriting guidelines to ensure 
the ability to sell loans to these investors. Each investor’s guidelines vary. 
 
In 2007, however, an increasing number of borrowers, particularly those with adjustable rate 
mortgages, were unable to pay their mortgages, causing a sharp increase in home 
foreclosures. As a result, real estate prices began to fall, causing an increase in losses for 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Because of the potential liabilities facing each company, 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed into a government conservatorship, which is 
similar to a Chapter 11 bankruptcy, under the Federal Housing Finance Agency, a 
government agency responsible for overseeing the two entities.  
 



:


introduct to the mortgag industri
after the us hous market collaps dure the great depress congress creat the
nation hous act to strengthen the deepli troubl hous market an import
element of thi legisl wa to make mortgag fund avail to more american by
protect lender from the risk of default loan
to thi end the feder hous administr fha wa creat through thi act with
the follow goal
to provid mortgag insur on residenti loan thu afford lender protect
against loss as the result of homeown default lender would bear less risk becaus
the fha would pai claim to the lender in the event of a default
to regul the rate of interest and the term of mortgag that it insur
similarli the veteran administr va home loan guaranti servic wa found in
1944 to assist veteran in purchas home va loan were also insur against default by
the us govern
in 1937 the feder nation mortgag associ fanni mae wa charter by the
fha fanni mae wa creat to purchas fhaguarante loan in the secondari market
and pool them for sale as mortgageback secur mbss to investor on the open
market
howev as recent as 1968 there wa no secondari market for nongovern loan also
call convent loan bank still carri convent loan in their portfolio and
access to convent loan by homeown wa still larg dictat by local
economi and market a secondari market for convent loan wa need to stabil
the convent lend market thi could be done by ad liquid so that there would
be a steadi suppli of fund avail to lender who origin convent loan
in 1968 fanni mae charter wa amend to allow purchas of convent mortgag in
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2302 2011 fraud examin manual
the secondari market congress charter the feder home loan mortgag compani
freddi mac in 1970 as an addit resourc for purchas convent mortgag at a
time when demand wa high for savingsandloan financ
fanni mae and freddi mac ar shareholderown publicli trade profitmak
corpor or governmentsponsor enterpris gse regul by the offic of
feder hous enterpris oversight ofheo gse have loan limit establish by law
and set each januari by congress
in 1968 along with amend fanni mae charter congress establish the govern
nation mortgag associ ginni mae as a governmentown corpor within the
depart of hous and urban develop hud lender pool packag of
qualifi fha or va mortgag and convert them into secur and ginni mae
guarante investor the time payment of princip and interest on these secur
a final compon of the secondari market compris privat investor such as wall street
firm becaus gse typic underwrit prime loan onli privat investor ar the main
secondari market for subprim loan secondari market investor plai an import role in
dictat loan product as lender us secondari market underwrit guidelin to ensur
the abil to sell loan to these investor each investor guidelin vari
in 2007 howev an increas number of borrow particularli those with adjust rate
mortgag were unabl to pai their mortgag caus a sharp increas in home
foreclosur as a result real estat price began to fall caus an increas in loss for
fanni mae and freddi mac becaus of the potenti liabil face each compani
fanni mae and freddi mac were place into a govern conservatorship which is
similar to a chapter 11 bankruptci under the feder hous financ agenc a
govern agenc respons for overse the two entiti
