2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Federal Laws Relating to Credit Reports


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Federal Laws Relating to Credit Reports 
The loan approval process begins with the credit of the borrower. Lenders rely on a credit 
report to assess the creditworthiness of a borrower and establish whether he will repay a 
loan. A credit report is typically one of the first things that a loan officer will obtain when 
qualifying a borrower. Typically, a borrower’s credit is highly related to the probability that 
the loan will go into default. Because higher credit scores tend to raise fewer red flags, 
perpetrators prey on borrowers with high credit scores. 
 
Credit reports are provided by credit bureaus, also known as credit reporting agencies. Credit 
bureaus are local or national institutions that collect data on individual consumer 
creditworthiness and report that data to their members or subscribers; however, their 
members or subscribers may only request and use the information provided for those 
purposes allowed by law.  
 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the Fair Credit Reporting Act 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.309 
(15 U.S.C. § 1681b). This Act provides the permissible purposes for obtaining a credit 
report, such as credit evaluation, insurance, employment, or similar purposes. More 
specifically, it regulates the type of information that can be contained in a consumer credit 
report, it restricts credit bureaus from releasing an individual’s credit information to any 
third parties without authorization, and it sets forth the circumstances under which a third-
 party can obtain a copy of the report. For more information about this Act, see the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act section in the “Individual Rights” chapter.  
 
In addition, privacy rules implemented as part of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (16 C.F.R. 
Part 313) have been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information (including 
names, addresses, phone numbers, and Social Security numbers). This prevents credit 
bureaus from selling such information to private investigators, direct marketers, or other 
information brokers.  
 



:


feder law relat to credit report
the loan approv process begin with the credit of the borrow lender reli on a credit
report to assess the creditworthi of a borrow and establish whether he will repai a
loan a credit report is typic on of the first thing that a loan offic will obtain when
qualifi a borrow typic a borrow credit is highli relat to the probabl that
the loan will go into default becaus higher credit score tend to rais fewer red flag
perpetr prei on borrow with high credit score
credit report ar provid by credit bureau also known as credit report agenc credit
bureau ar local or nation institut that collect data on individu consum
creditworthi and report that data to their member or subscrib howev their
member or subscrib mai onli request and us the inform provid for those
purpos allow by law
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the fair credit report act
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2309
15 usc 1681b thi act provid the permiss purpos for obtain a credit
report such as credit evalu insur employ or similar purpos more
specif it regul the type of inform that can be contain in a consum credit
report it restrict credit bureau from releas an individu credit inform to ani
third parti without author and it set forth the circumst under which a third
parti can obtain a copi of the report for more inform about thi act see the fair
credit report act section in the individu right chapter
in addit privaci rule implement as part of the grammleachblilei act 16 cfr
part 313 have been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform includ
name address phone number and social secur number thi prevent credit
bureau from sell such inform to privat investig direct market or other
inform broker
