2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Qui Tam Suits and the Civil False Claims Act/Filing an Action


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Filing an Action 
If an individual has knowledge that a false claim was submitted to the government, the 
individual should first retain an attorney. The attorney will then draft a complaint and a 
disclosure statement. The whistleblower can file the complaint and the disclosure statement 
under seal in U.S. District Court and copies are served upon the Department of Justice. 
After the filing of the complaint, the Justice Department has 60 days to investigate the 
allegations and determine whether it will join the lawsuit. If the department decides not to 
participate in the lawsuit, the individual has the right to continue to pursue the claim on 
behalf of the United States. If the department does not participate, the whistleblower will 
receive a higher portion of any recovery received. 
 
If the Justice Department elects to join the lawsuit, it has the primary responsibility for 
prosecuting the case and can limit the whistleblower’s participation in the action. If the 
government successfully prosecutes the suit, the private party may recover from 15–25 
percent of the recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. If the government does 
not take over the prosecution, and the qui tam plaintiff successfully wins the case on his 
own, the court may award the plaintiff 25–30 percent of the recovery, plus reasonable 
attorneys’ fees and costs.  The judge normally determines the percentage. 
 



:


file an action
if an individu ha knowledg that a fals claim wa submit to the govern the
individu should first retain an attornei the attornei will then draft a complaint and a
disclosur statement the whistleblow can file the complaint and the disclosur statement
under seal in us district court and copi ar serv upon the depart of justic
after the file of the complaint the justic depart ha 60 dai to investig the
alleg and determin whether it will join the lawsuit if the depart decid not to
particip in the lawsuit the individu ha the right to continu to pursu the claim on
behalf of the unit state if the depart doe not particip the whistleblow will
receiv a higher portion of ani recoveri receiv
if the justic depart elect to join the lawsuit it ha the primari respons for
prosecut the case and can limit the whistleblow particip in the action if the
govern successfulli prosecut the suit the privat parti mai recov from 1525
percent of the recoveri plu reason attornei fee and cost if the govern doe
not take over the prosecut and the qui tam plaintiff successfulli win the case on hi
own the court mai award the plaintiff 2530 percent of the recoveri plu reason
attornei fee and cost the judg normal determin the percentag
