2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes/The Whistleblower Protection Act


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


The Whistleblower Protection Act (5 U.S.C. §§ 1211–1215, 1218–1219, 1221–1222, 7703) 
Two pieces of U.S. legislation, the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 and the Whistleblower 
Protection Act of 1989, define the character of whistleblower protection for federal 
employees. The Civil Service Reform Act protected federal employees who disclosed 
information about the government’s misconduct or waste. In 1989, the Whistleblower 
Protection Act (WPA) strengthened the protections provided in the Civil Reform Act to 
protect federal employees from workplace retaliation when disclosing illegal or improper 
government activities. Specifically, the act prevents a federal agency from taking any adverse 
“personnel action” against a civil servant w ho has reported wrongdoing by the agency.  
 
To receive protection under the WPA, employees must first file a complaint with the U.S. 
Office of Special Counselor (OSC), an independent federal investigative and prosecutorial 
agency that investigates whistleblower complaints. There is no statute of limitations for 
initially filing a complaint with the OSC. In addition, the WPA provides federal employees 
an independent right of action; however, this right is only available if the OSC has closed the 
matter at issue or has not notified the employee within 120 days that it will pursue corrective 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.344  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
action. This right of action, which is filed with the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), 
must be filed within 60 days of an adverse OSC decision. Appeals under the WPA fall under 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit’s exclusive jurisdiction. Remedies that may 
be awarded to employees under the WPA include reinstatement, back pay, and attorneys’ 
fees. 
 
But it is important to note that there are several circumstances that do not afford employees 
protection under the WPA. For example, the WPA does not protect employees who make 
disclosures during the course of performing their job duties. In addition, employees cannot 
claim protection under the WPA if they make disclosures of wrongdoing directly to the 
wrongdoer, or if they make disclosures of publicly known information. 
 



:


the whistleblow protect act 5 usc 12111215 12181219 12211222 7703
two piec of us legisl the civil servic reform act of 1978 and the whistleblow
protect act of 1989 defin the charact of whistleblow protect for feder
employe the civil servic reform act protect feder employe who disclos
inform about the govern misconduct or wast in 1989 the whistleblow
protect act wpa strengthen the protect provid in the civil reform act to
protect feder employe from workplac retali when disclos illeg or improp
govern activ specif the act prevent a feder agenc from take ani advers
personnel action against a civil servant w ho ha report wrongdo by the agenc
to receiv protect under the wpa employe must first file a complaint with the us
offic of special counselor osc an independ feder investig and prosecutori
agenc that investig whistleblow complaint there is no statut of limit for
initi file a complaint with the osc in addit the wpa provid feder employe
an independ right of action howev thi right is onli avail if the osc ha close the
matter at issu or ha not notifi the employe within 120 dai that it will pursu correct
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2344 2011 fraud examin manual
action thi right of action which is file with the merit system protect board mspb
must be file within 60 dai of an advers osc decis appeal under the wpa fall under
the us court of appeal for the feder circuit exclus jurisdict remedi that mai
be award to employe under the wpa includ reinstat back pai and attornei
fee
but it is import to note that there ar sever circumst that do not afford employe
protect under the wpa for exampl the wpa doe not protect employe who make
disclosur dure the cours of perform their job duti in addit employe cannot
claim protect under the wpa if thei make disclosur of wrongdo directli to the
wrongdoer or if thei make disclosur of publicli known inform
