2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Analysis/Vertical Analysis Discussion


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Vertical Analysis Discussion 
Vertical analysis  is the expression of the relationship or percentage of component items to a 
specific base item. In the above example, vertical analysis of the income statement includes 
total sales as the base amount, and all other items are then analyzed as a percentage of that 
total. Vertical analysis emphasizes the relationship of statement items wi thin each accounting 
period. These relationships can be used with historical averages to determine statement 
anomalies.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.337 
In the above example, we can observe that accounts payable makes up 29 percent of total 
liabilities in Year One. Historically, we may find that this account averages slightly over 25 
percent of total liabilities. In Year Two, accounts payable, as a percentage of total liabilities, 
increased to 51 percent. Although this increase may be explainable through a correlation 
with a rise in sales, such a significant increase could also be the starting point of a fraud 
examination. Source documents should be examined to determine the reason for the rise in 
this percentage. With this type of examination, fraudulent activity might be detected. The 
same type of change can be seen as selling expenses decline as a percentage of sales in Year 
Two from 20 percent to 17 percent. Again, this change may be explainable with higher 
volume sales or another bona fide explanation. But close examination may point a fraud 
examiner to uncover fictitious sales, since there was not a corresponding increase in selling 
expenses.  
 



:


vertic analysi discuss
vertic analysi is the express of the relationship or percentag of compon item to a
specif base item in the abov exampl vertic analysi of the incom statement includ
total sale as the base amount and all other item ar then analyz as a percentag of that
total vertic analysi emphas the relationship of statement item wi thin each account
period these relationship can be us with histor averag to determin statement
anomali
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1337
in the abov exampl we can observ that account payabl make up 29 percent of total
liabil in year on histor we mai find that thi account averag slightli over 25
percent of total liabil in year two account payabl as a percentag of total liabil
increas to 51 percent although thi increas mai be explain through a correl
with a rise in sale such a signific increas could also be the start point of a fraud
examin sourc document should be examin to determin the reason for the rise in
thi percentag with thi type of examin fraudul activ might be detect the
same type of chang can be seen as sell expens declin as a percentag of sale in year
two from 20 percent to 17 percent again thi chang mai be explain with higher
volum sale or anoth bona fide explan but close examin mai point a fraud
examin to uncov fictiti sale sinc there wa not a correspond increas in sell
expens
