2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Analysis/Ratios Analysis


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Ratios Analysis 
Ratio analysis  is a means of measuring the relationship between two different financial 
statement amounts. The relationship and comparison are the keys to the analysis. Many 
professionals, including bankers, investors, and business owners, as well as major investment 
firms, use this method. Ratio analysis allows for internal evaluations using financial statement 
data. Traditionally, financial statement ratios are compared to an entity’s industry averages. 
The ratios and comparisons can be very useful in detecting red flags for a fraud examination.  
 
The financial ratios present a significant change from one year to the next, or over a period 
of years, it becomes obvious that there may a problem. As in all other analysis, specific 
changes are often explained by changes in the business operations. Analyses change in 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.338                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Current Assets 
Current Liabilities 
Cash+Securities+Receivables
 Current Liabilities 
specific ratios is detected, the appropriate source accounts should be researched and 
examined in detail to determine if fraud has occurred. For instance, a significant decrease in 
a company’s current ratio may point to an incr ease in current liabilities or a reduction in 
assets, both of which could be used to cover fraud.  
 
In the analysis of financial statements, each reader of the statements will determine which 
portions are most important. Like the statement analysis discussed previously, the analysis of 
ratios is limited by its inability to detect fraud on a smaller, immaterial scale. Some of the 
types of financial ratio comparisons are shown below. 
 
Many of the possible ratios are used in industry-specific situations, but the nine comparisons 
mentioned below are ratios that may lead to discovery of fraud. The following calculations 
are based on the example financial statements presented earlier: 
 



:


ratio analysi
ratio analysi is a mean of measur the relationship between two differ financi
statement amount the relationship and comparison ar the kei to the analysi mani
profession includ banker investor and busi owner as well as major invest
firm us thi method ratio analysi allow for intern evalu us financi statement
data tradition financi statement ratio ar compar to an entiti industri averag
the ratio and comparison can be veri us in detect red flag for a fraud examin
the financi ratio present a signific chang from on year to the next or over a period
of year it becom obviou that there mai a problem as in all other analysi specif
chang ar often explain by chang in the busi oper analys chang in
financi statement fraud financi transact
1338 2011 fraud examin manual
current asset
current liabil
cashsecuritiesreceiv
current liabil
specif ratio is detect the appropri sourc account should be research and
examin in detail to determin if fraud ha occur for instanc a signific decreas in
a compani current ratio mai point to an incr eas in current liabil or a reduct in
asset both of which could be us to cover fraud
in the analysi of financi statement each reader of the statement will determin which
portion ar most import like the statement analysi discuss previous the analysi of
ratio is limit by it inabl to detect fraud on a smaller immateri scale some of the
type of financi ratio comparison ar shown below
mani of the possibl ratio ar us in industryspecif situat but the nine comparison
mention below ar ratio that mai lead to discoveri of fraud the follow calcul
ar base on the exampl financi statement present earlier
