2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Interviews in Fraudulent Financial Statement Cases/The Interview/THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


THE CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
In the vast majority of cases the CFO is an integral part of any financial statement fraud, as 
illustrated previously. As a result, the interview with the CFO should concentrate not only 
on possible motivations to commit fraud, but also on the opportunity to do so. Since most 
CFOs are accountants, they should more readily  understand your fraud-related mission. This 
can be good or bad; good if the CFO is hone st, and bad if he isn’t. Among all financial 
personnel, the CFO is in the best position to know how to cook the books and keep it from 
being uncovered. As if that weren’t enough, many CFOs are hired directly from the firms 
that audit the company. Is there any other person more likely to be at the center of the 
fraud?  
 
1. Mr. CFO, you now know that audit standards require us to actively assess the risk that material fraud 
could be affecting the financial statements. We have ta lked with the CEO, and he  is fully aware that we 
will be asking most everyone we  speak with about the possibility of fraud or irregularities. You 
understand this, don’t you? (Wait for affirmative response.) 
 
2. Of the accounts on the company’s books, which do  you suspect might be the most vulnerable to 
manipulation, and why? 
 
3. What kind of history does the company have with fraud in general, including defalcations and employee 
thefts? (Look for signs of a weak corporate culture.) 
 
4. We know that fraud usually exists to some extent—even if it is small—in most companies. How do you 
think your company compares to others? 
 
5. What is your overall impression of the company’s ethics and corporate culture? 
 
6. During our assessment of risk of fraud in your company, are there any specific ar eas you’d like to discuss 
with us? 
 
7. Is there any reason that anyone in  the company might say that management had a motive to misstate the 
financials? 
 
8. Has anyone you work with ever asked you to do  anything with the books that you thought was 
questionable, unethical, or illegal?  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.349 
9. Are you involved in the personal finances of the CEO?  If so, is there anything about them that might 
make you think he is under personal financial pressure? 
 
10. Do either the CEO’s lifestyle or habits give you any reason to think he may be living beyond his means? 
 
11. Has anyone in a position of authority ever asked that you withhold in formation from the auditors, alter 
documents, or make fictitious en tries in the books and records? 
 
12.  Is there anything about your own background or finances that would cause someone to suspect that you 
had a motive for committing fraud? 
 
13.  Because of your importance as CF O, I must ask you one final question: Have you, yourself, committed 
fraud or illegal acts against this company? (Remember—don’t apologize.) 
 



:


the chief financi offic
in the vast major of case the cfo is an integr part of ani financi statement fraud as
illustr previous as a result the interview with the cfo should concentr not onli
on possibl motiv to commit fraud but also on the opportun to do so sinc most
cfo ar account thei should more readili understand your fraudrel mission thi
can be good or bad good if the cfo is hone st and bad if he isnt among all financi
personnel the cfo is in the best posit to know how to cook the book and keep it from
be uncov as if that werent enough mani cfo ar hire directli from the firm
that audit the compani is there ani other person more like to be at the center of the
fraud
1 mr cfo you now know that audit standard requir us to activ assess the risk that materi fraud
could be affect the financi statement we have ta lked with the ceo and he is fulli awar that we
will be ask most everyon we speak with about the possibl of fraud or irregular you
understand thi dont you wait for affirm respons
2 of the account on the compani book which do you suspect might be the most vulner to
manipul and why
3 what kind of histori doe the compani have with fraud in gener includ defalc and employe
theft look for sign of a weak corpor cultur
4 we know that fraud usual exist to some extenteven if it is smallin most compani how do you
think your compani compar to other
5 what is your overal impress of the compani ethic and corpor cultur
6 dure our assess of risk of fraud in your compani ar there ani specif ar ea youd like to discuss
with us
7 is there ani reason that anyon in the compani might sai that manag had a motiv to misstat the
financi
8 ha anyon you work with ever ask you to do anyth with the book that you thought wa
question uneth or illeg
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1349
9 ar you involv in the person financ of the ceo if so is there anyth about them that might
make you think he is under person financi pressur
10 do either the ceo lifestyl or habit give you ani reason to think he mai be live beyond hi mean
11 ha anyon in a posit of author ever ask that you withhold in format from the auditor alter
document or make fictiti en tri in the book and record
12 is there anyth about your own background or financ that would caus someon to suspect that you
had a motiv for commit fraud
13 becaus of your import as cf o i must ask you on final question have you yourself commit
fraud or illeg act against thi compani rememberdont apolog
