2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/Arrest and Interrogation


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Arrest and Interrogation 
The Fourth Amendment guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable 
searches and seizures. This means that the government cannot make an arrest unless there is 
probable cause to believe that the suspect committed an offense. The “probable cause” 
requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the standard by which a police officer is 
authorized to make an arrest to obtain an arrest warrant.  
 
An arrest occurs whenever a reasonable person would not feel free to leave. Although the 
Fourth Amendment does not necessitate warrants for all arrests, they are required under 
some circumstances: 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.503 
• Arrests in private homes 
• Arrests for minor offenses that are not committed in the arresting officer’s presence 
 
Although a warrant is required in some circumstances, the Supreme Court has identified 
situations in which warrants are not required. For example, a police officer or private citizen 
may make an arrest in public without a warrant if a felony is committed in his presence. This 
exception is designed to remove the “intoler able burdens” a uniform warrant requirement 
would create for law enforcement.  
 
In addition, the Supreme Court has held that a person arrested without a warrant is entitled 
to prompt judicial determination of probable cause before that person can be detained for 
any extended period. 
 
Not all police stops are arrests that require probable cause. In Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), 
the Supreme Court held that the police may briefly detain and question a person for 
investigative purposes if there are specific “articulable” reasons to do so. A valid stop may 
yield evidence to effect an arrest. If the police arrest or detain unlawfully, any statements or 
evidence obtained as a result will be suppressed. The suspect may still be prosecuted, 
however, if other untainted evidence of wrongdoing exists. 
 



:


arrest and interrog
the fourth amend guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason
search and seizur thi mean that the govern cannot make an arrest unless there is
probabl caus to believ that the suspect commit an offens the probabl caus
requir of the fourth amend is the standard by which a polic offic is
author to make an arrest to obtain an arrest warrant
an arrest occur whenev a reason person would not feel free to leav although the
fourth amend doe not necessit warrant for all arrest thei ar requir under
some circumst
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2503
arrest in privat home
arrest for minor offens that ar not commit in the arrest offic presenc
although a warrant is requir in some circumst the suprem court ha identifi
situat in which warrant ar not requir for exampl a polic offic or privat citizen
mai make an arrest in public without a warrant if a feloni is commit in hi presenc thi
except is design to remov the intol abl burden a uniform warrant requir
would creat for law enforc
in addit the suprem court ha held that a person arrest without a warrant is entitl
to prompt judici determin of probabl caus befor that person can be detain for
ani extend period
not all polic stop ar arrest that requir probabl caus in terri v ohio 392 us 1 1968
the suprem court held that the polic mai briefli detain and question a person for
investig purpos if there ar specif articul reason to do so a valid stop mai
yield evid to effect an arrest if the polic arrest or detain unlawfulli ani statement or
evid obtain as a result will be suppress the suspect mai still be prosecut
howev if other untaint evid of wrongdo exist
