2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/Arrest and Interrogation/Interrogation of Suspects


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Interrogation of Suspects 
After the arrest, the suspect is placed in custody. While in custody, the police can interrogate 
the suspect to obtain information or a confession, but there are limits on such 
interrogations.  
 
The Fifth Amendment provides that a person cannot be compelled to give information that 
may incriminate him in a criminal case, but it applies only to: 
• Compelled “testimonial statements:” The Fifth Amendment applies only to testimonial 
statements (i.e., any testimony or communicative evidence that might tend to incriminate 
the individual, either directly or indirectly, by leading the government to incriminating 
evidence). Nontestimonial conduct, such as compelling a suspect to appear in a line-up, 
give handwriting samples, or submit to blood or alcohol tests, is not barred by the Fifth 
Amendment. 
• Individuals : The Fifth Amendment applies only to individuals; business entities, including 
sole proprietorships and other organizations, do not have a Fifth Amendment privilege. 
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.504  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Fifth Amendment protects an individual’s personal papers that are not voluntarily 
prepared, including tax returns, if incriminating. Documents such as appointment books, 
correspondence, and other records that the subject prepared without government 
compulsion are not covered by the Amendment and must be produced. 
 
To ensure that every citizen has the opportunity to exercise this fundamental right, the 
Supreme Court ruled in the landmark case of Miranda v. Arizona, 348 U.S. 436 (1966), that 
the police must give the following warnings (known as the Miranda  warnings) before 
interrogating any suspect held in custody: 
• That the suspect has the right to remain silent 
• That any statements can be used against him at trial 
• That the suspect has a right to the assistance of an attorney 
• That an attorney will be appointed to represent the suspect if he cannot afford to retain 
one 
 
Miranda warnings are required only if the suspect is (1) interrogated (2) while held in custody  
(3) by public authorities. Certain exceptions to the warning requirement apply, such as when 
immediate questioning is necessary to ensure public safety. The warnings generally are not 
required when a person is being questioned by private parties. 
 
Once a suspect asserts the right to remain silent, all questioning must cease until counsel is 
provided. If the defendant thereafter decides to make a statement, the government must 
show that it was the result of a voluntary, knowing waiver of his rights. 
 
The Supreme Court, however, made major revisions to the Miranda warnings in three 
separate cases decided in 2010. In one case, the Court upheld a version of the Miranda 
warnings that told a suspect of his right to a lawyer before, rather than during, 
interrogation. In a second case, the Court ruled that a suspect’s request for a lawyer is good 
for only 14 days after the suspect is released from custody. Finally, in a third case, the Court 
held that suspects must tell police that they are going to remain silent if they want to invoke 
their “right to remain silent” and stop an interrogation.  
 
                                                 
4 Florida v. Powell, 130 S. Ct. 1195 (Feb. 23, 2010).  
5 Maryland v. Shatzer, 130 S. Ct. 1213, 1223 (Feb. 24, 2010). 
6 Berghuis v. Thompkins, 130 S. Ct. 2250 (June 1, 2010).  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.505 
Apart from the Miranda requirements, a confession also must be voluntary, not coerced by 
physical or psychological means. Some inducement is permissible, such as informing the 
suspect that a confession might result in treatment that is more lenient. Using deceit and 
trickery to extract a confession, such as telling the suspect that an accomplice had confessed 
when in fact he had not, is treated differently by different courts, some permitting such 
confessions, others not. No confession will be admitted if the circumstances under which it 
was obtained render it unreliable. 
 
For more information on the applicability of the Fifth Amendment to investigations 
conducted by nongovernment personnel, please refer to the “Individual Rights” chapter.  
 
 



:


interrog of suspect
after the arrest the suspect is place in custodi while in custodi the polic can interrog
the suspect to obtain inform or a confess but there ar limit on such
interrog
the fifth amend provid that a person cannot be compel to give inform that
mai incrimin him in a crimin case but it appli onli to
compel testimoni statement the fifth amend appli onli to testimoni
statement ie ani testimoni or commun evid that might tend to incrimin
the individu either directli or indirectli by lead the govern to incrimin
evid nontestimoni conduct such as compel a suspect to appear in a lineup
give handwrit sampl or submit to blood or alcohol test is not bar by the fifth
amend
individu the fifth amend appli onli to individu busi entiti includ
sole proprietorship and other organ do not have a fifth amend privileg
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2504 2011 fraud examin manual
the fifth amend protect an individu person paper that ar not voluntarili
prepar includ tax return if incrimin document such as appoint book
correspond and other record that the subject prepar without govern
compuls ar not cover by the amend and must be produc
to ensur that everi citizen ha the opportun to exercis thi fundament right the
suprem court rule in the landmark case of miranda v arizona 348 us 436 1966 that
the polic must give the follow warn known as the miranda warn befor
interrog ani suspect held in custodi
that the suspect ha the right to remain silent
that ani statement can be us against him at trial
that the suspect ha a right to the assist of an attornei
that an attornei will be appoint to repres the suspect if he cannot afford to retain
on
miranda warn ar requir onli if the suspect is 1 interrog 2 while held in custodi
3 by public author certain except to the warn requir appli such as when
immedi question is necessari to ensur public safeti the warn gener ar not
requir when a person is be question by privat parti
onc a suspect assert the right to remain silent all question must ceas until counsel is
provid if the defend thereaft decid to make a statement the govern must
show that it wa the result of a voluntari know waiver of hi right
the suprem court howev made major revis to the miranda warn in three
separ case decid in 2010 in on case the court upheld a version of the miranda
warn that told a suspect of hi right to a lawyer befor rather than dure
interrog in a second case the court rule that a suspect request for a lawyer is good
for onli 14 dai after the suspect is releas from custodi final in a third case the court
held that suspect must tell polic that thei ar go to remain silent if thei want to invok
their right to remain silent and stop an interrog
4 florida v powel 130 s ct 1195 feb 23 2010
5 maryland v shatzer 130 s ct 1213 1223 feb 24 2010
6 berghui v thompkin 130 s ct 2250 june 1 2010
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2505
apart from the miranda requir a confess also must be voluntari not coerc by
physic or psycholog mean some induc is permiss such as inform the
suspect that a confess might result in treatment that is more lenient us deceit and
trickeri to extract a confess such as tell the suspect that an accomplic had confess
when in fact he had not is treat differ by differ court some permit such
confess other not no confess will be admit if the circumst under which it
wa obtain render it unreli
for more inform on the applic of the fifth amend to investig
conduct by nongovern personnel pleas refer to the individu right chapter
