2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/The Grand Jury


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


The Grand Jury 
The grand jury is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas for testimony 
and documents to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. The grand jury 
consists of 16 to 23 people sworn as jurors who meet in secret deliberation, usually in 
biweekly or monthly sessions, to hear witnesses and other evidence presented by prosecutors 
and to vote on indictments. An indictment, or true bill, must be agreed upon by at least 12 
jurors voting without the prosecutor present. 
 
The hearing is a non-adversarial proceeding. The accused has no right to be informed of its 
deliberations, to know the evidence against him, or to confront the accusers. The accused 
also has no absolute right to appear, and if he does, may not be accompanied by counsel. 
However, the accused may periodically leave the grand jury to consult with the attorney. 
 
These severe limitations on the rights of the accused are thought by some to be justified on 
the grounds that they are necessary to investigate criminal activity effectively and that the 
grand jury has only the power to accuse, not to convict, the defendant. The defendant, if 
indicted, has full constitutional protections at trial. The grand jury’s power has been severely 
criticized by many legal and public interest groups. Abuse of its processes can do severe 
damage to innocent parties, particularly public figures to whom an indictment alone can be 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.507 
devastating. For this reason, defense counsel in major white-collar cases now often begins its 
defense at the grand jury stage to try to convince prosecutors not to indict — rather than 
waiting, as was traditionally the case, until an indictment is returned. 
 
The grand jury has the right to subpoena witnesses and documents. Refusals to appear or 
produce may be punishable as contempt, with fines or jail terms until the subpoena is 
complied with or the grand jury term expires. A witness or target of the grand jury retains 
the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
A grand jury may be used to obtain evidence of possible violations of the criminal law, and 
its process may not be used as a ruse to obtain evidence for parallel civil actions. A common 
example of such parallel proceedings would be investigation of possible antitrust violations. 
The grand jury may, however, with the appropriate court order, make evidence available to 
the proper government authorities for a civil proceeding, as long as the primary purpose of 
its inquiry was to enforce the criminal laws. Access by private parties via court orders to 
grand jury evidence for use in private civil proceedings is unlikely to be granted because of 
secrecy requirements, unless substantial need is demonstrated. 
 



:


the grand juri
the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena for testimoni
and document to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur the grand juri
consist of 16 to 23 peopl sworn as juror who meet in secret deliber usual in
biweekli or monthli session to hear wit and other evid present by prosecutor
and to vote on indict an indict or true bill must be agre upon by at least 12
juror vote without the prosecutor present
the hear is a nonadversari proceed the accus ha no right to be inform of it
deliber to know the evid against him or to confront the accus the accus
also ha no absolut right to appear and if he doe mai not be accompani by counsel
howev the accus mai period leav the grand juri to consult with the attornei
these sever limit on the right of the accus ar thought by some to be justifi on
the ground that thei ar necessari to investig crimin activ effect and that the
grand juri ha onli the power to accus not to convict the defend the defend if
indict ha full constitut protect at trial the grand juri power ha been sever
critic by mani legal and public interest group abus of it process can do sever
damag to innoc parti particularli public figur to whom an indict alon can be
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2507
devast for thi reason defens counsel in major whitecollar case now often begin it
defens at the grand juri stage to try to convinc prosecutor not to indict rather than
wait as wa tradition the case until an indict is return
the grand juri ha the right to subpoena wit and document refus to appear or
produc mai be punish as contempt with fine or jail term until the subpoena is
compli with or the grand juri term expir a wit or target of the grand juri retain
the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
a grand juri mai be us to obtain evid of possibl violat of the crimin law and
it process mai not be us as a ruse to obtain evid for parallel civil action a common
exampl of such parallel proceed would be investig of possibl antitrust violat
the grand juri mai howev with the appropri court order make evid avail to
the proper govern author for a civil proceed as long as the primari purpos of
it inquiri wa to enforc the crimin law access by privat parti via court order to
grand juri evid for us in privat civil proceed is unlik to be grant becaus of
secreci requir unless substanti need is demonstr
