2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD/The Charging Process/Arraignment


:


Law


:


Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud


:


Arraignment 
Once the defendant is formally charged, he is brought before the court to enter a plea. This 
process is called the arraignment. A defendant named in an indictment, if not already in 
custody, may be arrested on a warrant. Alternatively—more often in white-collar crime 
cases — the defendant is summoned to appear before a magistrate at a stated time and place 
to be arraigned.  
 
The arraignment must take place in open court, and it consists of reading the indictment or 
information to the defendant and calling on him to enter a plea. The defendant may plead 
guilty, not guilty, or nolo contendere. If the defendant pleads guilty, the sentencing phase of the 
criminal justice process begins. A plea of not guilty sets in motion the adjudicative process as 
described below. A plea of nolo contendere means the defendant does not contest the charges, 
without formally admitting or denying them. A defendant may plead nolo only with the 
consent of the court. If accepted, a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilty for purposes of 
punishment, but it cannot be used as a formal admission of guilt. This makes it a favored 
plea for corporate defendants facing subsequent civil litigation. 
 
Before the court will accept a guilty plea, it must follow procedures to ensure that the plea is 
voluntary and accurate; that is, that there is a “factual basis” for the plea. This usually means 
that the defendant must admit to committing acts that satisfy each element of the offense. In 
some circumstances, however, a defendant may be allowed to enter an Alford plea (named 
after the Supreme Court case that upheld the practice) under which he pleads guilty, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.509 
although continuing to assert innocence. Such a plea may be made to obtain the benefits of a 
plea agreement and to avoid potentially more dire consequences, such as the death penalty, if 
the defendant is convicted after trial. Before the court accepts an Alford  plea, it must 
determine that there is strong evidence of guilt and that the defendant understands the 
consequences.  
 



:


arraign
onc the defend is formal charg he is brought befor the court to enter a plea thi
process is call the arraign a defend name in an indict if not alreadi in
custodi mai be arrest on a warrant alternativelymor often in whitecollar crime
case the defend is summon to appear befor a magistr at a state time and place
to be arraign
the arraign must take place in open court and it consist of read the indict or
inform to the defend and call on him to enter a plea the defend mai plead
guilti not guilti or nolo contender if the defend plead guilti the sentenc phase of the
crimin justic process begin a plea of not guilti set in motion the adjud process as
describ below a plea of nolo contender mean the defend doe not contest the charg
without formal admit or deni them a defend mai plead nolo onli with the
consent of the court if accept a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilti for purpos of
punish but it cannot be us as a formal admiss of guilt thi make it a favor
plea for corpor defend face subsequ civil litig
befor the court will accept a guilti plea it must follow procedur to ensur that the plea is
voluntari and accur that is that there is a factual basi for the plea thi usual mean
that the defend must admit to commit act that satisfi each element of the offens in
some circumst howev a defend mai be allow to enter an alford plea name
after the suprem court case that upheld the practic under which he plead guilti
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2509
although continu to assert innoc such a plea mai be made to obtain the benefit of a
plea agreement and to avoid potenti more dire consequ such as the death penalti if
the defend is convict after trial befor the court accept an alford plea it must
determin that there is strong evid of guilt and that the defend understand the
consequ
