Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1201 
HEALTH CARE FRAUD 
 
According to the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS), total health care 
expenditures are estimated to have reached approximately $2.5 trillion by the end of 2009, 
and are projected to rise to over $4.5 trillion by 2019 and comprise 19.3 percent of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). Per person health spending is expected to reach over $8,600 by 
the end of 2011 and is projected to increase to $13,400 by the end of 2019. 
 
Health care spending continues to increase much faster than the overall economy. This gap 
between health care spending and the overall economy is one of the main reasons that fraud 
in the health care industry is so prevalent. According to the U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (GAO), the most common estimate of he alth insurance fraud is 10 percent of our 
total health care spending. However, because no one knows exactly what the figure is, the 
figure has also been estimated to be from 3–10 percent per year. Health care providers 
perpetrate the majority of this fraud. 
 
 
Laws Relating to Health Care Fraud 
Numerous criminal and civil federal and state laws are available in the prosecution of health 
care fraud. In addition, regulatory agencies are also available for licensure action.  
 
Federal Criminal Laws 
Health Insurance Portabil i t y and Accountabi l i t y Act 
As part of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, 
Congress made a number of changes to the federal criminal code. In fact, the promulgation 
of HIPAA was the first massive sweep to wipe out health care fraud.  
 
The Act established several criminal statutes related specifically to health care fraud.  Under 
HIPAA, there are five federal crimes directed at health care fraud. Specifically, HIPAA made 
it illegal for anyone to knowingly and willfully: 
• Carry out a scheme to defraud any health care benefit program (18, U.S.C., § 1347) 
• Steal or embezzle any funds, property, or money of a health care benefit program (18, 
U.S.C., § 669) 
• Make false statements relating to heal th care matters (18, U.S.C., § 1035) 
• Obstruct a criminal investigations of a health care offense (18, U.S.C., § 1518) 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1202                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
More specifically, under section 1347, which esta blishes a federal offense of “health care 
fraud,” it is illegal for anyone to:  
• Knowingly and willfully  
• Executes, or attempts to execute  
• A scheme or artifice intended to 
? Defraud a health care benefit program, or 
? By false or fraudulent means, obtain money or property owned by, or under the 
custody or control of, any health care benefit program 
 
The term health care benefit program  as used in these statutes is defined to mean “any public or 
private plan or contract, affecting commerce, under which any medical benefit, item, or 
service is provided to any individual, and includes any individual or entity who is providing a 
medical benefit, item, or service for which payment may be made under the plan  
or contract.” 
 
The Act also provides that a judge order a person convicted of a federal health care offense 
to forfeit any property that can be traced from the proceeds received from the offense. More 
information concerning these statutes is set out in the Law section. 
 
Moreover, pursuant to its purpose in providin g funds to combat health care fraud, HIPAA 
launched the Fraud and Abuse Control Program, which: 
• Coordinates federal, state, and local law enforcement programs to control fraud and 
abuse as applicable to Medicaid programs;  
• Conducts investigations, audits, evaluations, and inspections as they relate to delivery and 
payment for Medicaid services;  
• Modifies and establishes Safe Harbor Provisions;  
• Issues advisory opinions and special fraud alerts; and  
• Provides reporting and disclosure requirements of adverse actions (under the Health 
Care Fraud and Abuse Data Collection Program).  
 
Furthermore, as part of the implementation of HIPAA, the Secretary of the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) was directed to create the Health Integrity and 
Protection Data Bank (HIPDB). The HIPDB is a reporting mechanism that allows users to 
access and review final adverse actions taken against practitioners, providers, and suppliers. 
Access to the data bank, however, is limited to federal and state government agencies and 
health plans.  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1203 
The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickbac k Statute (42, U.S.C., § 1320a-7b(b)) 
The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute (also known as the Federal Healthcare 
Anti-kickback Act) may also be used to combat healthcare fraud. This statute prohibits an 
individual from making payments to induce the purchase of healthcare goods or services that 
will be paid for by a federal health care program. Specifically, the statute prohibits: 
• The knowing and willful 
• Payment or receipt of any form of remuneration (including kickbacks, bribes, and 
rebates)  
• To induce someone to recommend or to purchase, order, or recommend any service that 
may be paid for under a federal health care program 
 
The statute encompasses a very broad array of activities that can be classified as Medicaid 
fraud. It applies to all federally funded health care programs, not just Medicaid.  
 
The statute criminally penalizes individuals who actually receive, as well as those who merely 
solicit, Medicaid remuneration. So long as the defendant’s intent is knowing and willful, and 
his means of involvement includes the receipt or solicitation of the kickback, the crime is 
prosecutable. But generally, it is difficult to determine whether the defendant intended to act 
knowingly and willfully, and neither “knowingly” nor “willfully” is defined in the statute. 
Thus, their interpretations are left for the courts to decipher, and this has inherently led to 
discrepancies in determining a defendant’s intent. 
 
The following examples are types of activities that typically violate the Medicare and 
Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute: 
• Payments for Medicaid patient referrals 
• Payments from a self-referral joint venture to investors for Medicaid patient referrals 
• Involvement in a consignment agreement, whereby performance under the agreement is 
based upon a percentage-based compensation scheme 
• A physician who performs little or no services to Medicaid patients yet receives large 
amounts of money for referring those patients to hospitals under ostensible services 
contracts 
 
The Stark Law (Physician Self-Referrals) 
The Stark Law (also known as the physician self -referral law) attempts to limit the ability of 
physicians to profit from their referrals by prohibiting physicians from referring 
Medicare/Medicaid patients for designated heal th services (DHS) entities with which the 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1204                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
physician or his immediate family member has a financial relationship. The law was passed in 
two phases.   
 
Stark I was enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989; it prohibited 
a physician from referring a patient to a clinical laboratory with which he (or an immediate 
family member) has a financial relationship. 
 
Stark II provided additional amendments and expanded the referral and billing prohibitions 
to additional “designated health services.” It strengthened Stark I’s prohibitions on physician 
referrals from certain designated health services (DHS) entities with which the physician or 
his immediate family member has a financial relationship. 
 
As related to Medicaid, Stark II prohibits a physician, in exchange for a payment of equity or 
reduction of debt, without an exception, to make: 
• A Medicaid referral;  
• A Medicaid claim; or  
• Compensation arrangement.  
 
In addition to these codified requirements, states often supplement the federal requirements 
with more stringent state requirements. For example, in Pennsylvania, physicians are 
prohibited from making any automatic referrals, whether they are enunciated in direct or 
indirect agreements with other health providers.  
 
Despite the general rule that physicians cannot profit from their referrals, there are several 
exceptions and safe harbor provisions to protect physicians from making certain referrals. In 
part, these exceptions include: referrals to an d from physicians in the same group practice, 
same in-office ancillary services, prepaid plans, legitimate personal services arrangements, 
and physician recruitment. 
 
Although Stark II appears to mimic the Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute, the 
two laws are different. First, unlike the Anti-Kic kback Act, which applies to all individuals, 
Stark II only applies to physicians and their family members. Second, where the Medicare 
and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute provides crim inal penalties for its violations, Stark II is 
codified as a civil statute, and therefore only imposes monetary penalties, suspension, and 
termination. Finally, under Stark II, each Medi caid entity providing items or services for 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1205 
payment must comply with reporting requirements and disclose information relating to the 
entity’s ownership, investment, and compensation arrangements. 
 
Violations of Stark II may subject a defendant to  $15,000 for each service improperly billed 
or claimed, $100,000 for participation in a circumvention arrangement or scheme, exclusion 
from participating as a provider in Medicaid programs, and/or a penalty of $10,000 each day 
reporting is delinquent. 
 
F a l s e Claims and Statements 
Though there is a statute specifically designed to combat false claims in connection with 
health care benefits programs, the federal false claims statutes may be used to combat certain 
types of health care fraud. Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications 
• False certifications or assurances 
• False records or invoices 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices 
• Billing for fictitious employees 
• Billing for goods and services not provided 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods 
 
Although these statutes are discussed in more detail in the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual , this discussion will provide a brief overview of the main false claims and 
statements statutes used to combat health care fraud, including: false statements under 
section 1001, the criminal False Claims Act, and the Civil False Claims Act. 
 
FALSE STATEMENTS (18, U.S.C., § 1001) 
Although there are a number of federal statutes that prohibit making false claims and 
statements to the federal government, the term false statement usually refers to the Federal 
False Statements statute laid out in Section 1001 of Title 18, United States Code. Briefly 
stated, the law prohibits a person from lying to or concealing information from a federal 
official. 
 
Under section 1001, a false statement can be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed or 
unsigned. The false statement, however, must be about a material fact, and it must be 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1206                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
capable of influencing the outcome of the agency action. The elements of a typical section 
1001 violation are set forth below: 
• The defendant made a false statement (or used a false document) 
• That was material 
• Regarding a matter within the jurisdiction of any agency of the United States 
• With knowledge of its falsity 
 
THE CRIMINAL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (18, U.S.C., § 287) 
This statute makes it illegal to present or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim 
against any agency or department of the United States. The crime is complete when the 
claim is presented and payment of the claim is not an element of the offense.  
 
To establish violation of this statute, the government must establish all of the following 
elements:  
• The defendant made or presented  
• Any claim that was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
• The defendant knew the claim was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
 
Violators of this statute may be imprisoned not more than five years and subject to a fine of 
$250,000. 
 
THE CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (31, U.S.C., § 3729 ET SEQ.) 
The False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 through 3733) is a civil statute that generally 
provides liability for false statements and representations made to an officer or employee of 
the federal government. As the civil counterpart to the criminal False Claims Act, it provides 
a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal prosecution. 
 
The Civil False Claims Act provides in part that a person who violates its provisions is liable 
to the government for any treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 
per false claim. 
 
The penalties for violation of the Act range from $5,000 to $10,000 plus up to three times 
the amount of the government’s damages. In  addition, violators may be suspended from 
participating in Medicaid programs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1207 
In addition to allowing the government to recover penalties and damages for false claims, 
the Civil False Claims Act allows a private party to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a q ui tam action and is discussed in 
further detail below. 
 
The most commonly prosecuted acts under the statute result from the following: 
• The receipt of false or fraudulent claims paid by the government 
• The use of false or fraudulent records or statements to avoid payment to the government 
 
To bring an action under the Civil False Claims Act stemming from Medicaid fraud, there 
must be a false statement or representation in connection with either of the following: 
• The wrongful disposal of Medicaid assets 
• Solicitation or payment of Medicaid claims 
 
Even if a state’s Medicaid program is admini stered exclusively by the state, because the 
program is subsidized with federal funds, all false or fraudulent claims submitted to the 
state’s Medicaid program fall within the guise of  the Civil False Claims Act as claims against 
the federal government. 
 
The following examples are typical violations under the Civil False Claims Act: 
• Physician billing for services provided by residents as if the services were performed by 
the physician 
• Billing for upcoded medical services covered by Medicaid 
• Marketing and selling bundles tests (necessa ry and unnecessary tests) to referring 
physicians, who then bill Medicaid at a higher rate than authorized 
• Misdiagnosing Medicaid beneficiaries as havi ng medical conditions, and then billing for 
services that wouldn’t otherwise be covered 
 
Computer Fraud 
Section 1030 of Title 18, U.S. Code, may also be used to combat health care fraud schemes 
involving computers. Under this section, any scheme that uses a computer as the instrument 
or vehicle by which funds could be illegally transferred or uses a computer to obtain 
confidential information may be prosecuted.  
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1208                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An insurance company employee generates a false claim in the company computer making a 
fraudulent payment to a friend who then  shares the bounty with the employee. 
 
Money Laundering 
The money laundering statutes may also be effective in deterring and punishing individuals 
who commit health care fraud. Section 1956 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes financial 
transactions involving proceeds of unlawful activity. Property qualifies as the proceeds of 
illegal activity if it is derived from a “specifi ed unlawful activity,” which HIPAA amended to 
include health care offenses.  
 
Using the federal money laundering statutes is beneficial because they allow the government 
to seize property through civil forfeiture (i.e., the government may seize property before 
judgment to ensure it will be secure until a hearing can be held). 
 
The text of the money laundering statutes can be found in the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual . 
 
O t h e r Federa l Statute s 
The following federal laws are also commonly used in the prosecution of health care fraud 
cases. More detail on each of these statutes can be found in the “Law Related to Fraud” 
chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual . 
• Mail and Wire Fraud, Title 18, U.S.C., §§ 1341, 1343 : Mail and wire fraud makes it a crime 
to use the mails or wire communications to perpetrate a scheme to defraud a victim of 
money or property (.e.g., present a false claim to Medicare, state health plan, or private 
insurer).  
• Conspiracy, Title 18, U.S.C., § 371, Title 18, U.S.C., § 286 : Section 286 makes it a crime for 
two or more people to agree or conspire to defraud the United States by obtaining, or 
aiding in obtaining, payment or allowance of any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim. 
• O bstruction of Federal Audit, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1516 : This statute, originally passed in 1988, 
makes it a felony for anyone to influence, obstruct, or impede a federal auditor in the 
performance of his official duties. This statute is relevant to health care fraud because 
audits are the main tool used by the government to monitor healthcare provider 
performance and are generally the first step in any health care fraud investigation.  
• Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Statute, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1961–1 9 6 8 : 
RICO outlaws the investment of ill-gotten gains in another business enterprise, the 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1209 
acquisition of an interest in an enterprise through certain illegal acts, and the conduct of 
the affairs of an enterprise through such acts. 
• Electronic Funds Transfer Ac t, Title 15, U.S.C., § 1693n : Section 1693n applies to paperless 
money transfers between accounts, and in general, it attaches criminal liability to the acts 
of giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations and 
failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations. 
 
Civil Remedies 
There are many federal statutes that victims of health care fraud can use to obtain relief. The 
False Claims Act and RICO both provide for civil remedies in addition to criminal penalties.  
 
In addition, one of the most effective remedies is available under the Civil Monetary 
Penalties Law (42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7a). Under this  law, administrative actions can be invoked 
against providers who defraud any federally funded program by filing false claims or other 
improper billing practices. Any person (including an organization, agency, or other entity, 
but excluding a beneficiary) who violates the law is subject to civil monetary penalties. 
Violators can be fined up to $10,000 for ea ch medical service that was fraudulently 
represented, and they may be excluded from participating in government programs.  
 
State Statutes 
Although fraud is illegal in every state, not all states have specific legislation against insurance 
fraud. Laws such as “grand theft,” “scheme to  defraud,” or “fraud by deception” must be 
used to charge offenders. Nineteen states have passed legislation that specifically prohibits 
insurance fraud although the effectiveness varies according to the provisions in each statute. 
For example, in some states, health insurance fraud is illegal, but there is no immunity to the 
insurance company for reporting fraud. 
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted the Insurance 
Fraud Prevention Model Act. The key provisions include:  
• Mandatory reporting of fraud. 
• Immunity from prosecution for reporting fraud. 
• Making insurance fraud a felony under state law.  
• Requiring a fraud warning on claim forms. 
• Requiring anti-fraud initiatives including mandatory special investigation units. 
• Restitution to the victim. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1210                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Regulatory Boards 
Since most medical practitioners are required to be licensed by their state to practice, the 
regulatory boards have jurisdiction over the licensees and can take action when appropriate. 
The regulatory boards will take action when the patient’s health is in jeopardy, fraud has 
been committed, continuing education requirements are not met, or other similar 
circumstances. In most instances, when a licensee is convicted of fraud, it is not automatic 
that his license is suspended or revoked. A separate action and investigation must be 
completed for that to happen. In many cases, however, when there is not enough evidence 
to sustain a criminal conviction, the licensing boards may be able to take action and offer 
relief. 
 
“Runni ng” and “Cappi ng” Legisla t ion 
Many states have enacted legislation to preven t attorneys from using runners or cappers to 
solicit business. Although state disciplinary rules generally prohibit this practice, very few 
attorneys have received any substantial sanctions. Some states, such as California, have taken 
the initiative to criminalize running and capping.  
 
Under a California law passed in July 1993, insu rance companies now have the right to bring 
a lawsuit against any person who hires runners or cappers to procure clients or patients to 
obtain workers’ compensation benefits (Ins. Code 1971.7). This action need not be brought 
in the insurance company’s name. Instead, the insurance company can act on behalf of the 
“People of the State of California.”  
 
 
Fraud by the Insurance Company 
Frauds committed by insurance companies include some of the following: 
• Submission of false documentation and improper billing 
• Mishandling claims 
• Failure to pay legitimate claims 
• Charging unapproved rates 
• Requesting rate increases based on fraudulent data 
• Using illegal or deceptive tactics to sell insurance 
• Failure to give “fee breaks”  
• Patient screening 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1211 
Submission of False Documents 
If the insurance company acts as an intermediary for the payer, such as Medicare, then the 
insurance company commits fraud when it improperly bills the government or submits false 
cost reports or audits. 
 
Mishandli n g Claims 
Mishandling claims also arises primarily in th e area of an insurance company acting as an 
intermediary administering the insurance program of the payer. The insurance company is 
under a duty to try to detect false claims. Although it is impossible to detect every fraudulent 
claim, if a company bypasses its own claims verification procedures, it can be guilty of fraud. 
 
F a i l u r e to Pay Legitimat e Claims 
The insurance company or carrier is required to pay any claim that is properly submitted, 
contains all the required the information, absent of fraud, and has benefits available. An 
insurance company might commit fraud when claims are consistently rejected even though 
the required information has been submitted. Ma ny states have regulations regarding the 
amount of time an insurance company has to pay a “clean” claim—one that has all the 
needed information. Even if an insured has committed fraud in the past, and for some 
reason or another is still an insured, the insurance company must still adjudicate a valid 
claim. 
 
Charging Unapproved Rates 
Some states require insurance companies to obtain approval on their premium rates. Until 
the approval is received, the rates cannot be charged to the insured. An insurance company 
may improperly begin charging the unapproved rate before it is allowed to. 
 
Requesting Rate Increases Based o n Fraudule nt Data 
Similar to the above, insurance companies or carriers needing regulatory approval for rate 
increases use cost data to justify their increases. In order to get their rate hike, they may use 
fraudulent cost data.  
 
Deceptive or Illegal Sales Practic e s 
Insurance companies may promote or condone deceptive or illegal sales practices in order to 
increase sales. The most common example is to disguise an insurance policy as a savings plan 
or investment. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1212                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Failure to Give “Fee Breaks” 
An insurance company may be guilty of fraud if it fails to pass on fee breaks it negotiates 
with its providers. The alleged overcharging occurs when an insurance company negotiates a 
discount on a medical bill. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer’s 
co-payment is made on the full price rather than the discounted price, and the consumer 
ends up paying a higher percentage of their bill than they should. For example, if a bill is 
$1,000 and a 50 percent discount is negotia ted, the consumer’s 20 percent portion should 
equal $100. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer pays 20 percent 
of the full $1,000, or $200.  
 
P a t i e n t Screenin g 
In the managed care environment, because so much emphasis is placed on preventive care, 
some insurance companies may be reducing their risk by limiting their insured to only 
healthy patients. 
 
Detection 
Detection of fraud committed by an insurance company may include the following: 
• Review complaints by insureds. 
• Compare financial statement data to data used to request rates. 
• Compare rates charged with rates approved. 
• Compare discounts negotiated with providers with the amounts allowed on the claims 
and coinsurance charged. 
• Review rejected members to determine if underwriting guidelines were abused. 
 
 
Employee Claims Fraud 
Employees of insurers, especially claims examiners and customer service representatives, can 
present additional problems to the fraud examiner. Due to their ability to access claims and 
subscriber files, the frauds perpetrated can be almost limitless. 
• Claims fraud using the employee’s contract  
• Claims fraud using another insured’s contract number 
• Claims payment using a relative’s contract 
• Claims adjustment system 
• Payment for canceled contracts or deceased insureds 
• Improper payee  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1213 
Claims Fraud Usi ng the Employee’s Contract  
Claims employees generally have access to claims data and claim forms. They can sometimes 
adjust claims or pull someone’s claim, change the claimant’s contract number, and have the 
claim processed.  
 
Claims Fraud Usi ng Another Insured’s Contr act Number  
Employees who have access to insureds enrollment file can locate an insured with a similar 
name as the employee. From there, the employee only has to complete a claim form and 
submit the claims through the regular processing system. The employee only has to put his 
own address in order to receive the payment. 
 
Claims Payment Using a Relative’ s Contract 
Employees can fabricate claims and submit them under a relative’s contract number. 
 
Claims Adjustment System  
Claims that are legitimately paid incorrectly need to be adjusted. An adjustment examiner can 
adjust a claim for fraudulent purposes also. 
 
P a y m e n t for Canceled Contract s or Deceased Insureds   
If an adjuster has access to the enrollment files, he may run across a deceased insured. By 
submitting or processing a claim before cancellation, an examiner can manipulate the claims 
system and divert payment to himself. 
 
Improper Payee  
A claim approver overrides a claim payment system and pays out claims to improper payees. 
The claim approver inserts her son and daughter-in-law as payee. Checks are submitted to 
other than the insured’s address. 
 
Detection 
The following steps can be used to determine if a company is dealing with an employee who 
is defrauding the system: 
• Pull high-dollar claim payments for insureds. Investigate all unusual patterns by  
verifying services. 
• Review printouts for special payee codes to search for employees. 
• Review printouts for a high number of adjusted claims per insured. 
  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1214                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review printouts of recently canceled contracts for unusual claims activity just prior to 
cancellation. 
• Once unusual activity has been identified, follow normal investigative procedures. 
• Review address change lists for employee names or unusual activity. 
 
 
Agent Fraud 
Nearly all insurance companies use the services of a broker or agent external to the firm. 
Unfortunately, the best interests of the insurance company are not always served. Several 
schemes have been identified that can be classified as fraudulent. 
 
P h o n y Groups 
Agents will set up bogus companies in order to sell health insurance to individuals at  
group rates. 
 
Phony or Nonexistent Policies 
Rather than going to the trouble of setting up a bogus company, many agents will sell a 
phony policy, and take the money and run. 
 
Medical Underwriting Fraud 
The broker will write a policy knowing that the client has pre-existing conditions that would 
prevent acceptance for coverage. 
 
Eligibil ity Fraud 
A broker may seek to add ineligible family members, girlfriends, or associates to a group 
policy by representing them as employees.  
 
Another eligibility fraud is where a broker may sell a low-cost group policy to an 
organization that employs a small percentage of people with serious health problems. A 
better rate can be obtained by separating healthy people from sick people. The broker splits 
off the unhealthy people in their own group, placing the coverage with an insurer of last 
resort such as a carrier that is given favorable tax status in exchange for issuing coverage  
to anyone. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1215 
ERISA Fraud 
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulates all trust accounts held by an 
employer for the purpose of paying benefits such as retirement annuities or health and life 
policies. Under the Act, if an insurance company believes that a plan administrator is 
engaging in violations of the Act, it is required to report the matter to the U.S. Department 
of Labor. As an example, a corporation ma y use funds collected from employees through 
payroll deduction to finance daily operations of the company.  
 
P a y m e n t Induceme n t s 
These schemes involve brokers furnishing group coverage to individuals who would not 
otherwise qualify for such policies by adding them to legitimate groups or establishing a 
fictitious group for the purpose of obtaining waivers and/or cheaper rates. The broker 
profits not only from the normal sales commission, but also from a “surcharge” or billing 
fee that is added to the published premium that is collected from the policy holder by the 
broker. In another scenario, a broker may charge a markup for adding employees to a 
legitimate group.  
 
Switching Policies 
This scheme involves the agents telling the customers that they are obtaining one policy, 
taking the premium for that policy, and then buying a cheaper policy with less coverage 
instead. The agents then pocket the difference. 
 
 
P r o v i d e r Fraud 
Provider fraud is a fraud perpetrated b y medical practitioners, medical suppliers, or medical 
facilities on patients or customers in order to increase their own income by illicit means. 
 
The potential for fraud involving providers has grown with the increased use of computer 
equipment in generating bills. Additionally, providers possess the knowledge of medical 
techniques, procedures, and terminology needed to avoid being questioned by claim-
 handling personnel. More insurance companies are contracting directly with providers for 
billing arrangements, leaving patients out of the loop. In addition, patients are usually 
reluctant to accuse physicians of wrongdoing because they rely on the provider’s continued 
services and because, when providers engage in fraudulent practices, they often forgive any 
out-of-pocket expenses the patient incurs. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1216                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rolling Labs 
A rolling lab  is a mobile laboratory that solicits insureds to participate in health screening tests 
at no cost to the insured. These labs are usually located in semi-trailers parked at health 
clubs, spas, shopping centers, or on vacant property. 
 
Patients are contacted by telephone for a free physical exam. Subsequent to exam, the 
insurance company is billed for eight to 10 claims totaling $8,000–$10,000 for a single date 
of testing performed by multiple providers. Additional claims are billed for later service dates 
even though no more testing is done. The lab moves to another location prior to the patient 
receiving the test results to avoid detection. 
 
The providers market their services in many ways. One way is to rent office space in a 
doctor’s office for one day and then test all of that doctor’s patients. The testing equipment 
itself might arrive in a truck or van and moves from one office to another. Another method 
involves setting up a temporary operation in a shopping center. Rolling labs are also set up at 
health spas, with all members tested at no charge. The most common method, however, is to 
simply set up a small office for a temporary period and use telephone solicitations. 
 
Clinical Labs 
Clinical labs have devised fraudulent billing practices to encourage physicians to order 
unnecessary tests on patients. The schemes caused specific blood tests to be included in a 
panel of frequently ordered tests. The ordering physician pays nothing or a nominal fee for 
the extra tests. The tests are then unbundled and billed separately by the lab to government 
payers and insurance companies.  
 
Suppl iers 
Ambulance Transportation 
Fraudulent billing for ambulance transportation can include bills for more mileage than 
incurred, for trips never taken, or for noncovered trips. 
 
Infusion Care 
Fraud schemes involving infusion care treatment include: 
• Services billed at abnormally high rates in comparison to cost. 
• Bills for noncovered patients. 
• Bills in excess of physician’s prescription. 
• Bills for unnecessary treatment. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1217 
• Kickbacks given to the prescribing physician. 
 
Durable Medical Equipment Suppl iers 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by suppliers of durable medical equipment frequently involve: 
• Falsified prescriptions. 
• Excessive supplies. 
• Equipment not delivered or billed before delivery. 
• Billing for equipment rental after equipment was returned. 
• Noncovered supplies,(for example, incontinent care kits). 
• Milk supplement scam. 
• Lymphedema pumps. 
• Scooter scam. 
 
H o m e Health Companies 
Fraud involving home health care companies gained national exposure after the federal 
government’s investigation of ABC Home Health  Care was released. At the time of the 
investigation, ABC was the largest privately held home health care provider in the United 
States. In 1994, ABC made some 7.8 million visits and billed Medicare $615.9 million. 
Among the types of fraud identified at ABC were: 
• Medical records were altered to make it appear that patients continued to need home 
health visits. 
• Managers directed employees to continue vi siting patients who, in the employee’s 
opinion, did not qualify for home health care because they were not homebound. 
• A manager directed a nurse to record visits that were never made. 
• A manager forged physicians’ signatures on plans of care. 
• If a care plan was signed by a physician, employees would alter the number of visits.  
• ABC reportedly charged Medicare for the cost  of acquiring other home health agencies 
by paying owners a small sum up front and the balance in salary under the form of 
employment agreements. 
• Managers directed employees to market ABC and its services with the intent of charging 
Medicare for costs that were not reimbursable. 
 
Pharmacy 
Fraud schemes stemming from pharmacy transactions include: 
• Merchandising—substituting something of value for a prescription drug. 
• Billing for brand name drugs but dispensing generic drugs. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1218                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Billing beyond amount prescribed. 
• Billing for drugs not prescribed. 
• Billing for a high-priced generic drug but dispensing a lower-priced generic drug. 
• Package size differential—billing third-party payers for the price of drugs purchased in 
small package sizes when they were purchased at less cost in larger quantities. 
• Black market purchasing—purchasing drugs at significantly reduced rates then 
dispensing at regular prices. 
 
Chiropractors 
Dishonest chiropractors may engage in fraud schemes, such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered or unnecessary services. 
• Billing for multiple family members. 
• Purchasing individual contracts for their patients. 
• Billing for physical therapy services when contract does not cover chiropractors. 
• Billing for excessive services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
While certain treatments by chiropractors are usually not covered by insurance, similar 
treatments by physicians may be covered. To correct this perceived inequity, some 
chiropractors have set up medical corporations and then hired medical doctors as employees. 
The chiropractor is CEO of the corporation an d has total discretion of how the funds are 
disbursed. The net result of this set-up is that  a medical doctor gives the stamp of approval 
to charges that might not otherwise be paid , and the chiropractor reaps the profits. 
 
Chiro-Shenanigans 
PATIENTS FOR LIFE 
Charging annual fees that exceed $5,000, pr actice management firms teach chiropractors 
how to build million-dollar practices in as little as two years. The literature advises the 
chiropractors not to tell patients the results of their initial exam or how long they will need 
treatment until they’ve been indoctrinated into  the benefits of lifelong chiropractic care. 
 
Further, they promote care of infants that will continue for the lifetime of the patient. 
Patients who question the continuation of treatment are given the guilty treatment: “It’s a 
choice you have to make depending on how important your health is to you.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1219 
Patients don’t seem to be cured until the insurance benefits run out. When benefits are 
renewed in the next calendar year, the symptoms return, and a new series of treatment 
begins until benefits run out again.  
 
PATIENT RECRUITING PRACTICES 
Some chiropractors use questionable recruiting practices to lure new patients into their 
practices. These might include: 
• Coupons for free meals where the benefits of chiropractic care are explained. 
• Advertising for free initial care. 
• Booths at health fairs, malls, and spas offering free screenings. 
 
TREATMENT FOR NONSPINAL CONDITIONS 
At one time chiropractors only treated spinal problems; however, many chiropractors now 
claim that they can treat any medical condition, including cancer, hernias, pneumonia, 
anemia, and heart conditions. For example, one chiropractic pamphlet stated, “If you are 
suffering from kidney disease, the logical course is to visit your chiropractor. He will 
examine your spine to see where your trouble is.” 
 
OTHER QUESTIONABLE CHIROPRACTIC TREATMENT 
Other types of questionable chiropractic treatment include: 
• Surrogate testing where the leg of a mother is flexed to diagnose her child’s illness. 
• Spinal manipulation of newborn babies to get over the trauma of birth. 
• Spinal manipulation to treat epilepsy, asthma, bedwetting, and learning disabilities. 
• Applied kinesiology whereby diseases can be diagnosed by testing muscles with the help 
of particular food or nutrients. 
• Analysis of x-rays to identify homicidal tendencies. 
• The creation of a treatment plan prior to examination. 
• Spinal manipulations begun at an early age to prevent cancer.  
• Iridology or the examination of patients’ eyes for markings that will indicate what 
diseases the patient has or will get. 
• A magnetic device placed over the thymus gland to diagnose nutrient deficiencies. 
 
Red Flags 
Warning signs that a chiropractor may be engaging in dishonest practices include a 
chiropractor who: 
• Takes full spine or repeated x-rays. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1220                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Prescribes treatments before a medical history or physical are taken. 
• Solicits family members. 
• Promises to prevent disease through regular check-ups. 
• Promises no out-of-pocket expenses for patients. 
• Ends treatment when their insurance benefits are exhausted, but recontacts patients for 
maintenance treatment when their benefits are renewed. 
 
Podiatrists 
Like other medical providers, unethical podiatrists may: 
• Bill for services never rendered. 
• Bill for noncovered services. 
• Provide kickbacks to suppliers. 
 
Ophthalmo logists 
Ophthalmol ogists may engage in fraudulent practices such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered and noncovered services. 
• Billing for unnecessary services. 
 
Psychiatrists and Psychiatric Clinics 
Fraud schemes committed by psychiatrists and psychiatric clinics can include: 
• Billing for services never rendered. 
• Billing for noncovered services, such as weight loss services or biofeedback. 
• Billing for services under psychiatrist’s name when the service was actually performed by 
a noncovered but licensed provider, such as a drug counselor or minister. 
• Billing for services performed by an unlicensed employee. 
• Admitting patients with false diagnoses. 
 
Anesthesio l o g i s t s 
Dishonest anesthesiologists may bills for more time than was rendered. 
 
Dental Fraud 
Fraud involving dental providers might include bills for: 
• X-rays that were not taken. 
• Crowns that were not cemented. 
• Amalgams for teeth that were not filled. 
• Teeth that were not extracted. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1221 
• Fillings for teeth that have previously been extracted. 
• More fillings than a person can possibly have. 
 
Allergists 
Fraud schemes involving allergists can include bills for: 
• Allergy testing not performed 
• Unnecessary services 
• Allergy shots not given. 
 
Infertility Treatment 
Infertility treatment is generally not a service covered by insurance. However, some less-
 than-honest providers will bill such services as hormonal replacement therapy in order to  
be paid. 
 
Impostor Provider 
An impostor provider is a pr ovider who does not exist but bills fraudulent claims. A variation 
on this scam involves assuming the identify of a deceased provider and practice—or putting 
together a group of licensed providers—and fraudulently billing under the group’s provider 
identification code. 
 
Investigation Tips 
To help determine whether a provider is an imposter: 
• Call the telephone number on the bill to determine if the provider exists; however, keep 
in mind that a fictitious provider may actually have rented a location and established a 
telephone number. 
• Contact the applicable licensing board or state to determine if the alleged provider was 
licensed to practice in the area at the time the service was allegedly provided. 
• Check the provider’s Social Security number or Tax Identification number (if listed on 
the bill) with the applicable licensing board. 
• Visit the provider’s physical address to determine if it is valid; if it is, speak to the 
superintendent to determine the tenant for that address. 
• Contact the Postal Inspector to verify what mail is being dropped at that address. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1222                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Diagnoses 
When a provider knows that a service is not covered, he may use false diagnoses or 
procedure code manipulation to get a claim for the service paid. Examples of common 
services not covered are: 
• Annual physical examination. 
• School physicals. 
• Weight loss programs. 
• Stop smoking programs. 
• Investigational or experimental procedures. 
• Cosmetic surgery. 
 
In addition, physicians may justify the ordering of expensive x-rays or other diagnostic 
services by falsely purporting that a need exists to make such diagnostic inquiries. The 
services are rendered, but because is the claim for the services is based on false information 
and is used to deceive the insurance company, it is considered a false claim. 
 
Red Flags of Provider Fraud 
Warning signs that a provider is engaging in fraudulent practices include: 
• Pressure for rapid adjudication of claims. 
• Threats of legal action for delay in making payments. 
• Frequent telephone inquiries on claim status. 
• Assertive providers who demand same-day claim payment and special handling. 
• Charges submitted for payment with no supporting documentation available (such as x-
 rays or lab results). 
• Use of a P.O. box as return addresses. 
• Insured’s address on claim form is the same as provider. 
• Routine (not specialized) treatment for patients living more than 150 miles from  
the provider. 
• Referring physician and provider of service in same professional corporation. 
• Medical records that have been altered. 
• Medical records that have additional informat ion attached that would make an apparent 
noncovered service now covered. 
• Missing pages of medical records that woul d cover the period of time under review. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1223 
Fraud by the Medical Staff 
Employees of providers also have an opportunity to steal and cover up theft of cash. They 
can submit fraudulent claims for patients and divert the payments to themselves. If they are 
covered under insurance, they can also use their own contract to submit fraudulent claims. 
For many employees, care rendered by their employer (doctor) to them or their family is 
free, but claims may be filed and assignment not accepted. 
 
Another scheme involves the provider’s office calling in orders for unneeded prescription 
drugs to pharmacies. Once the drugs are picked up, they can be sold. For example, in a case 
involving collusion between a medical office employee and an elderly lady in a retirement 
community, the elderly lady had developed a business selling the drugs purchased from the 
employee to her friends and neighbors in her community. If the employee is in collusion 
with an insured, the fraudsters can collect not only from the sale of the drugs, but also from 
the proceeds of insurance claims. 
 
 
Kickbacks in the Health Care Industry 
Kickbacks in the health care industry ca n come from several sources. The medical 
community is facing competition that it has not faced in the past, and monetary offers to 
prospective patients have been difficult to refuse. For example, in one South Florida 
community, incentives such as free transportation to medical facilities, shopping centers, and 
refreshments are common. 
 
Examples of kickbacks are: 
• Payment for referral of patients 
• Waiver of deductible and co-payments 
• Payment for insurance contracts 
• Payment for vendor contracts 
 
P a y m e n t for Referral of Patien t s 
Providers in an area of high competition will pay from $50 to $500 to cappers or runners  for 
recruiting new patients. In addition, patients may receive $50 if they refer a patient to a 
provider. The provider makes up for the kickback in the unnecessary billing of medical 
expenses or false claims. In addition, providers will pay kickbacks to other physicians for 
patient referrals. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1224                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Waiver of Deductibles and Co-payments 
Most insurance contracts require patients to pay a deductible and co-payment for services 
rendered. One of the reasons for having co-payme nts is to make insureds take an active part 
in the financial responsibility for their care. To attract patients, however, providers will 
forgive the patient’s out-of-pocket expense, but will make up for it in additional services that 
are billed to the insurance company. 
 
P a y m e n t for Insurance Contracts 
Physicians with patients who are facing long-term care or lifetime treatment, such as dialysis 
for kidney failure, may purchase contracts for their patients. This ensures that the provider 
will be paid, and the patient has no out-of-pocket expense. 
 
Payment for Vendor Contracts 
Companies doing business with medical practitioners will pay a “consulting” fee for referring 
business to them or using their supplies. 
 
Payments to Adjusters 
In order to get a claim settled quickly, an insured, or someone operating on his behalf, may 
bribe adjusters or other claims-handling personnel to approve or speed up the payment of  
a claim. 
 
 
Inflated Bill ings 
Health care billings can be inflated by providers as well as insureds. The following are some 
of the most common fraud schemes encountered by investigators and claims approvers: 
• Altering claims  
• Adding services 
• Code manipulation 
 
Altered Claims 
Altering valid claims can be accomplished using a pen; photocopier; or scanner, computer, 
and printer. Common alterations are:  
• Amounts changed 
• Date of service changed 
• Name of patient changed 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1225 
For example, a medical bill can be altered by placing an additional number in front of the 
amount charged. The date of service can be altered so that it becomes a covered expense 
rather than one that was incurred prior to being eligible for coverage. The individual 
submitting a claim can change the name on the bill from a noncovered family member to 
one who is covered under the contract. 
 
Detection 
Procedures can help identify altered claims include: 
• Analyzing charges and identifying any excessive claims for prescription or medical 
services above an acceptable level. 
• Looking for any alterations, erasures, changes of  ink, or white-outs on the original bill 
prior to paying the claim. This is important in today’s environment in which original 
bills, checks, and other documents are destroyed as soon as they are microfilmed to 
minimize storage space for record keeping.  
• Training adjusters to look for obvious alterations when processing claims. 
 
Added Servi c es 
Some fraudsters add on services never rendered to dates of actual services. In these cases, 
the verification process is the same as the procedures listed under the alteration process. 
 
Code Manipulat i o n 
Code manipulation is a problem that is faced by all health insurers. Each service is identified 
using the American Medical Association’s uniformly accepted coding system, called the 
Physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology (CPT). Medicare and most private insurers have 
developed fee schedules that use CPT codes and their accompanying narrative descriptions 
as the basis for paying providers.  
 
However, because the coding system is complicated, providers and insurers often have 
difficulty identifying the codes that most accurately describe the services provided. The 
coding system is difficult to use because it attempts to identify codes for all accepted medical 
procedures, including codes to describe minor procedures that are components of more 
comprehensive procedures. Payment policies add to the difficulty. For example, the fee for 
surgery often includes the cost of related services for the global service period, that is, for a 
set number of days before and after the surgery. To prevent overpayment in these cases, 
insurers need to identify when claims for surgery include codes that represent related 
services and reduce the payment accordingly.  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1226                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
It is difficult for providers and insurers to maintain proficiency in proper coding practices 
because a substantial number of the codes are changed each year. These complexities can 
inadvertently lead providers to submit improperly coded claims. They also make insurers 
vulnerable to abuse from providers or billing services that attempt to maximize 
reimbursements by intentionally submitting claims containing inappropriate combinations  
of codes. 
 
Unbundl ing Charges /Fragmentation 
Simple unbundling occurs when a provider charges a comprehensive code as well as one or 
more component codes. For instance, in the examples illustrated below, the provider would 
be overpaid because the fee for the total procedure already includes the value of its 
component parts. 
 
Procedure 
Code Service Billed Correctly Bille d Procedure 
58150 
58720 
49000 
44955 
58740  
Total Hysterectomy ($1,300)
 Removal of ovaries & tubes ($950) 
Exploration of abdomen ($671) 
Appendectomy ($250) 
Lysis of Adhesions ($550) 
 
Total Charge $3,721 
 
Total Hysterectomy
  
 
 
 
 
Total Payment $1,300 
29877 
 
29870 
Knee arthroscopy with debridement 
($1650) 
Diagnostic knee arthroscopy ($1625) 
 
Total Charge $3,275  
Knee arthroscopy with debridement  
 
Total Payment $1,650 
 
47610 
 
47600 
Cholecystectomy with common bile duct 
exploration ($1,997) 
Cholecystectomy ($705) 
 
Total Charge $2,702 
Cholecystectomy with common bile 
duct exploration 
 
 
Total Payment $1,997 
 
Unbundling can be detected through the use of a computer program that determines 
whether each code submitted is a component of one or more comprehensive codes. 
 
Mutually Exclusive Procedures 
A variation of unbundling, this scam involves billing for procedures that are  
either impossible to perform together or, by accepted standards, should not be  
performed together.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1227 
Global Service Period Violations 
Some dishonest providers will bill for a major procedure—such as a surgery—as well as 
related procedures, when the fee for the major procedure already includes the fee for related 
procedures during the predefined time period (the global service period). This type of fraud 
is possible because most surgery includes all related services for a set number of days before 
and after the surgery. Detecting these abuses can be difficult because the examiner must 
determine which services are related to the surgery and which are not. This difficulty is 
compounded by the fact that such services may be rendered by more than one provider. 
 
Upcodi ng 
Upcoding  is billing for a higher level of service than was rendered. One common form of 
upcoding involves generic substitution—filling a prescription with a less expensive drug, 
while billing for the more expensive form of the drug.  
 
Misuse of New Patient Codes 
The CPT coding system includes special codes for new patient visits, which enable the 
physicians to be reimbursed for the additional work that new patient visits typically require. 
Consequently, physicians who want to pad their claims may bill for visits with established 
patients using new patient codes. 
 
 
Insured Fra ud 
Insureds may attempt to perpetrate a fraud by submitting fictitious claims forms: 
• Multiple surgeries. 
• Multiple office visits. 
• Foreign claims—Patient supposedly goes  out of the country and falls ill. 
• Noncovered dependents. 
 
Doctor/ER Shopping 
Excessive drug claims for controlled substance drugs. Patient “shops” for controlled 
substance drugs. One physician does not know that the other has prescribed the drug. In 
addition, the patient may shop for drugs in emergency rooms complaining of soft tissue 
injuries, sprains, and strains. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1228                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Misrepresentation on Application 
Failure by insured to list all prior medical conditions or group to list medical conditions  
of employees. 
 
Third-Party Fraud 
This category involves an unauthorized use of an insured’s identification card by another  
known person or unknown person. The insurance company is usually notified by the insured 
once they receive a benefit statement work sheet for services rendered. 
 
Death of Insured 
The primary insured passes away; however, th e beneficiary does not notify the insurance 
carrier and continues to submit fictitious claims on medical expenses after the death of the 
insured. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• Determine how the insured lost his card. If stolen, the police should be contacted to 
determine if the crime was reported. A copy of the police report should be obtained. 
• Obtain an actual description of the cardholde r so that identification can be made of the 
impostor who used the card improperly. 
• Visit the providers or medical doctors to obtain any information to identify  
the perpetrator. 
 
 
Criminal Rings 
Individual criminals infiltrate mailrooms and are able to obtain copies of legitimate bills 
submitted to providers. They subsequently establish a mail drop point or rent an office and 
begin submitting false claims to insurance companies by creating fictitious tax identification 
numbers. Since the claimants are genuine, insurance companies will normally pay these bills. 
 
 
Collusion 
Collusion  is the most difficult insurance fraud to detect since several people are involved in 
committing the fraud. Usually cases of this nature are disclosed by accident or by a tip 
received from someone who may have been involved and has had a falling-out. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1229 
Any time a frauds are committed by insureds, there is no question on the part of the 
perpetrators as to the intent to obtain funds to which they are not entitled. However, it is 
also extremely difficult to detect this type of fraud. 
 
Detection 
• Excessive billings report may show that a provider is submitting large amounts of 
expenses. In addition, the claimant requests substantial payments to be made to him 
rather than the provider. 
• Explanation of benefits, if submitted to the provider, will probably generate some 
reaction from the provider. If substantial, at the time that Form 1099 is submitted to the 
provider, there may also be comments by the provider. 
• Periodically, management should compare the membership/enrollment file to the Social 
Security file to determine if the insurance company is paying claims on deceased 
insureds. The membership file also may be compared to the file from the vital statistics 
department to search for divorced policyholders. 
 
Divorce 
An insured and a covered spouse file for divorce, but neither party notifies the insurance 
company. The ex-spouse, who remains at the address of record, continues to submit claims. 
 
Foreign Insured 
A foreign insured submits phony information that the primary insured passed away. For the 
last month he was hospitalized in a foreign hospital and a sizable bill was mailed to the 
carrier for payment. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• The claim file should be reviewed to determine if the charges are legitimate. 
• Determine if the medical language appears to be proper by comparing samples of bona 
fide claims. 
• It may be necessary to submit a letter to the attending physician to determine if the 
charges are correct. 
• Through law enforcement contacts, it may be necessary to obtain information regarding 
the legitimacy of the claim. 
• Check the style of the date. In many foreign countries, dates are listed with the day first, 
then the month and year, e.g., 07/01/08 would be 7 January 2008. If the U.S. style of 
dating is used (month/day/year), it may indicate a fraudulent claim. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1230                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Detection of External Fraud 
• Misspelled medical/dental terminology. 
• Unusual charges for a given service. 
• Similar handwriting by the claimant and the provider of service. 
• Typed, not printed bill heads. 
• Bills with irregular columns. 
• Unassigned bills that are normally assigned, such as large hospital or surgical bills. 
• Typed or handwritten hospital bills. 
• Drug receipts from the same pharmacy but on different color paper. 
• Erasures or alterations. 
• Lack of any provider’s signature on a claim form. 
• Absence of the provider’s medical degree, i.e., “Dr. John Doe” instead of “John Doe, 
M.D.” 
• An illegible provider signature on the bill submitted or the signature does not match the 
one on file. 
• Surgeries that don’t have other related services such as hospital charges. 
• Physician’s specialty does not agree with diagnosis. 
• Services billed do not agree with diagnosis. 
• Impossible or unlikely services. 
• Photocopied bills. 
• Other indicators that a claim approver or in vestigator should be aware of that could 
result in identifying a possible fraud: 
? Pressure by a claimant to pay a claim quickly. 
? Individuals who hand deliver their claim insist on picking up their claim check. 
? Threats of legal action if a claim is not paid quickly. 
? Anonymous telephone call inquiries regarding the status of a pending claim. 
? Identical claims for same patient in different months or different years. 
? Dates of service just prior to termination of enrollment or just after enrollment. 
? Services billed that do not appear to agree with the medical records. 
? Billing for services or equipment that are clearly unsuitable for the patient’s needs. 
? Foreign claims listing charges in U.S. dollars when that isn’t the currency of that 
country. 
? Foreign claims giving documentation in English when English is not the primary 
language spoken. 
? Multiple foreign claims for same subscriber. 
? Multiple foreign claims from same physician/hospital. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1231 
Fraud by Medical Institutions 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by institutions and their employees include those commonly 
used by doctors and other providers. However, the more common schemes in which 
hospitals are primarily involved include: 
• Filing of false cost reports. 
• DRG creep. 
• Billing for experimental procedures. 
• Improper contractual and other relationships with physicians. 
• Revenue recovery firms to (knowingly or unknowingly) bill extra charges. 
 
False Cost Reports 
Cost reports sometimes include noncovered items such as golf outings, parties, and exotic 
trips disguised as covered items. For example, an investigation disclosed that a hospital 
recovered silver from the processing of x-ray film, sold it, gave it to the candy stripers, only 
to have it “donated” back to the hospital. Since Medicare doesn’t consider donations as 
revenue, the hospital was able to claim higher expenses, thus more money from Medicare. 
 
Inclusi on of Unallowabl e Items 
• Expenses for tax penalties, late charges, and promotional advertising. 
• Costs incurred from a related-party transaction with a mark-up over the costs incurred 
by the related-party. 
• Expenses that are reimbursed under other programs (e.g., billable medical supplies and 
therapies). 
• Excessive expenses such as hotel, food, travel expenses for recreational events. 
• Luxury items (e.g., lavish furnishings, corporate planes, swimming pools, spas). 
 
DRG Creep 
Diagnostic Related Groupings (DRG) is a reimbursement methodology for the payment of 
institutional claims. It is a patient classification scheme that categorizes patients who are 
medically related with respect to primary and secondary diagnosis, age, and complications. 
Reimbursements are determined by the DRG. For example, a heart bypass operation is 
worth a certain amount of reimbursement and a hernia repair is worth a different amount. 
DRG creep occurs when a hospitalization is coded as a more complex admission than 
occurred. When it becomes a pattern and intent is established, it becomes fraud. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1232                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another type of fraud using DRG codes involves billing for the DRG code and then billing 
again for services that were included in the DRG payment. 
 
Billing for Experimental Procedures 
It is reported that one form of medical fraud that is little known, but apparently widespread, 
is the third-party billing for experiments with new medical devices that have not yet been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Some hospitals are deliberately misleading 
third-party payers by getting them to pay for the manufacturer’s research. Many of the 
doctors involved are alleged to have stock in the manufacturing companies. 
 
Improper Relation s h i p s with Physici a n s 
Certain relationships between hospitals and physicians result in fraud to the insurer. For 
instance, a hospital provides no or token reimbursement to pathologists for Medicare Part A 
services in return for the opportunity to perform and bill Part B services at that hospital. 
 
The following transactions are generally regarded as suspect: 
• Payment of any sort of incentive by the hospital each time a physician refers a patient to 
the hospital. 
• Provision of free or significantly discounted billing, nursing, or other staff services. 
• Free training for a physician’s office staff in areas such as management techniques, CPT 
coding, and laboratory techniques. 
• Guarantees that provide that, if the physician’s income fails to reach a predetermined 
level, the hospital will supplement the remainder up to a certain amount. 
• Low-interest or interest-free loans, or loans that may be forgiven if a physician refers 
patients to the hospital. 
• Payment of the cost of a physician’s travel and expenses for conferences. 
• Payment for a physician’s continuing education courses. 
• Coverage on the hospital’s group health insur ance plan at an inappropriate or very  
low cost. 
• Payment for services, such as consultation at the hospital, that require few, if any, 
substantive duties by the physician, or payment for services in excess of the fair market 
value of services rendered. 
 
Revenue Recovery Firms 
Another form of health care fraud involves so-called revenue recovery firms padding 
medical bills. These billing consultants review patients’ bills (months or even years after 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1233 
treatment) looking for charges that were missed. Critics have charged that too often these 
firms pad medical bills by adding on fictitious charges. The more charges that are added 
onto the bill, the more the revenue recovery firm gets paid. In addition, their employees may 
be paid bonuses for piling on extra charges and pressured to meet monthly quotas.  
 
Changing Codes 
One of the most common methods used by reve nue recovery firms is to change every 
hospital’s or nursing home’s billing codes. For instance, changing each code for an ordinary 
five-cent bandage so that the provider is charged for a $5 surgical dressing. 
 
Adding Items 
Extra charges are added onto hospital bills by assuming that hospitals used certain items, 
even though there was no evidence of the procedure or service. For instance, if the hospital 
had certain procedures for which they sometimes use a piece of x-ray equipment, the auditor 
reviewing the bill would always assume that the hospital had used the equipment, and they 
would put it on the bill. 
 
Kickbacks 
Often hospitals are unaware (sometimes intentionally) of the extent of the fraud committed 
by revenue recovery firms. In other cases, however, revenue firms report that they will 
contact a hospital or nursing home directly and tell them that if the institution will give them 
their bills, they will split the profit produced by the added charges. 
 
Billing for Expensi v e Treat m e n t s 
Numerous charges for the use of expensive treatments such as laser are added to patients’ 
bills. Charges may be added after the patient had already been billed for the use of the laser. 
 
Altering Records 
In some instances, firms may actually alter medical records. For example, in one case a firm 
added more than $1,300 to a patient’s bill for video equipment that was supposedly used 
during surgery. In order to justify the fraudulent billing, the firm checked a box on the 
surgical record to indicate that the equipment had been used. After the original document 
was obtained, it showed that the box was not checked on the original form completed by the 
surgical staff. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1234                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Donating Organs 
One hospital, which has ceased using a particular firm, reported that the firm regularly 
double billed for services and treatments, and in another instance, outside auditors found 
that the firm had tried to charge for dead patients donating their organs. 
 
Additional Anesthesi a Time 
Another common scheme is the charging of additional hours of anesthesia. Patients should 
be billed from when they enter the surgery room to when they leave the surgery room. The 
revenue firm pads the bill by increasing the time billed to include time spent in a recovery 
room, or before the patient went into the operating room. 
 
Rent-a-Patient Schemes 
So called “rent-a-patient” schemes inv olve paying individuals to undergo unnecessary 
medical procedures that are then billed to the patient’s insurance. Rent-a-patient schemes 
typically begin with the leasing of a sham medical clinic. Past investigations show that these 
clinics tend to be nondescript, often within shopping centers, and in destitute sections of 
town. Almost always, the lessee of the clinic is involved in the criminal organization of the 
scheme. Once a sham clinic is in place, recrui ters (a.k.a., “coyotes” or “cappers”) are hired to 
solicit low-income individuals, who speak little English, and offer them money in exchange 
for submitting to “minor” surgical procedures. Recr uiters are often former criminals, for it is 
not as dangerous to deal patients, as it is to deal drugs, and can be much more lucrative 
(average $2,000 per willing participant). 
 
EXAMPLE 
A surgery center paid hundreds of dollars to patients who endured largely unnecessary 
operations and then falsely charged the go vernment. One of the operations involved 
collapsing the patient’s lung to snip a nerve that would supp osedly control “sweaty palms.” 
The surgery did stop the patient’s not-so-sweat y palms from perspiring; it also caused the 
patient to lose strength in his hands, and sweat profusely on other parts of his body. 
 
Recruiters will scour low-income housing projects, elderly neighborhoods, and factories for 
victims. Once recruiters have convinced an individual to become a willing participant, they 
will request a copy of the individual’s benefit ca rd to confirm benefits prior to subjecting the 
patient to an unnecessary treatment. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1235 
Recruiters will drive the patients, usually across state lines, to small “out of network” sham 
clinics. Along the way, the recruiter will advise each patient to describe particular false and 
embellished symptoms to the health professional at the clinic, such as: “I sweat too much”; 
“My stomach is bothering me”; “My nose hurts.” Such descriptions will later be used by the 
scam clinic to create medical charts, justifying a particular surgical procedure. Following a 
night of fast food and a cheap hotel, the patients are driven to a clinic. The patients then 
wait in line, sign an informed consent form, and promise to give the clinic all the checks 
thereafter received. Following administrative procedures, the patients briefly meet with a 
doctor and undergo the procedures that have been predetermined for them. Later that 
evening or the next day, the recruiter will give the patients a few hundred bucks and drive 
the patients home. 
 
After rendering services, the provider will bill the patients’ insurance company, Medicare, or 
Medicaid for the unnecessary procedures beyond the usual and customary cost (past 
investigations evidence up to 5,000 percent above average market price). The claims will 
likely include fees for surgical supplies and medical equipment that were never used or 
distributed. Some insurers reimburse patients directly for out-of-network claims, thereby 
requiring the patient to pay the facility. However, because the patients targeted in rent-a-
 patient scams are often indigent, and believe they deserve the money for enduring the 
unnecessary procedures, it is common for them to deposit or cash the checks. It is a cycle 
whereby the victims are not only used to perpetrate the fraud, but in the end become 
fraudsters themselves. 
 
Insurance companies have difficulty determining when rent-a-patient schemes are being 
committed because their claims systems can only compare codes, and cannot determine the 
usual and customary cost for a particular procedure. To make matters worse, some states 
have prompt pay laws, requiring claims to be paid within a period of time, such as 45-days. 
Rapid claims turnover inevitably leads to poor oversight regarding fraud-related claims. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1236                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Source: U.S. GAO Report: Health Care Fraud: Schemes to  Defraud Medicare, Medicaid, and Private Health Care 
Insurers  (July 2000).  
 
What to Do? 
Consumer education is the front line to battling rent-a-patient schemes. Insurance 
companies must educate their insureds on the prevalence of this type of fraud, and provide 
these individuals with means of communication when it is believed fraud is afoot. 
Disadvantaged populations must also be informed about the negative impacts of 
participating in such schemes (i.e., health risks and criminal liability). 
 
Insurance companies must educate from within. Investigation units should be established to 
include skilled fraud examiners. Fraud detection software programs should be purchased to 
detect irregular claims patterns. An example of progressive movement towards the fight 
against health care fraud is Blue Cross Blue Shield’s establishment of the Anti-Fraud Strike 
Force to bring Blue Plans together when faced with multi-jurisdictional health care fraud 
schemes. The program pools resources, insight, and intellect from around the country to 
circumvent and prosecute rent-a-patient schemes. 
 
Likewise, the federal government has implemen ted several organizations and programs to 
target health care fraud. For example, the Health Care Integrity and Protection Data Bank 
(HIPDB) is a flagging system that alerts federal and state government agencies commence 
with a more thorough review of a practitioner’s, provider’s, or supplier’s past dealings. Not 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1237 
only may federal and state governments review the database for potential red flags, but also 
they must report the following information: heal th care-related civil judgments and criminal 
convictions in federal or state court; inju nctions; administrative actions; participation 
exclusions; and the like. Failure to report such information may subject a health plan to a 
civil penalty of up to $25,000 for each adverse action not reported. 
 
Red Flags of Rent-A-Patient Schemes 
• Large influx of out-of-state patients to a part icular clinic; including clusters of patients 
from a particular location. 
• Several non-related procedures on a patient in a short period of time (e.g., a colonoscopy 
and circumcision on one patient within a few days or even weeks). 
• Numerous claims by a particular clinic for the following procedures: colonoscopies, 
endoscopies, septoplasties, circumcisions, and thoracoscopies with sympathectomy 
(a.k.a., “sweaty palms surgery”). 
• Parallel procedures on families (husbands, wives, and children) on the same day. 
• Extremely high staff salaries. 
• Charging beyond the average market price for procedures, medical equipment,  
and devices. 
• Frequent patients with out-of-network coverage. 
 
 
Nursing Homes 
Nursing homes have become a multibillion dollar business in the last few years. As such, 
they have become a common target of fraud. A wide array of providers—including durable 
medical equipment suppliers, laboratories, physicians, optometrists, and psychiatrists—have 
been involved in fraudulent or abusive billing for services and supplies furnished to nursing 
facility patients. Most fraudulent activity in volves billing for unnecessary or undelivered 
services, or misrepresenting a service to obtain reimbursement. 
 
There are several features unique to nursing homes that make them particularly vulnerable  
to fraud: 
• Unscrupulous billers of services can operate their schemes in volume because the 
patients are all located together under one roof. 
• In some instances, nursing homes make patient records available to outside providers 
who are not responsible for the direct care of the patient (contrary to federal 
regulations). 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1238                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Under the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ reimbursement procedures, 
providers can bill Medicare directly without the nursing facility or attending physician 
affirming whether the items were necessary or provided as claimed. 
• Scrutiny of the claims at the processor level is inadequate because the automated claims 
systems used do not accumulate data that would timely flag indications of improbably 
high charges or levels of service. 
• Even when abusive practices are detected and prosecuted, repayment is rarely received 
from wrongdoers because they usually go out of business or deplete their resources so 
that they lack any resources to repay the funds. 
• Patient personal funds are controlled by nursing home administration and are an inviting 
target for embezzlement. Individually, patients generally maintain a relatively small 
balance in their personal funds accounts. Collectively, however, these funds generate a 
considerable source of income for an unscrupulous nursing home operator or employee. 
 
Failure of the Nursing Facility  to Monitor Outside Provide r s 
Although nursing homes are required to perform numerous tasks to monitor patients and 
meet their needs, there are no requirements that nursing homes monitor the services or 
supplies provided to their patients. These providers are allowed to bill directly without 
adequate confirmation that the care or items were necessary or were delivered as claimed. 
 
Most nursing facilities do not have the in-ho use capability to provide all the services and 
supplies their patients need. Accordingly, outside providers market their services and 
supplies to nursing homes to meet the needs of their patients. Typically, provider 
representatives enter the home and offer to handle the entire transaction—from reviewing 
medical records to identify those patients who need their services, to billing—with no 
involvement by the nursing facility. Some homes allow providers or their representatives to 
review patient medical records contrary to federal regulations. By doing so, these providers 
can obtain all the information necessary to order, bill, and be reimbursed for services and 
supplies that are, in many instances, not necessary or even provided. 
 
Excessive Reimbursements 
Although carriers do employ automated controls to prevent fraud, often questionable claims 
and providers are not flagged before excessive reimbursements are paid. In other instances, 
providers bill for quantities of services or supplies that could not possibly have been 
furnished or necessary. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1239 
Psychi a t r i c Hospit a l Fraud 
Psychiatric hospitals are susceptible to fraud because of the very nature of mental health 
problems and the manner in which they are diagnosed and treated. Unlike the acute care 
field, it is often difficult to determine whether a person is in need of hospitalization for 
psychiatric treatment. 
 
Abuse in the Admissions Process 
Some psychiatric treatment facilities have developed programs for patients who exhibit 
symptoms of both psychiatric illness and substance abuse problems. Fraud occurs when a 
patient is admitted on the basis of a diagnosis that reflects the patient’s insurance coverage 
rather than the patient’s illness. Psychiatric hospitals have been accused of finding something 
wrong with patients when it is discovered that they have insurance coverage. Such patients 
may often be admitted without examination by a physician. 
 
F r a u d in the Treat m e nt Proce s s 
The following types of abuses can occur with regard to psychiatric treatment: 
• Extending the length of treatment programs or delaying discharges because patients have 
additional insurance benefits remaining. 
• The use of illegitimate, questionable, non-approved, or dangerous treatment programs 
and forms of therapy, such as brain wave synchronization, magnet therapy, memory 
retrieval/enhancement therapy, and deep sleep therapy 
• Engaging in excessive treatment of psychiatric patients such as thyroid testing, drug tests, 
or psychiatric evaluation tests. 
 
Abusive Marketing Practic e s 
Many hospitals rely on marketing as a mean s of encouraging treatment and generating 
referrals. Overly aggressive marketing methods include: 
• Paying bonuses to employees to persuade or pressure prospective patients to undergo a 
psychiatric evaluation and to admit themselves for treatment. 
• Encouraging patients to admit themselves by offering financial incentives such as 
payment of plane fare, child care, COBRA payments, and waivers of patient co-
 payments or deductibles. 
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1240                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Financial Rewards for Referrals 
Many facilities are dependent on outside sources of patient referrals such as physicians or 
other clinicians. This dependence has led some hospitals to develop economic relationships 
in order to obtain referrals: 
• Rewarding clinicians who refer patients by referring patients who need outpatient 
treatment to those clinicians. 
• Allowing allied health professionals who refer patients to provide therapy for their own 
patients at the hospital; while nonreferring allied professionals are not allowed to use  
the hospital. 
• Paying medical directors or other physicians an incentive bonus linked to the overall 
profitability of the hospital. 
• Paying a physician who is under contract to the hospital but who provides no services. 
 
Red Flags for Psychiatric and Subs tance Abuse Claims 
• Treatment takes place far from patient’s home. 
• Diagnosis becomes alcoholism when state mandate reimburses alcoholism like any  
other illness. 
• Patient is on disability. 
• Provider’s credentials are questionable. 
• Documentation of treatment is lacking. 
• Ancillary services are not treatment oriented. 
 
 
Other Frauds in the Institutional Setting 
 
Write-Off of Patient Accounts 
When a patient account or other type of receivable has been determined to be uncollectible, 
the account is written-off to bad debts. It becomes a fraudulent transaction when the 
account has been written-off prematurely and the balance subsequently collected with the 
proceeds going to the employee. In this scheme, the employee has the opportunity to collect 
the receivable and divert the funds to himself, because companies typically do not keep track 
of old, written-off accounts receivable. 
 
Often old accounts receivable are assigned to a collection agency. These agencies typically 
are paid on a percentage of the collected amounts. Fraud schemes can be perpetrated by 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1241 
these agencies if the company does not monitor the method by which the agency receives 
old accounts and the collection process itself.  
 
The assignor company needs to assure itself that the collection agency is being assigned truly 
old accounts only and not good accounts that can reasonably be expected to pay within the 
normal course of business.  
 
Additionally, the company needs to be sure that the collection agency cannot compromise 
the indebtedness so that collections are not reported. This would allow the collection agency 
to compromise indebtedness for its own collection and not remit amounts owed the 
company. 
 
Credit Balances 
When patients have more than one payer responsible for payment of an admission, 
institutions have been known to collect more than the original amount billed. This may 
occur when the patient has more than one health insurance company, is in a vehicle accident 
where multiple insurance carriers are involved, or where workers’ compensation is 
applicable. In addition, the facility may also collect the deductible and co-payment from the 
patient. If the hospital has a credit balance, the amount paid above the charges should be 
refunded to the applicable parties. However, this does not always occur. Generally the 
refund will be made upon request, but only upon request. 
 
T h e f t of Pharmac e u t i ca l s and Supplies 
Because of the ready market for selling pharmaceuticals and supplies, they have a propensity 
for being stolen. Narcotic drugs, although they are usually tightly controlled, still may be 
stolen and sold on the street. Supplies such as canes, sunglasses after cataract surgery, and 
admission kits are popular items for theft or employee abuse. 
 
 
Managed Care 
The United States’ health  care system is moving toward more and different types of 
“managed” care. As the country moves to a differe nt type of health care delivery system, so 
may the types of fraud. 
 
Traditionally, health care has been provided and paid for on a “fee-for-service” basis where 
payments were made either directly to the health care provider as payment for services 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1242                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
rendered to the insured party, or to the insured as reimbursement for medical expenses 
incurred. The premise behind managed care is that the medical practitioner is responsible for 
managing the total needs of the patient. The primary purpose of managed care is to reduce 
cost by promoting the most appropriate and efficient use of medical services.  
 
The most common managed care arrangements are: 
• Modified traditional coverage 
• HMOs 
• PPOs 
 
Modified Traditional Coverage 
Under this type of coverage, the medical practitioner is reimbursed through a fee-for-service 
arrangement. The patient is free to choose a provider and a claim is submitted for 
reimbursement by either the insured or the provider. It is a managed care model in that cost-
 cutting measures are in the form of utilization review, prior authorization, second surgical 
opinions, and hospital pre-authorizations. 
 
HMOs 
HMOs, or Health Maintenance Organizations, have several variations. The HMO may 
employ all of the providers as in a staff-model HMO, or the managed care organization may 
contract with individual physicians or physician groups. The insured selects a primary care 
physician (PCP) who is the gatekeeper. Generally all medical care is initiated through the 
PCP. Payment is made by capitation, that is, the PCP receives a flat fee per month from the 
managed care organization, although some fees still may be paid on a fee-per-service basis 
usually at a reduced rate. Care that cannot be performed by the PCP is done by a specialty 
care physician who is also a member of the HMO network. The patient is severely penalized 
for going outside the HMO network. 
 
PPOs 
PPO, or Preferred Provider Organization, is  a managed care arrangement in which the 
patient chooses a provider from a list of participating providers in the PPO network. Their 
care is not managed by one provider as in the HMO, and they may see any provider in the 
network. The patient is penalized for going outside the network, although not as severely as 
in an HMO network. Providers usually must bill the third-party payer and claims are 
assigned.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1243 
How Managed Care Alters the Potentia l for Fraud 
In a managed care environment, fraud is not eliminated. Insured fraud may be reduced 
substantially, but provider fraud is still alive and well. In addition to billing fraudulent 
services, managed care has an additional incentive for fraud. Because the providers share in 
the financial risk of a patient, there is the potential to provide less services to a patient since a 
fixed capitation rate allows the patients unlimited visits to a provider. 
 
Types of Managed Care Frauds 
• Inadequate treatment of patients. 
• Referring patients automatically to providers outside the network (perhaps in exchange 
for kickbacks from outside providers). 
• Establishment of inconvenient appointment hours, service locations, etc. to suppress the 
number of patients. 
• Inflating reports of patient traffic and treatment costs to induce payers to increase future 
per patient capitation fees. 
• False claims for services not covered by fixed capitation payments. 
• Falsification of quality of care and/or treatment-outcome data. 
• Providers misrepresenting their credentials or qualifications for admission to a given 
payer’s network of managed care providers. 
• Out-of-network overbilling for substandard services. 
• Employees’ creating claim checks during pe riods when the plan no longer is doing 
business with the HMO, but treatment of me mbers continues due to existing problems. 
• Providing kickbacks to employees of managed care organizations for putting patients in 
their panel. 
 
Managed care systems also create the opportunity for fraud by the insureds. Some of the 
examples of fraud that may be found in the managed care environment include  
the following: 
• Patients (members) loaning or selling use of card to nonmembers. 
• Enrolling noneligible persons as members for obtaining treatment. 
• Failing to disenroll ex-spouse of family members. 
• Out-of-network falsified emergency trea tment in collusion with providers. 
 
Red Flags 
Some of the red flags for managed care frauds are: 
• Identifying providers who regularly waive co-payments or deductibles. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1244                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Unusual referral patterns—either too high or too low. 
• Unusually high pattern of referrals to pharmacies, laboratories, or specialty  
care physicians. 
• High number of emergency room referrals. 
• Patient complaints about the treatment. 
• A pattern of high number of services that fall outside of the capitated services. 
 
 
Medicaid Fraud 
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed th e Social Security Act, which established 
Medicare and Medicaid. These programs provid e medical and health-related services to 
specific groups of people in the United States. Both programs are managed by the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), a federal agency within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.  
 
Although both Medicare and Medicaid provide medical and health-related services, there are 
several differences between the two programs. Medicare, which is funded and governed by 
the federal government, is the federal health insurance program for people age 65 or older 
and most people with certain disabilities; it is financed by Social Security contributions. 
Conversely, Medicaid is a federal- and state-funded program that provides health care 
coverage for low-income families and children, medical and long-term care coverage for 
people with disabilities, and assistance with health and long-term care expenses for low-
 income seniors. Although Medicaid is a federa l program, it is operated by the states, and 
each state decides eligibility and the scope of coverage. Medicaid does not require recipients 
to make contributions, and it is financed from general revenues. 
 
According to the federal government, Medicaid fraud involves purposely billing Medicaid for 
services that were never provided or received. 
 
As the number of individuals enrolled in Medi caid increases, the amount of funds being 
expended by these programs leaves the industry at a significant risk for fraudulent claims. 
Medicaid expenditures comprised $216 billion of the 2009 federal budget. The proposed 
fiscal year 2011 budget includes a $1.7 billion allotment to fight fraud and abuse in the 
Medicare and Medicaid systems. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1245 
In response to the enormous increase in Me dicaid fraud, the federal government has 
established departments, programs, statutes, and funds for deterring, investigating, and 
prosecuting such types of fraud.  
 
An Overview of the Medicaid System 
For a state to establish a Medicaid program for its residents, it must comply with specific 
federal guidelines. Each state must: 
• Establish its own eligibility standards;  
• Determine the type, amount, duration, and scope of services;  
• Set the rate of payment for services; and  
• Administer its own program. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1246                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AGENCY RESPONSIBILITY  RELATED ACTIVITIES 
FEDERAL      
Centers for 
Medicare And 
Medicaid 
Service s  
• Assist each state in increasing the 
effectiveness of its Medicaid 
program integrity efforts.  
• Acts as an oversight entity of 
states’ fraud and abuse efforts.  
• Keeps the alliance in working 
order.  
• Oversees state Medicaid agencies. 
• Facilitates communication 
and information sharing 
between the federal 
government and states  
• Establishes a national forum 
for Medicaid fraud and abuse 
issues.  
• Provides ongoing forums and 
training for state officials on 
fraud control.  
HHS (OIG) • Oversees state Medicaid Fraud 
Control Units.  
• Investigates federal Medicaid 
fraud cases. 
• Sanctions fraudulent 
providers by imposing 
exclusions and civil monetary 
penalties. 
• Refers investigative findings 
to the DOJ. 
DOJ 
(U.S. Attorneys)  
• Prosecutes Medicaid fraud cases 
referred by the FBI and OIG.  
• Indicts, negotiates 
settlements, and recovers 
damages. 
DOJ (FBI)  • Investigates federal fraud cases 
(can’t impose sanctions).  
• Refers investigative findings 
to U.S. Attorneys.  
STATE      
State Medicaid 
Agency  
• Administers state Medicaid 
programs.  
• Conducts pre- and post-
 payment claims reviews. 
• Administers provider 
enrollment processes. 
P r o g r a m 
Integrity Unit 
• Reviews claims data to detect and 
investigates unusual payment 
patterns. 
• Conducts various integrity 
activities. 
• Refers suspected fraud cases 
to the state’s Medicaid Fraud 
Control Unit. 
• Refers civil cases to the state 
Medicaid agency’s collection 
unit. 
Medicaid Fraud 
Control Uni t 
(MFCU)  
• Investigates and prosecutes cases 
involving Medicaid fraud. 
• Investigates and acts on 
complaints of abuse or neglect of 
patients in facilities receiving 
Medicaid funding. 
• Refers cases that will not be 
prosecuted to the state 
Medicaid agency or other 
authority for administrative 
action.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1247 
Federa l Legislat i o n 
The following are some of the most common federal statutes used to prosecute  
Medicaid fraud: 
• The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute 
• The Civil False Claims Act 
• The Stark Law 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
 
State Level Enforcem e n t 
In 1977, Congress devised the Medicaid Frau d Control Units (MFCU) program, to help 
states counter Medicaid fraud. MFCUs are sta te law enforcement agencies that investigate 
and prosecute cases involving Medicaid fraud, investigate and act on complaints of abuse or 
neglect of patients in facilities receiving Medica id funding, and refer cases, which will not be 
prosecuted, to the state Medicaid agency or other authority for administrative action. The 
only way a state can keep from establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud 
in their state. 
 
Under MFCU program, each state is to impl ement its own MFCU. The federal government 
subsidizes each state’s program with 90 percent of the monies necessary to get that state’s 
MFCU up and rolling. Three years thereafter, the federal government provides the state’s 
MFCU with 75 percent of its operating co sts. The only way a state can keep from 
establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud in their state. 
 
Federal initiatives such as this have helped states effectively curb Medicaid fraud on state and 
local levels. According to the United States Government Accountability Office, for FY 2008, 
state MFCUs recovered more than $1.3 billion in  legal restitution, obtained more than 1,314 
convictions, and excluded 971 individuals from participating in the Medicaid and Medicare 
programs. 
 
To identify and detect Medicaid fraud at any level, fraud examiners must be apprised of 
various Medicaid fraud schemes because such sche mes are, often, more stringently regulated 
at the state level.  
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1248                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Electronic Claims Fraud 
Auditing electronic claims may use the same techniques as auditing any other type of health 
care if the original source documents are used. The difference may be that the audit may use 
the information electronically transmitted rather than the original information. If reliance 
could be placed on the information being submitted, then there wouldn’t be any difference. 
However, history has proved that electronic claims can be a fertile source for fraud. 
 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) is the exchange of electronic data between computers in 
which there is no human interaction. This technology has advanced companies’ ability to 
conduct business by light-years, but it has also provided would-be fraudsters an increased 
opportunity to commit white-collar crimes. 
 
EDI’s origins arise in the 1960s, when ma ny industry groups began to develop EDI 
standards in areas such as purchasing, transportation, and financial transactions. The next 
major step forward came when the Transportation Data Coordinating Committee and the 
National Association of Credit Management’s  Credit Research Foundation developed the 
first standards of electronic data interchange. At this time, they have developed over 300 
different standards for individual industries concerning the transmission of EDI. These 
standards are published by the Data Interchange Standards Association.  
 
Although these standards have been adopted and used worldwide by a multitude of different 
industries, the health care industry has been notoriously slow in adopting the new 
technology. Only now have a handful of large health care providers such as Blue Cross Blue 
Shield announced their endorsements of the health care industry conducting business 
electronically. The reasoning behind the reluctance to convert is that the health care system 
is so complicated that a switch in operation procedure of this magnitude would cause 
considerable headache in the early phases. 
 
EDI can be used internally within a business as a way of communication and data transfer 
and it can also be used for the same purposes between different businesses. In the case of 
the health care industry, EDI enables the different companies to send claims, invoices, and 
other vital data that once was shipped in a paper format via airmail. The fact that EDI allows 
for an immediate exchange of data makes the process of submitting and approving health 
care claims much more efficient for the health care industry.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1249 
The health care transactions that will be affected by the emerging of EDI technologies 
include: 
• Claims payment  
• Enrollments 
• Claims submission 
• Eligibility 
• Claim status 
• Crossover COB 
• Health care service review 
• Patient information record 
• Managed care encounter 
• Capitated payment 
• Interactive claim 
• HMO reporting 
• Provider information 
 
In the current health care system, there are over 1,500 insurance companies that process 
over four billion medical claims every year. Because the health care system uses over 450 
different types of forms, it is estimated that in the past, the health care industry spent as 
much as $100 billion per year to process its pape rwork. Thus, EDI has the potential to save 
the health care industry from $8 billion to $2 0 billion every year. It is very simply a more 
efficient way for the health care industry to do business. However, fraud examiners fear that 
a more efficient system also paves the way for more efficient ways to defraud the health  
care industry. 
 
Solid controls must be established to deal with the health care industry’s conversion to EDI 
or the savings that the more efficient system will produce may be gobbled up by bigger fraud 
losses. The electronic conversion of information completely removes paper-based controls. 
 
EDI eliminates the abilities that fraud examiners have to detect fraud in the health care 
industry in three ways: 
• The automation of claims has erased claims professionals’ ability to detect suspicious-
 looking claims. Because they are used to handling the paperwork of claims, EDI 
hampers the claims professional from getting a good picture of the overall nature of an 
account, instead reducing each transaction to individual claims. 
• Because of the impersonal nature of electronic transactions, EDI raises the temptation 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1250                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of would-be fraudsters to commit white-collar crime. 
• EDI leaves no paper trail, making the process of fraud detection difficult for the  
fraud examiner. 
 
The reasons the health care industry is concerned about EDI’s potential to stimulate 
fraudulent activity include: 
• The lack of tools to detect EDI fraud. 
• The variation of health care services precipitates the potential from a plethora of 
dissimilar frauds. 
• The efficiency of EDI allows for more vendors and thus more claims to account for. 
• The swiftness in which transactions take place allow less time to uncover fraud. 
 
In the past, the health care industry has developed sophisticated methods of detecting fraud 
within the paper-based system. Now that the conversion to EDI is taking place, the health 
care industry must find a way to convert those methods to uncovering fraud in the electronic 
format. These methods will only be as sophisticated as the health care industry chooses to 
make them; the less concern that the industry shows for creating fraud indicators, the more 
opportunity they will be giving fraudsters to “beat the system.”   
 
Fraud examiners should not fear that the conversion to EDI will eliminate any fraud-related 
job opportunities. In fact, that conversion will actually open up many fraud examination 
jobs, as the safeguards and red flag system against fraud has not been effectively established 
at this time. Therefore, fraud examiners need to be aware that their jobs include not only 
investigating fraud, but also to creating systems that will effectively deter fraud. 
 
Many new and complicated legal issues are raised as a result of the health care industry’s 
conversion to EDI. Some of the difficult questions that have been pressed include: 
• How does the insurance company prove that all electronic claims are authentic? 
• Who is responsible for errors in electronic health care claims? 
• How does the fraud examiner prove that the contents of an electronic health care claim 
are false? 
• How does the health care industry ensure that all electronic transmissions are received 
exactly as they are sent? 
• What terms and conditions govern electronic claims? 
• How will fraud examiners determine the actual origin of any electronic submission? 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1251 
Because automated claims are quite easily altered, the health care industry must ensure that 
claims are authentic. Fraud examiners must document that claims have been received in the 
same condition in which they were processed if they are to be admissible as evidence.  
 
Some examples of ways to ensure claims’ authenticity include: 
• Data encryption  
• Digital signatures  
• Message authentication codes  
• Prior claims’ history checkups 
• A variety of field checks 
 
T h e Effects of Prosecut i o n in  an Electron i c Environm e n t 
EDI creates another type of legal evidence, but the basic legal principles regarding that 
evidence should remain intact. Therefore, the burden falls on the companies of the health 
care industry to demonstrate that its electronic system has proven safeguards that counteract 
fraud. If the system is proven to be reliable, the company can then show that it has created a 
reliable record of transactions. 
 
The greatest weakness within an EDI system is that in the prosecution, a defendant may 
claim that he did not enter the claim or that the claim was mishandled by the health care 
company. Thus, a health care company must maintain the integrity of its electronic records. 
The health care company must have in place several ways to uncover fraud, from automatic 
red flags to intricate fraud analysis programs that pick up on familiar patterns that may 
ultimately lead to fraud. 
 
A health care company must prove the origin of all electronic communication and the 
original content of the transaction. They must also reduce the possibility that the original 
claim’s content can be intentionally or unintentionally compromised. By doing these things, 
the health care industry can effectively use EDI without substantially raising the possibility 
of fraudulent activity. 
 
 
Health Care Compliance Programs 
Recently the government discovered a widespread “upcoding” scheme, in whi ch numerous 
hospitals across the country routinely and fraudulently coded cases in their billing systems 
under a diagnostic related group (DRG) that caused Medicare to overcompensate the 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1252                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
providers by about 28 percent. These “optimizat ion” programs crossed the line of legitimate 
billing and subsequent criminal and civil investigations followed. In dealing with such a large 
number of hospitals, the government utilized compliance programs, also known as corporate 
integrity agreements, to help minimize future instances of fraud without significantly 
damaging a community’s health care needs by sa nctioning or dismissing medical providers. 
 
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General 
(OIG), is increasingly using corporate compliance programs in lieu of sanctions to control 
medical providers and related entities who have defrauded federal health care programs.  
 
The OIG has devised model compliance guidelines for hospitals, clinical laboratories, 
durable medical equipment companies, and home health companies. The entire contents of 
those model plans can be located on the United States Department of Health and Human 
Service’s website at www.hhs.gov. 
 
Compliance programs are simply a set of effective internal controls designed to ensure that 
company operations adhere to the guidelines, regulations, and laws affecting the 
organization. Ideally, these internal controls should complement controls that already are in 
place within the accounting system. This is imperative because many problems OIG 
investigates center around the financial operations of the company, such as billing and 
collections. Compliance efforts are meant to encourage a culture that fosters prevention, 
detection, and resolution of conduct that is outside established company policies. The 
Federal Sentencing Guidelines also encourage compliance programs in order to reduce 
criminal fines and penalties. 
 
The sentencing guidelines and the Department of Health and Human Services model plans 
have some basic characteristics to which a compliance program should adhere. The seven 
basic elements include: 
• Develop and distribute policies that define standards and procedures to be followed by 
the organization’s agents and employees. Specifically, the organization should establish 
standards of conduct that emphasize the organization’s commitment to compliancy in 
areas such as Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations; fraud and 
abuse laws; federal, state, and local laws; and corporate ethical policies, mission, and 
goals. Annually circulate to every employee a standards of conduct statement that 
requires the signatures of all directors, officers, managers, employees, and contractors 
certifying that they have read, understand, and agree to comply with its terms;  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1253 
• Designate or hire a high-level employee who has ultimate responsibility to operate and 
monitor the compliance program and to report directly to the CEO or governing body. 
This employee would be much like the company’s own internal inspector general; 
• Use reasonable care to identify sanctioned providers and remove those individuals from 
any activity that would violate a law or regulation. This can be done by dismissing the 
provider or reassigning him to an area of the company that does not have direct contact 
with patients covered by government insurance, or to an area that is neither directly nor 
indirectly reimbursed by a government program. If a sanctioned party works in the 
supply division, and part of the costs of that division are allocated on the Medicare cost 
report, then this could constitute a violation;  
• Require regular training programs for all employees and contractors. Each entity should 
have some policy for educating managers, executives, and employees about fraud. This 
can be conducted during employee orientation and/or through ongoing training 
programs and other company communication methods. Initial and annual training for all 
staff, especially for those in the marketing, sales, and billing departments, is essential. 
Training should focus on billing policies and procedures, application of federal rules and 
regulations, disciplinary actions for non-compliance, personal responsibility of every 
employee to comply, CMS policies and procedures, and fraud and abuse laws; 
• Use various kinds of monitoring and proactive auditing systems to detect fraud and 
unusual trends to ensure compliance. There are many statistical aberrations that an 
experienced fraud examiner can monitor in a proactive manner to identify potential 
problem areas, such as noticeable variations in billing patterns. For instance, if suddenly 
there is a 200 percent increase in billing for physician consultations, the fraud examiner 
may wish to review those services to determine if simple office visits are being 
characterized fraudulently as more complex—and thus, more lucrative—consultations; 
• Establish and publicize a reporting system in which employees can report criminal 
conduct without fear of retribution (hotline or ombudsman program). Each employee in 
the company should know where to report suspicious, unethical, or illegal behavior. 
Steps should include establishing a self-disclosure policy, which outlines procedures for 
reporting law violations to the appropriate authorities, and a records retention policy, 
which sets standards on how long records should be stored and in what format 
(electronic media, original paper document, etc.). The Office of Inspector General also 
has a Provider Self-disclosure Program (discussed in detail in the Federal Register dated 
Oct. 30, 1998) that offers a cooperative effort in reporting problems; 
• Develop a system to respond to allegations, investigate those allegations, and, if needed, 
carry out the appropriate disciplinary measures. Be consistent and also discipline 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1254                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
individuals who fail to detect the offense due to negligence. The compliance program 
should outline specifically who will investigate suspected irregularities, and to whom 
these irregularities will be reported (i.e., management, internal investigators, law 
enforcement, and/or legal counsel); and 
• Regularly review for systemic weaknesses in company operations and/or policies and 
make changes as needed. 
 
Essentially, what a compliance program is designed to do is provide insurance for the 
provider. By taking every reasonable and prudent step possible, a provider will have 
demonstrated to a prosecutor, judge, or jury that he has taken steps to prevent fraudulent 
activity from pervading his operations. Consequently, the damage to a provider’s reputation, 
pocketbook, and freedom can be controlled and minimized to the fullest extent possible. 
 
 
