2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Provider Fraud/Home Health Companies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Home Health Companies 
Fraud involving home health care companies gained national exposure after the federal 
government’s investigation of ABC Home Health  Care was released. At the time of the 
investigation, ABC was the largest privately held home health care provider in the United 
States. In 1994, ABC made some 7.8 million visits and billed Medicare $615.9 million. 
Among the types of fraud identified at ABC were: 
• Medical records were altered to make it appear that patients continued to need home 
health visits. 
• Managers directed employees to continue vi siting patients who, in the employee’s 
opinion, did not qualify for home health care because they were not homebound. 
• A manager directed a nurse to record visits that were never made. 
• A manager forged physicians’ signatures on plans of care. 
• If a care plan was signed by a physician, employees would alter the number of visits.  
• ABC reportedly charged Medicare for the cost  of acquiring other home health agencies 
by paying owners a small sum up front and the balance in salary under the form of 
employment agreements. 
• Managers directed employees to market ABC and its services with the intent of charging 
Medicare for costs that were not reimbursable. 
 



:


home health compani
fraud involv home health care compani gain nation exposur after the feder
govern investig of abc home health care wa releas at the time of the
investig abc wa the largest privat held home health care provid in the unit
state in 1994 abc made some 78 million visit and bill medicar 6159 million
among the type of fraud identifi at abc were
medic record were alter to make it appear that patient continu to need home
health visit
manag direct employe to continu vi site patient who in the employe
opinion did not qualifi for home health care becaus thei were not homebound
a manag direct a nurs to record visit that were never made
a manag forg physician signatur on plan of care
if a care plan wa sign by a physician employe would alter the number of visit
abc reportedli charg medicar for the cost of acquir other home health agenc
by pai owner a small sum up front and the balanc in salari under the form of
employ agreement
manag direct employe to market abc and it servic with the intent of charg
medicar for cost that were not reimburs
