2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Provider Fraud/Red Flags of Provider Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Red Flags of Provider Fraud 
Warning signs that a provider is engaging in fraudulent practices include: 
• Pressure for rapid adjudication of claims. 
• Threats of legal action for delay in making payments. 
• Frequent telephone inquiries on claim status. 
• Assertive providers who demand same-day claim payment and special handling. 
• Charges submitted for payment with no supporting documentation available (such as x-
 rays or lab results). 
• Use of a P.O. box as return addresses. 
• Insured’s address on claim form is the same as provider. 
• Routine (not specialized) treatment for patients living more than 150 miles from  
the provider. 
• Referring physician and provider of service in same professional corporation. 
• Medical records that have been altered. 
• Medical records that have additional informat ion attached that would make an apparent 
noncovered service now covered. 
• Missing pages of medical records that would cover the period of time under review. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1223 



:


red flag of provid fraud
warn sign that a provid is engag in fraudul practic includ
pressur for rapid adjud of claim
threat of legal action for delai in make payment
frequent telephon inquiri on claim statu
assert provid who demand samedai claim payment and special handl
charg submit for payment with no support document avail such as x
rai or lab result
us of a po box as return address
insur address on claim form is the same as provid
routin not special treatment for patient live more than 150 mile from
the provid
refer physician and provid of servic in same profession corpor
medic record that have been alter
medic record that have addit informat ion attach that would make an appar
noncov servic now cover
miss page of medic record that would cover the period of time under review
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11223
