2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Detection of External Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Detection of External Fraud 
• Misspelled medical/dental terminology. 
• Unusual charges for a given service. 
• Similar handwriting by the claimant and the provider of service. 
• Typed, not printed bill heads. 
• Bills with irregular columns. 
• Unassigned bills that are normally assigned, such as large hospital or surgical bills. 
• Typed or handwritten hospital bills. 
• Drug receipts from the same pharmacy but on different color paper. 
• Erasures or alterations. 
• Lack of any provider’s signature on a claim form. 
• Absence of the provider’s medical degree, i.e., “Dr. John Doe” instead of “John Doe, 
M.D.” 
• An illegible provider signature on the bill submitted or the signature does not match the 
one on file. 
• Surgeries that don’t have other related services such as hospital charges. 
• Physician’s specialty does not agree with diagnosis. 
• Services billed do not agree with diagnosis. 
• Impossible or unlikely services. 
• Photocopied bills. 
• Other indicators that a claim approver or in vestigator should be aware of that could 
result in identifying a possible fraud: 
? Pressure by a claimant to pay a claim quickly. 
? Individuals who hand deliver their claim insist on picking up their claim check. 
? Threats of legal action if a claim is not paid quickly. 
? Anonymous telephone call inquiries regarding the status of a pending claim. 
? Identical claims for same patient in different months or different years. 
? Dates of service just prior to termination of enrollment or just after enrollment. 
? Services billed that do not appear to agree with the medical records. 
? Billing for services or equipment that are clearly unsuitable for the patient’s needs. 
? Foreign claims listing charges in U.S. dollars when that isn’t the currency of that 
country. 
? Foreign claims giving documentation in English when English is not the primary 
language spoken. 
? Multiple foreign claims for same subscriber. 
? Multiple foreign claims from same physician/hospital. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1231 



:


detect of extern fraud
misspel medicaldent terminolog
unusu charg for a given servic
similar handwrit by the claimant and the provid of servic
type not print bill head
bill with irregular column
unassign bill that ar normal assign such as larg hospit or surgic bill
type or handwritten hospit bill
drug receipt from the same pharmaci but on differ color paper
erasur or alter
lack of ani provid signatur on a claim form
absenc of the provid medic degre ie dr john doe instead of john doe
md
an illeg provid signatur on the bill submit or the signatur doe not match the
on on file
surgeri that dont have other relat servic such as hospit charg
physician specialti doe not agre with diagnosi
servic bill do not agre with diagnosi
imposs or unlik servic
photocopi bill
other indic that a claim approv or in vestig should be awar of that could
result in identifi a possibl fraud
pressur by a claimant to pai a claim quickli
individu who hand deliv their claim insist on pick up their claim check
threat of legal action if a claim is not paid quickli
anonym telephon call inquiri regard the statu of a pend claim
ident claim for same patient in differ month or differ year
date of servic just prior to termin of enrol or just after enrol
servic bill that do not appear to agre with the medic record
bill for servic or equip that ar clearli unsuit for the patient need
foreign claim list charg in us dollar when that isnt the currenc of that
countri
foreign claim give document in english when english is not the primari
languag spoken
multipl foreign claim for same subscrib
multipl foreign claim from same physicianhospit
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11231
