2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Fraud by Medical Institutions/What to Do?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


What to Do? 
Consumer education is the front line to battling rent-a-patient schemes. Insurance 
companies must educate their insureds on the prevalence of this type of fraud, and provide 
these individuals with means of communication when it is believed fraud is afoot. 
Disadvantaged populations must also be informed about the negative impacts of 
participating in such schemes (i.e., health risks and criminal liability). 
 
Insurance companies must educate from within. Investigation units should be established to 
include skilled fraud examiners. Fraud detection software programs should be purchased to 
detect irregular claims patterns. An example of progressive movement towards the fight 
against health care fraud is Blue Cross Blue Shield’s establishment of the Anti-Fraud Strike 
Force to bring Blue Plans together when faced with multi-jurisdictional health care fraud 
schemes. The program pools resources, insight, and intellect from around the country to 
circumvent and prosecute rent-a-patient schemes. 
 
Likewise, the federal government has implemen ted several organizations and programs to 
target health care fraud. For example, the Health Care Integrity and Protection Data Bank 
(HIPDB) is a flagging system that alerts federal and state government agencies commence 
with a more thorough review of a practitioner’s, provider’s, or supplier’s past dealings. Not 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1237 
only may federal and state governments review the database for potential red flags, but also 
they must report the following information: health care-related civil judgments and criminal 
convictions in federal or state court; injunctions; administrative actions; participation 
exclusions; and the like. Failure to report such information may subject a health plan to a 
civil penalty of up to $25,000 for each adverse action not reported. 
 



:


what to do
consum educ is the front line to battl rentapati scheme insur
compani must educ their insur on the preval of thi type of fraud and provid
these individu with mean of commun when it is believ fraud is afoot
disadvantag popul must also be inform about the neg impact of
particip in such scheme ie health risk and crimin liabil
insur compani must educ from within investig unit should be establish to
includ skill fraud examin fraud detect softwar program should be purchas to
detect irregular claim pattern an exampl of progress movement toward the fight
against health care fraud is blue cross blue shield establish of the antifraud strike
forc to bring blue plan togeth when face with multijurisdict health care fraud
scheme the program pool resourc insight and intellect from around the countri to
circumv and prosecut rentapati scheme
likewis the feder govern ha implemen ted sever organ and program to
target health care fraud for exampl the health care integr and protect data bank
hipdb is a flag system that alert feder and state govern agenc commenc
with a more thorough review of a practition provid or supplier past deal not
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11237
onli mai feder and state govern review the databas for potenti red flag but also
thei must report the follow inform health carerel civil judgment and crimin
convict in feder or state court injunct administr action particip
exclus and the like failur to report such inform mai subject a health plan to a
civil penalti of up to 25000 for each advers action not report
