2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing to Testify/Appearance


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Appearance 
The appearance of the expert witness often lends itself to an assessment of the credibility of 
that witness. It is recommended that the witness wear conservative business attire, be well-groomed, 
and neatly dressed.  
 
It is also important that the witness maintain a professional demeanor. In the witness box, the 
witness should maintain a poised, alert appearance, stand firmly, and be ready to take the oath. 
The witness should not smile gratuitously at the judge, jury, or the lawyers. Also, it is 
important that the witness keep control of his hands, to avoid fidgeting. And witness should 
maintain eye contact with the questioner as much as possible; he should not stare off into 
space, at the floor, or at the ceiling. 
 
As the judge will be taking notes, the witness should speak slowly to ensure that the judge 
does not fall behind. The answers should be directed to the questioner. The witness’s voice 
should be strong, clear, and audible. Thus, before answering each question, the witness should 
pause before answering and carefully consider the answer; he should also respond in a slow 
and deliberate manner. 
 



:


appear
the appear of the expert wit often lend itself to an assess of the credibl of
that wit it is recommend that the wit wear conserv busi attir be wellgroom
and neatli dress
it is also import that the wit maintain a profession demeanor in the wit box the
wit should maintain a pois alert appear stand firmli and be readi to take the oath
the wit should not smile gratuit at the judg juri or the lawyer also it is
import that the wit keep control of hi hand to avoid fidget and wit should
maintain ey contact with the question as much as possibl he should not stare off into
space at the floor or at the ceil
as the judg will be take note the wit should speak slowli to ensur that the judg
doe not fall behind the answer should be direct to the question the witnesss voic
should be strong clear and audibl thu befor answer each question the wit should
paus befor answer and carefulli consid the answer he should also respond in a slow
and deliber manner
