2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing to Testify/Do's and Don'ts


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Do's and Don'ts 
There are other considerations in making an expert a credible witness. Some tips are: 
• Exude an alert and confident attitude. 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.817 
• Maintain professional pride and integrity throughout. 
• Tell the truth; be honest and avoid bias. 
• Use simple rather than complex terms, and refrain from using professional jargon. 
• Explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms. 
• Be friendly and polite to all parties present. 
• Be alert.  
• Correct any misstatements as soon as they are detected. 
• Listen carefully and answer the specific questions—do not go off on tangents or volunteer 
more than the question requires. 
• Do not verbally fence with the attorney. 
• Do not try to be humorous or hip. 
• Be calm and deliberate in responding to questions—think before you speak. 
• Plan your testimony in advance and know your material thoroughly.  
• Use graphs, charts, and other visual aids if they help to clarify a point. 
• Do not read from notes if you can avoid it (the opposition lawyer will probably demand to 
see such notes, and the witness will then look like he rehearsed his testimony). 
• Prepare your material completely. If you have documents to introduce, have them 
organized so that you can quickly retrieve them when asked to do so. 
• Do not “hem and haw” or stammer; recover your composure when a tough or complex 
question is posed. 
• Ask for a question to be repeated or clarified if not fully comprehended. 
• If an answer is not known, say so; do not guess. 
• Do not invent and do not inflate. 
• In cross-examination, do not respond too quickly because counsel might wish to object to 
the question. 
• Do not be evasive. 
 
Several other things should also be avoided. These range from drinking five cups of coffee 
immediately prior to testimony or chewing bubble gum while giving evidence, to small 
physical mannerisms that might affect your appearance. These physical mannerisms, which 
might be as simple as rubbing one’s hands together continually, looking down at one’s hands, 
fidgeting on the stand, or jingling coins in a pocket, could become irritating to the judge and 
jury. 
 
Similar to trial proceedings, the opposition commonly drills an expert about his credentials, his 
methodology, and his conclusions pertaining to the case. Unlike in a trial, the expert quite 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.818  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
often answers tersely, giving only a straight “yes” or “no.” For inquiries that require more, you 
should respond directly and precisely and refrain from volunteering any information. It is not 
your duty to educate the other side at deposition. You may ask for a recess or a break if 
needed. 
 
Pour over the written transcription of your deposition afterward to ensure accuracy, 
immediately correcting any omissions or errors, whether made by you or the stenographer. 
Notify your lawyer if your opinion has changed since deposition. If you are present at the 
deposition of the opposing expert, you may be asked to summarize your impressions 
afterward and note any gray areas that call for further lines of inquiry. 
 
 



:


do and dont
there ar other consider in make an expert a credibl wit some tip ar
exud an alert and confid attitud
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2817
maintain profession pride and integr throughout
tell the truth be honest and avoid bia
us simpl rather than complex term and refrain from us profession jargon
explain complex concept in a layperson term
be friendli and polit to all parti present
be alert
correct ani misstat as soon as thei ar detect
listen carefulli and answer the specif questionsdo not go off on tangent or volunt
more than the question requir
do not verbal fenc with the attornei
do not try to be humor or hip
be calm and deliber in respond to questionsthink befor you speak
plan your testimoni in advanc and know your materi thoroughli
us graph chart and other visual aid if thei help to clarifi a point
do not read from note if you can avoid it the opposit lawyer will probabl demand to
see such note and the wit will then look like he rehears hi testimoni
prepar your materi complet if you have document to introduc have them
organ so that you can quickli retriev them when ask to do so
do not hem and haw or stammer recov your composur when a tough or complex
question is pose
ask for a question to be repeat or clarifi if not fulli comprehend
if an answer is not known sai so do not guess
do not invent and do not inflat
in crossexamin do not respond too quickli becaus counsel might wish to object to
the question
do not be evas
sever other thing should also be avoid these rang from drink five cup of coffe
immedi prior to testimoni or chew bubbl gum while give evid to small
physic manner that might affect your appear these physic manner which
might be as simpl as rub on hand togeth continu look down at on hand
fidget on the stand or jingl coin in a pocket could becom irrit to the judg and
juri
similar to trial proceed the opposit commonli drill an expert about hi credenti hi
methodolog and hi conclus pertain to the case unlik in a trial the expert quit
testifi as an expert wit law
2818 2011 fraud examin manual
often answer ters give onli a straight ye or no for inquiri that requir more you
should respond directli and precis and refrain from volunt ani inform it is not
your duti to educ the other side at deposit you mai ask for a recess or a break if
need
pour over the written transcript of your deposit afterward to ensur accuraci
immedi correct ani omiss or error whether made by you or the stenograph
notifi your lawyer if your opinion ha chang sinc deposit if you ar present at the
deposit of the oppos expert you mai be ask to summar your impress
afterward and note ani grai area that call for further line of inquiri
