2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Cross-Examination


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Cross-Examination 
Cross-examination is truly the highlight of the adversary court system. It is geared to allow 
counsel either to clarify or to make points at the witness’s expense. It generally is the most 
difficult part of the trial process for any witness. Anything can turn up that might refute or 
embarrass the witness. The witness’s credibility is constantly called into question. 
 
The goals of the opposing counsel during cross-examination are threefold. The first goal is to 
diminish the importance of the expert testimony just presented. The second goal is to have 
the expert testify in support of the opposing position by providing a series of assumptions. 
The third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequacies in the expert’s 
opinion, thereby discrediting the opinion, the report, and the witness. 
 
The opposing counsel can attack or question anything that has been said or entered into court. 
This includes notes, working papers, affidavits, will-says, reports, and preliminary trial or 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.821 
discovery transcripts. Often, cross-examination creates an atmosphere of confrontation and 
contradiction.  
 
The witness must not take attacks or attempts to discredit personally. There are many ways to 
discredit an expert witness. Throughout the process, it is important for the witness to maintain 
pride and professional integrity. An adage to remember is that “even mud can be worn well.” 
 
Opposing counsel wants to reduce or limit the impact of the witness’s evidence — it is natural 
to feel a certain amount of apprehension, and this might do a great deal to keep the witness 
alert. The jury often watches the judge, and thus the expert often can take a clue as to the 
tempo and reaction of the jury and the judge to the evidence being presented. Slight changes 
in style and presentation could be made accordingly. 
 
The opposing counsel usually has a plan of cross-examination in mind and an expert witness 
should be able to anticipate this direction to prevent falling into a trap. A danger to this, of 
course, is that the witness will spend as much time planning ahead as answering the questions, 
and might not be giving appropriate attention to the immediate questions. Further, in 
attempting to anticipate a question, the witness might misunderstand what is actually asked. 
 
Generally, it is a rule of thumb that a witness should not volunteer or freely give information.  
 
During the answer, it often might be extremely difficult to avoid getting trapped in various 
assumptions, “what if” scenarios, and generalities presented by counsel during cross-examination. 
If this occurs, or if asked a long or imprecise question, retrench by asking for a 
question to be rephrased in smaller components. 
 
It is critical never to underestimate the expertise of the opposing counsel. Often, opposing 
counsel will be underplaying its understanding of the issues to lull the expert into a sense of 
security. This can lead the expert into a difficult situation. Opposing counsel’s golden rule is to 
cross-examine only if it would benefit the case. In asking questions of the witness, opposing 
counsel generally either will ask short questions in plain words or will ask leading questions. 
Usually counsel knows the answers to the questions. 
   
The opposing counsel generally will evaluate answers and then take a specific approach that 
furthers the argument. Generally, the witness will not be allowed to explain or elaborate on 
the question as that would allow the witness to alter the thrust of a carefully orchestrated 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.822  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
cross-examination. Opposing counsel will continually question or evaluate how the last 
question and answer could be used against the witness. 
 
Furthermore, opposing counsel often will prepare by researching the expert. For example, it is 
likely that counsel will read all earlier testimony and publications of the witness. Opposing 
counsel also might speak to other lawyers as to the witness’s capabilities in court if the lawyers 
have had experience with the witness. If weaknesses are discovered, the questioning probably 
will be directed to that area. 
 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to take psychological control of a witness by: 
• Using physical presence to intimidate 
• Making nonstop eye contact 
• Challenging space of the witness 
• Asking questions at a fast pace to confuse the witness 
• Not allowing the expert to explain or deviate from the exact question 
 
Physical domination often is used by opposing counsel. Opposing counsel will quickly 
discover the response pattern of the expert and might take an aggressive stance to lead the 
expert to the point where he is unsure. 
 
Counsel may employ the following strategic methods to discredit a witness or to diminish the 
importance of a witness’s testimony. These methods could be used alone or in conjunction 
with one another and are not an all-encompassing list. A good counsel in cross-examination 
will quickly discover the witness’s weak areas and employ any possible techniques to achieve 
its goal. 
 



:


crossexamin
crossexamin is truli the highlight of the adversari court system it is gear to allow
counsel either to clarifi or to make point at the witnesss expens it gener is the most
difficult part of the trial process for ani wit anyth can turn up that might refut or
embarrass the wit the witnesss credibl is constantli call into question
the goal of the oppos counsel dure crossexamin ar threefold the first goal is to
diminish the import of the expert testimoni just present the second goal is to have
the expert testifi in support of the oppos posit by provid a seri of assumpt
the third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequaci in the expert
opinion therebi discredit the opinion the report and the wit
the oppos counsel can attack or question anyth that ha been said or enter into court
thi includ note work paper affidavit willsai report and preliminari trial or
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2821
discoveri transcript often crossexamin creat an atmospher of confront and
contradict
the wit must not take attack or attempt to discredit person there ar mani wai to
discredit an expert wit throughout the process it is import for the wit to maintain
pride and profession integr an adag to rememb is that even mud can be worn well
oppos counsel want to reduc or limit the impact of the witnesss evid it is natur
to feel a certain amount of apprehens and thi might do a great deal to keep the wit
alert the juri often watch the judg and thu the expert often can take a clue as to the
tempo and reaction of the juri and the judg to the evid be present slight chang
in style and present could be made accordingli
the oppos counsel usual ha a plan of crossexamin in mind and an expert wit
should be abl to anticip thi direct to prevent fall into a trap a danger to thi of
cours is that the wit will spend as much time plan ahead as answer the question
and might not be give appropri attent to the immedi question further in
attempt to anticip a question the wit might misunderstand what is actual ask
gener it is a rule of thumb that a wit should not volunt or freeli give inform
dure the answer it often might be extrem difficult to avoid get trap in variou
assumpt what if scenario and gener present by counsel dure crossexamin
if thi occur or if ask a long or imprecis question retrench by ask for a
question to be rephras in smaller compon
it is critic never to underestim the expertis of the oppos counsel often oppos
counsel will be underplai it understand of the issu to lull the expert into a sens of
secur thi can lead the expert into a difficult situat oppos counsel golden rule is to
crossexamin onli if it would benefit the case in ask question of the wit oppos
counsel gener either will ask short question in plain word or will ask lead question
usual counsel know the answer to the question
the oppos counsel gener will evalu answer and then take a specif approach that
further the argument gener the wit will not be allow to explain or elabor on
the question as that would allow the wit to alter the thrust of a carefulli orchestr
testifi as an expert wit law
2822 2011 fraud examin manual
crossexamin oppos counsel will continu question or evalu how the last
question and answer could be us against the wit
furthermor oppos counsel often will prepar by research the expert for exampl it is
like that counsel will read all earlier testimoni and public of the wit oppos
counsel also might speak to other lawyer as to the witnesss capabl in court if the lawyer
have had experi with the wit if weak ar discov the question probabl
will be direct to that area
oppos counsel also might attempt to take psycholog control of a wit by
us physic presenc to intimid
make nonstop ey contact
challeng space of the wit
ask question at a fast pace to confus the wit
not allow the expert to explain or deviat from the exact question
physic domin often is us by oppos counsel oppos counsel will quickli
discov the respons pattern of the expert and might take an aggress stanc to lead the
expert to the point where he is unsur
counsel mai emploi the follow strateg method to discredit a wit or to diminish the
import of a witnesss testimoni these method could be us alon or in conjunct
with on anoth and ar not an allencompass list a good counsel in crossexamin
will quickli discov the witnesss weak area and emploi ani possibl techniqu to achiev
it goal
