2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Expressing an Opinion on Guilt


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Expressing an Opinion on Guilt 
As previously discussed, testifying expert witnesses give opinion testimony, which is based 
upon their specialized knowledge and experience about case issues, but experts may only give 
opinion testimony in areas that will aid the jurors in reaching their verdict. Additionally, 
experts may give opinion testimony on ultimate issues (i.e., the basic conclusions upon which 
the outcome of a case depends), but they cannot offer legal conclusions or educate the jury on 
the principles of law.  
 
Moreover, article five of the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics prohibits opinions regarding 
the guilt or innocence of any person or party:  
 
A fraud examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence or other documentation to 
establish a reasonable basis for any opinion rendered. No opinion shall be expressed regarding the 
guilt or innocence of any person or party.  
 
This rule is a rule of prudence. For example, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to 
refrain from usurping the role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified 
Fraud Examiner for such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
The fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such evidence might 
constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. However, a clear 
line should be drawn between a report that essentially says “Here is the evidence,” and one 
that steps over the line and says “He is the guilty (innocent) person.” Nevertheless, there is a 
fine line between recommending action — forwarding the evidence to a law enforcement 
agency or filing a complaint or lawsuit — and giving an opinion on guilt or innocence. Certified 
Fraud Examiners might make such recommendations because they think the evidence is 
strong enough to support a case. They might even have a conclusion about whether the 
suspect committed a crime. The rule does not prohibit the Certified Fraud Examiner, under 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.827 
the proper circumstances, from accusing the person under investigation. However, the 
ultimate decision of whether a person is “guilty” or “innocent” is for a jury to determine. The 
CFE is free to report the facts and the conclusions that can be drawn from those facts, but the 
decision as to whether or not a person is guilty of a crime is a decision for the judge or jury. 
 
 



:


express an opinion on guilt
as previous discuss testifi expert wit give opinion testimoni which is base
upon their special knowledg and experi about case issu but expert mai onli give
opinion testimoni in area that will aid the juror in reach their verdict addition
expert mai give opinion testimoni on ultim issu ie the basic conclus upon which
the outcom of a case depend but thei cannot offer legal conclus or educ the juri on
the principl of law
moreov articl five of the acf code of profession ethic prohibit opinion regard
the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
a fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid or other document to
establish a reason basi for ani opinion render no opinion shall be express regard the
guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
thi rule is a rule of prudenc for exampl it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to
refrain from usurp the role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi
fraud examin for such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such evid might
constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person howev a clear
line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid and on
that step over the line and sai he is the guilti innoc person nevertheless there is a
fine line between recommend action forward the evid to a law enforc
agenc or file a complaint or lawsuit and give an opinion on guilt or innoc certifi
fraud examin might make such recommend becaus thei think the evid is
strong enough to support a case thei might even have a conclus about whether the
suspect commit a crime the rule doe not prohibit the certifi fraud examin under
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2827
the proper circumst from accus the person under investig howev the
ultim decis of whether a person is guilti or innoc is for a juri to determin the
cfe is free to report the fact and the conclus that can be drawn from those fact but the
decis as to whether or not a person is guilti of a crime is a decis for the judg or juri
