2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Preparation


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Preparation for Taking Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Since expert handwriting identifications can truly prove the case, adequate pre-interview 
preparation by the fraud examiner is essential. At the time of the interview session to obtain 
dictated writing samples, the investigator should have all of the proper writing materials and 
should have the original or copies of the evidence documents to serve as a guide for 
dictating the sample text. Do not rush through the interview. Take as much time as 
necessary. Take short comfort breaks if the suspect tires. Do not allow the suspect to see the 
evidence documents before or during the taking of the samples. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Directions for Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Dictated writing samples should be obtained by using the same types of materials as the 
evidence document: writing instrument (ball-point pen, fountain pen, pencil, etc.), paper 
(lined, unlined, size of sheet), and forms (check forms, business forms, etc.). For purposes of 
the samples, an investigator can use a genuine form of the same or similar kind, make many 
photocopies of it, and have the samples prepared on the blank copies. 
 
To help the suspect relax, begin by having him write miscellaneous innocuous text, such as 
his name, the date, and a statement as to the voluntary nature of the samples being prepared. 
This statement will also assist later in getting the samples admitted in court.  
 
Patiently dictate to the suspect the same text or text containing the same letters and 
combinations of letters of the same type (hand printed, handwritten, capital, or small letters) 
as the questioned writings on the evidence document. Do not assist the suspect in the 
spelling of words, punctuation, or grammar. 
 
Obtain one sample at a time on separate sheets or forms. Once a sample is complete, 
remove it from the suspect’s sight before the next sample is prepared. To ensure that the 
suspect’s range of normal variation is displayed, several samples of each text should  
be obtained.  
 
Be alert for any attempts to disguise normal writings, such as exaggerated slant, very rapid 
writing, very slow and awkward writing, unusually large or small writing, or bizarre letter 
formations. (See the “Natural Variation, Disguise, Distortion, and Forgeries” section.)  
 
 
Typewriters and Computer Printers 
Typewriting prepared on traditional typebar/segment-shift typewriters, both manual and 
electric, can often be positively identified by experts from mechanical defects unique to each 
machine. Typewritten texts prepared on later-model typewriters equipped with 
interchangeable daisy wheel, ball, or basket-type elements are difficult, if not impossible to 
identify. Computerized dot matrix, ink jet, thermal transfer, or laser (electrostatic) printers 
are rarely identifiable. Usually, the only expert determinations concerning these typewriters 
and printers are that the same typeface design and size (font), letter spacing, and print 
process were used. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.115 
Typewriter Ribbons Could Be Evidence 
Old-style fabric typewriter ribbons are rarely of any value in determining whether a particular 
typewriter was used to prepare a questioned document. Fortunately for investigators, most 
modern manual and electric typewriters, regardless of whether typebar or single element, are 
equipped with single-use ribbons. If it is suspected that an evidence document was recently 
prepared on such a machine, removal and examination of the ribbon might reveal the text of 
the document. Expert examination of the ribbon might positively prove that the typewriter 
and ribbon were used to produce the document. 
 
Avoid Taking Unnecessary Samples 
Fraud examiners do not have to be experts to make preliminary eliminations of some 
suspect typewriters and narrow down the number of typewriters they might have to take 
samples from. Although there are hundreds of different fonts in use on computer printers, 
traditional manual and some electronic typewriters might be eliminated by differences in 
their typeface designs. 
  
Although fonts might appear to be very similar, the observant fraud examiner can 
differentiate between them by concentrating on those letters and numerals that most often 
differ. Note first whether the letter styles on the evidence document and the typewriter are 
serif (the letters have small horizontal bars at the top and bottom of the letters, like little feet) 
or sans serif (no small bars). If they differ, then the typewriter is not the one used. Next, look 
at the shapes of the letters and numerals. Pay particular attention to the small letters f, g, r, t, 
and w, and the numerals 2, 3, 4, and 5. If any of those differ in shape, then the typewriter is 
not the one used.  
 
Taking Typewriter Samples 
Always remove, retain, and preserve the original ribbon first, before taking any samples. 
Place it in a sealed envelope and initial it for later identification. After removing and 
preserving the original ribbon, replace it with a new one and type the samples in the same 
text as the questioned document. Repeat portions of the questioned text several times. After 
taking samples with a ribbon, shift the ribbon adjustment to the “stencil” position.  
 
Insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directly onto the carbon 
paper, using it as a “ribbon” to make typed text on the sheet of paper. Again, type the 
questioned text several times. As each specimen is made, record the brand name, model, and 
serial number of the typewriter used and initial and date each sheet. Place the ribbon and 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
specimens in a plastic or heavy envelope and submit them to the expert along with the 
questioned evidence documents in separate envelopes. 
 
 
Photocopies 
Increasingly, photocopies are retained as “original” records of documents (particularly in 
outgoing correspondence files) and can become the only evidence of a document because 
the original document cannot be located or, in some cases, cannot be released, such as in the 
case of official public records 
 
Fraud examiners and other investigators sometimes submit a copy of a document for 
examination because they do not wish to part with the original. As a result, the document 
examiner will probably not be able to determine features and reach conclusions that could 
have been made from the original document. When at all possible, the fraud examiner 
should obtain the original document for the document examiner and should not submit  
a copy. 
 
Identifying the Source of a Photocopy 
Photocopies can be the actual original evidence in the case of: 
• Anonymous letters 
• Unauthorized “leaks” of information in the fo rm of copies of letters, memoranda, files, 
and other records 
• Copies made to conceal forgeries or to insert or manipulate text 
• Spurious “disinformation” dissemination of phony official documents 
 
Locating the source of a copy can be crucial in some investigations. It is sometimes possible 
to determine what kind of copier was used to produce the copy in question. Some types of 
machines leave minute markings, indentations, and other features on the copy that will assist 
the expert in determining the brand and model of the machine used. It is also possible to 
identify the particular machine used by examining the pattern of unique and identifiable 
“trash marks” (specks, spots, streaks, edge markings, etc.) it leaves on copies and comparing 
them with copies from a known machine. The fraud examiner should be aware, however, 
that some of these markings have permanence while others are transient and temporary. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.117 
Permanent “Trash Marks”  
These uniquely identifiable markings on copies are usually caused by accidental deep 
scratches and imperfections in the copier’s glass surface or document cover, in the printing 
element surface, or other permanent machine parts that are not readily replaced or changed 
during servicing of the machine. These marks can be reproduced on copies for years until 
the machine is repaired or the part replaced. 
 
Transient “Trash Marks”  
Trash marks are uniquely identifiable markings on copies. They are usually caused by dirt, 
smudges, or small bits of foreign matter on or in machine surfaces that will appear until the 
machine is cleaned or serviced. These markings prove not only that a particular machine was 
used to produce the copy, but that documents that share the same transient trash marks 
might have been produced at approximately the same time. This is one of several ways to 
determine when a document was prepared. 
 
Taking Photocopier Samples 
First, without placing any document in the machine, make six “blank” copies. As the 
machine produces each “copy,” remove it, turn it over and on the reverse side initial and 
number each copy in the same sequence they were produced by the machine (these copies will 
reproduce all “trash marks” made by the machine, including the entire document cover, glass 
surface, and internal printing element surface. Six sample copies are needed since different 
models of machines have varying printing element surface sizes, usually ranging in size from 
one to three sheet impressions before repeating on the same area of the surface). 
 
Second, place a ruler or other calibrated measuring device on the glass document surface, 
close the cover, and make six copies. (These copies will permit a determination of the 
standard amount of reduction or enlargement the machine makes when in the “actual size” 
or one-to-one mode.) If the machine requires documents to be fed into it, rather than having 
a glass document surface, use any sample document available as an “original” and include 
that sample document along with the copies of it. On the reverse of each copy, initial and 
number the copies in the same sequence they were produced by the machine, as outlined in 
the first step. 
 
Third, place a sample document containing both typewritten and handwritten text on the 
glass document surface in the standard position, close the document cover, and again print 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.118   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
six copies, initialing and numbering as previously directed. Also include the sample 
document with the copy samples. 
 
Place all of the sample copies and sample documents into a large sturdy paper or cardboard 
envelope or folder (do not use a plastic envelope) on which you have previously noted the 
make, model, and location of the machine. Initial, date, and seal the envelope and submit it 
to the document examiner along with the questioned evidence documents. 
 
 
Dating a Document 
Is the document genuine, or a back-dated fabrication? This question sometimes arises during 
fraud inquiries, and the answer can be determined through scientific examinations of the 
document by forensic experts. The fraud examiner should be alert for this type of fraud and 
have some knowledge of what can be done, as well as an awareness of the limitations. 
  
The “Alibi” Document 
These documents suddenly appear “from out of nowhere” and often late in the course of  
an investigation, inquiry, or trial. They are always favorable to the suspect and refute 
previously developed information or evidence that is damaging to the suspect. Many prove 
to be fabricated. 
 
The “Long Lost” Will 
The sudden appearance of a new will that post-dates and supersedes all other wills is all too 
common. Amazingly, it often leaves large portions of the estate to the person who found it, 
and only a photocopy can be located. Many prove to have been fabricated using the cut-and-paste 
method. Although not involving photocopies, the much publicized fabricated and 
forged “Mormon Will” of Howard Hughes in the mid-1970s is a prime example. 
 
Valuable Historical and Collectible Documents 
The production of phony historical and collectible documents, artworks, and antiques has 
been a lucrative field for fraud artists for hundreds of years and continues to the present. 
Recent major frauds involving losses of millions of dollars have involved such diverse phony 
documents as the fake “Hitler Diaries,” counterfeited rare baseball cards, forged autographs 
of historical figures and celebrities, fake old treaties with Native American tribes, newly 
discovered handwritten “rough drafts” of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, Lincoln’s 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.119 
Gettysburg Address and other famous historical documents, several counterfeited and 
forged “Mormon” documents, counterfeited “first edition” books, and many others. 
 
Anachronisms in Documentary Materials 
Exposure of fraudulent historical documents often relies upon the combined skills of 
investigators, historical experts, scientific laboratories, and forensic document examiners. 
Accurate handwriting comparisons are rarely possible in the absence of adequate 
contemporaneous genuine writings of the purported author. Instead, examinations are made 
of the materials used to produce the documents, such as paper, ink, printing, adhesives and 
seals, bindings, and covers. Detection of backdated contemporary documents usually relies 
upon diligent investigation and the techniques of the forensic document examiner. 
 
When adequate handwriting or signature samples are available, expert comparisons can 
expose the forgery. Otherwise, in order to disprove the purported date of the document, 
analyses of the materials might prove that they did not exist at the time the document was 
supposedly prepared. Expert examinations of contemporary documentary materials include: 
• Ink analyses and comparisons with a library of ink standards maintained by the U.S. 
Secret Service Laboratory in Washington, D.C., to determine the kind of ink and when it 
was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of typewriting and comparisons with collections of typewriter reference 
standards maintained by forensic laboratories to determine the kind of typewriter that 
was used and when the typewriter was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of paper, especially watermarked paper, and searches of reference 
materials to determine who manufactured the paper and when it was first produced. 
• Examinations of photocopies and fax copies and comparisons with reference standards 
to determine what kind of machine was used and when those machines were first 
produced. 
• Comparisons of questioned photocopies with photocopies known to have been 
produced on a particular machine on a particular date can prove or disprove the date of 
the questioned copy. 
 
Fraud examiners should note that there are currently no methods for accurately determining 
how long ink, typewriting, or photocopier/printer toner have been on paper. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.120   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Indented Writings 
Fraud examiners should be alert for the presence of incriminating indented writings, or the 
absence of logical indentations, both of which can be valuable in proving fraud. In some 
situations, documents are routinely kept in multiple-page sets, such as in legal forms, 
multiple-copy invoices, notebooks, tablets, pads, clipboards, and so on. In these situations 
the writings on one sheet should correspond to indentations on the following sheet. The 
absence of corresponding indented writings on the following sheet, or the presence of 
indented writings on one sheet that do not correspond with the text of the writings on the 
preceding sheet, could provide proof that pages have been removed and substituted. 
 
Developing Indented Writings 
Never attempt to develop indented writings by shading or scratching on the surface of a 
sheet of paper with a pencil. This will reveal deep indentations, but it will not reveal the faint 
ones and will permanently prevent expert examinations from developing them. Other types 
of technical examinations might also be prevented by this defacing of the document. 
 
Some indented writings can be visualized by taking the document to an area with subdued 
overhead lighting, placing the document on a flat surface, and shining a bright beam of light 
from a small-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp across the paper surface at a low 
oblique angle or parallel to the surface. Since shadows in the indentations will only show at 
right angles to the beam of light, it will be necessary to move the light around in several 
positions and note the changing shadows as they form the text of the indentations. 
 
Document experts use special lighting and photographic techniques and sensitive 
instruments such as the electrostatic detection apparatus (ESDA) to detect and permanently 
record extremely faint indented writings that cannot be visualized by the oblique-lighting 
method.  
 
 
Counterfeit Printed Documents 
Most documents that have monetary value, such as currency, bank checks, traveler’s checks, 
money orders, bearer bonds, postage stamps, gift certificates, or lottery tickets, have all been 
counterfeited at one time or another. Identity documents are also often counterfeited, for 
example, passports, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and government and commercial 
employee identity cards. Other counterfeited documents include commercial product labels, 
business stationery and forms, business logos, motor vehicle titles and registration forms, 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.121 
and safety inspection stickers. Despite most preventive measures, if a document has any 
value it can be, and probably has been, counterfeited. Counterfeiting has become big 
business, especially in some third-world countries, where the latest developments in printing 
technology are being used to produce large quantities of high-quality counterfeit documents 
and “knock-off” phony products in violation of international copyright and trademark laws. 
 
Counterfeiting Methods 
The days of old-style counterfeiters — who were skilled artisans who carefully etched 
counterfeit printing plates — are over. Today most counterfeit documents are prepared by 
various photo-reproduction processes such as the photo-offset printing process 
(lithography) and flexography, which uses rubberized printing “plates.” These processes 
begin with the photographic reproduction of a genuine document. The photographic 
negatives are then carefully retouched to remove the filled-in text, serial numbers, and other 
distinguishing features that appeared on the genuine document. Printing plates are then 
made from the retouched negatives, and counterfeit copies are printed from the plates.  
 
Rapidly advancing technology now allows larcenous novices with no commercial printing 
experience to use sophisticated computerized scanners, computer graphics software, 
multicolor computer printers, and full-color photocopy machines to produce relatively high-quality 
counterfeit documents. 
 
Detecting Counterfeits 
Many counterfeits can be detected by making a side-by-side comparison with a 
corresponding genuine document. Be alert for different versions or form revisions. Look for 
subtle differences in ink colors and brilliance, different types of paper substrate, the use of 
different typestyles and type sizes (fonts), and evidence of the retouching the text on the 
genuine document used in the reproduction. The retouching will be most evident in areas 
where text, serial numbers, and the like are superimposed on a background design, especially 
if they are printed in black ink. 
 
When furnished with genuine documents for comparisons with suspected counterfeits, 
forensic document examiners can also make expert differentiations between the printing 
processes, ink formulations, and paper substrates used. In some instances it has been 
possible for the experts to reconstruct portions of the filled-in text or serial numbers that 
appeared on the genuine document, but were removed in the retouching process. In this 
fashion the specific original document used by the counterfeiter can sometimes be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.122   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
determined. By tracing the history of the document’s ownership, the counterfeiter can be 
located and identified. Treatment of the original genuine document for latent  
fingerprints might positively identify the counterfeiter and other people who handled the 
genuine document. 
 
 
Fingerprints 
Latent (non-visible) prints are left on surfaces by the body oils, salts, and amino acids 
clinging to or exuded by friction ridges in the skin on fingers, palms of the hands, and soles 
of the feet and are unique personal identifiers. Latent prints might also be deposited on 
surfaces by hands, fingers, and bare feet through the transfer of oils and greases. Patent 
(visible) prints are sometimes deposited on surfaces by hands, fingers, and bare feet through 
the transfer of materials such as blood, paint, soot, and soil. 
  
Latent prints absorbed into protected porous sur faces, such as paper in files or pages in 
books, have been known to survive for decades and still be identifiable after chemical 
development. However, latent fingerprints on hard, non-porous surfaces can be destroyed or 
deteriorate rapidly if handled; not protected fr om the environment; or exposed to high 
temperatures, humidity, or water. 
 
Fraud examiners should wear protective gloves or carefully use tweezers when handling 
latent fingerprint evidence to avoid smudging and contamination. Tweezers should not be 
used on documents if indented writing or photocopier examinations are planned.  
 
Fingerprints on Paper or Other Absorbent Porous Surfaces 
Fraud examiners should never try to develop latent fingerprints that have been absorbed into 
paper or other porous materials by dusting with fingerprint powder or any other means. 
 
Such efforts will not only be unsuccessful, but will prevent additional examinations. Preserve 
the evidence by placing the item into a plastic bag or cellophane protector. Label the 
container with the examiner’s initials, the date, and an identifying exhibit number. Experts 
will use various methods on these materials, including iodine fuming and brushing or 
spraying silver nitrate solution or ninhydrin spray, which reacts with the body chemicals and 
other substances in the latent print that have soaked into the absorbent surface. Some of 
these methods will permanently discolor a document.  
  
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.123 
Fingerprints on Hard, Non-Porous Surfaces 
Items with hard, non-porous surfaces, such as plastic, metal, and glass, can be dusted for the 
presence of latent fingerprints left on their surfaces. Special fingerprint dusting powders and 
lifting materials are available from law enforcement suppliers. The dry, powdered toner used 
in some photocopy machines has also been used successfully for fingerprint dusting. 
 
After dusting the surface and locating a suspected print or partial print, blow or gently brush 
off the excess powder. Remove the developed print with adhesive lifting tape and place the 
tape on an index card that contrasts in color with the dusting powder used. Mark the card 
with initials, the date, an identifying exhibit number, and where the print was found.  
 
Some latent prints on non-porous surfaces might not be developed by the dusting method. 
If possible, rather than dusting the item, the fraud examiner should retain it; place it in a 
protective container; initial, date, and label the container with an identifying exhibit number; 
and submit it to a fingerprint expert for processing. Rather than dusting, fingerprint experts 
might use cyanoacrylate (“super-glue”) fuming or a laser to successfully develop and 
photograph the latent prints on some materials, such as black plastic bags.  
 
Fingerprint Comparison Standards 
The fingerprints of millions of people are on record in repositories of fingerprint cards 
maintained by law enforcement agencies throughout the world. These cards contain the 
inked fingerprints of people who have been arrested, served in the military, applied for 
employment at various levels of government, and volunteered their fingerprints to assist in 
personal identification in the event of their deaths. Many of these fingerprint databases have 
been computerized and are linked by networks. However, millions of people do not fit in 
any of these categories and have never been fingerprinted. 
  
If a suspect has never been fingerprinted or refuses to voluntarily furnish inked print 
samples, it might be necessary for the fraud examiner to obtain a legal court order directing 
the suspect to furnish inked prints for identification purposes. Even though the evidence 
items might have been handled by several people, they might still bear latent prints of the 
guilty party. If the items have been inadvertently handled by other known people, including 
the fraud examiner, then inked prints of all of those people should also be obtained and 
submitted to the fingerprint expert along with the evidence items and the inked prints  
of suspects. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.124   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources for Expert Document Examinations 
 
Law Enforcement Laboratories 
In cases where criminal prosecutions are likely, there are excellent forensic laboratories 
available through law enforcement agencies at the local, state, and national levels of the 
criminal justice system. 
 
Forensic Document Experts in Private Practice 
When an expert’s services are needed, a fraud examiner can identify and locate fully 
qualified, court-certified, expert forensic document examiners available in a particular 
geographical area by contacting the following organizations: 
 
American Board of Forensic Document Examiners 
7887 San Felipe, Suite 122 
Houston, Texas 77063 
(713) 784-9537 
www.abfde.org 
 
American Academy of Forensic Sciences 
410 North 21st Street 
Colorado Springs, Colorado 80904-2798 
(719) 636-1100 
www.aafs.org 
 
Graphologists (Graphoanalysts) 
Graphology (graphoanalysis) has been described as a pseudoscience whose practitioners 
have the purported ability to determine a person’s character, moral traits, personality, and 
mental state based upon an analysis of that person’s handwriting. Graphology is often 
erroneously confused with forensic document examinations, especially by the media. Fraud 
examiners should be aware that some people who practice graphological analyses might have 
little academic and scientific training. They might be self-taught or graduates of a 
correspondence course. Since a conclusive accuracy level has not been established for those 
examinations, expert testimony by graphologists is often rejected by the courts. Fraud 
examiners should be cautious in relying on handwriting identifications made by some of 
these “handwriting experts.”  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.201 
INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION 
 
An interview is a question-and-answer session designed to elicit information. It differs from an 
ordinary conversation in that the interview is structured, not free-form, and is designed for a 
purpose. An interview might consist of only one question or a series of questions. 
 
 
Preparation 
Before embarking on an interview, the examiner should review the case file to ensure that it 
does not contain important information that has been overlooked. In addition, the examiner 
should review the case file to learn what information is known to the witness. The 
hypothesis should be reviewed to make sure it reflects the obtained documents. 
 
The examiner should consider what type of information can be supplied by each of the 
potential witnesses. Generally, the most vulnerable witness should be interviewed after the 
more reluctant witnesses. This will provide the examiner with a broader base of information 
that can be used to formulate later questions. However, the timing of interviews is at the 
discretion of the examination team. 
 
 



:


prepar for take dictat handwrit sampl
sinc expert handwrit identif can truli prove the case adequ preinterview
prepar by the fraud examin is essenti at the time of the interview session to obtain
dictat write sampl the investig should have all of the proper write materi and
should have the origin or copi of the evid document to serv as a guid for
dictat the sampl text do not rush through the interview take as much time as
necessari take short comfort break if the suspect tire do not allow the suspect to see the
evid document befor or dure the take of the sampl
analyz document investig
3114 2011 fraud examin manual
direct for obtain dictat handwrit sampl
dictat write sampl should be obtain by us the same type of materi as the
evid document write instrument ballpoint pen fountain pen pencil etc paper
line unlin size of sheet and form check form busi form etc for purpos of
the sampl an investig can us a genuin form of the same or similar kind make mani
photocopi of it and have the sampl prepar on the blank copi
to help the suspect relax begin by have him write miscellan innocu text such as
hi name the date and a statement as to the voluntari natur of the sampl be prepar
thi statement will also assist later in get the sampl admit in court
patient dictat to the suspect the same text or text contain the same letter and
combin of letter of the same type hand print handwritten capit or small letter
as the question write on the evid document do not assist the suspect in the
spell of word punctuat or grammar
obtain on sampl at a time on separ sheet or form onc a sampl is complet
remov it from the suspect sight befor the next sampl is prepar to ensur that the
suspect rang of normal variat is displai sever sampl of each text should
be obtain
be alert for ani attempt to disguis normal write such as exagger slant veri rapid
write veri slow and awkward write unusu larg or small write or bizarr letter
format see the natur variat disguis distort and forgeri section
typewrit and comput printer
typewrit prepar on tradit typebarsegmentshift typewrit both manual and
electr can often be posit identifi by expert from mechan defect uniqu to each
machin typewritten text prepar on latermodel typewrit equip with
interchang daisi wheel ball or baskettyp element ar difficult if not imposs to
identifi computer dot matrix ink jet thermal transfer or laser electrostat printer
ar rare identifi usual the onli expert determin concern these typewrit
and printer ar that the same typefac design and size font letter space and print
process were us
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3115
typewrit ribbon could be evid
oldstyl fabric typewrit ribbon ar rare of ani valu in determin whether a particular
typewrit wa us to prepar a question document fortun for investig most
modern manual and electr typewrit regardless of whether typebar or singl element ar
equip with singleus ribbon if it is suspect that an evid document wa recent
prepar on such a machin remov and examin of the ribbon might reveal the text of
the document expert examin of the ribbon might posit prove that the typewrit
and ribbon were us to produc the document
avoid take unnecessari sampl
fraud examin do not have to be expert to make preliminari elimin of some
suspect typewrit and narrow down the number of typewrit thei might have to take
sampl from although there ar hundr of differ font in us on comput printer
tradit manual and some electron typewrit might be elimin by differ in
their typefac design
although font might appear to be veri similar the observ fraud examin can
differenti between them by concentr on those letter and numer that most often
differ note first whether the letter style on the evid document and the typewrit ar
serif the letter have small horizont bar at the top and bottom of the letter like littl feet
or san serif no small bar if thei differ then the typewrit is not the on us next look
at the shape of the letter and numer pai particular attent to the small letter f g r t
and w and the numer 2 3 4 and 5 if ani of those differ in shape then the typewrit is
not the on us
take typewrit sampl
alwai remov retain and preserv the origin ribbon first befor take ani sampl
place it in a seal envelop and initi it for later identif after remov and
preserv the origin ribbon replac it with a new on and type the sampl in the same
text as the question document repeat portion of the question text sever time after
take sampl with a ribbon shift the ribbon adjust to the stencil posit
insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directli onto the carbon
paper us it as a ribbon to make type text on the sheet of paper again type the
question text sever time as each specimen is made record the brand name model and
serial number of the typewrit us and initi and date each sheet place the ribbon and
analyz document investig
3116 2011 fraud examin manual
specimen in a plastic or heavi envelop and submit them to the expert along with the
question evid document in separ envelop
photocopi
increasingli photocopi ar retain as origin record of document particularli in
outgo correspond file and can becom the onli evid of a document becaus
the origin document cannot be locat or in some case cannot be releas such as in the
case of offici public record
fraud examin and other investig sometim submit a copi of a document for
examin becaus thei do not wish to part with the origin as a result the document
examin will probabl not be abl to determin featur and reach conclus that could
have been made from the origin document when at all possibl the fraud examin
should obtain the origin document for the document examin and should not submit
a copi
identifi the sourc of a photocopi
photocopi can be the actual origin evid in the case of
anonym letter
unauthor leak of inform in the fo rm of copi of letter memoranda file
and other record
copi made to conceal forgeri or to insert or manipul text
spuriou disinform dissemin of phoni offici document
locat the sourc of a copi can be crucial in some investig it is sometim possibl
to determin what kind of copier wa us to produc the copi in question some type of
machin leav minut mark indent and other featur on the copi that will assist
the expert in determin the brand and model of the machin us it is also possibl to
identifi the particular machin us by examin the pattern of uniqu and identifi
trash mark speck spot streak edg mark etc it leav on copi and compar
them with copi from a known machin the fraud examin should be awar howev
that some of these mark have perman while other ar transient and temporari
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3117
perman trash mark
these uniqu identifi mark on copi ar usual caus by accident deep
scratch and imperfect in the copier glass surfac or document cover in the print
element surfac or other perman machin part that ar not readili replac or chang
dure servic of the machin these mark can be reproduc on copi for year until
the machin is repair or the part replac
transient trash mark
trash mark ar uniqu identifi mark on copi thei ar usual caus by dirt
smudg or small bit of foreign matter on or in machin surfac that will appear until the
machin is clean or servic these mark prove not onli that a particular machin wa
us to produc the copi but that document that share the same transient trash mark
might have been produc at approxim the same time thi is on of sever wai to
determin when a document wa prepar
take photocopi sampl
first without place ani document in the machin make six blank copi as the
machin produc each copi remov it turn it over and on the revers side initi and
number each copi in the same sequenc thei were produc by the machin these copi will
reproduc all trash mark made by the machin includ the entir document cover glass
surfac and intern print element surfac six sampl copi ar need sinc differ
model of machin have vari print element surfac size usual rang in size from
on to three sheet impress befor repeat on the same area of the surfac
second place a ruler or other calibr measur devic on the glass document surfac
close the cover and make six copi these copi will permit a determin of the
standard amount of reduct or enlarg the machin make when in the actual size
or onetoon mode if the machin requir document to be fed into it rather than have
a glass document surfac us ani sampl document avail as an origin and includ
that sampl document along with the copi of it on the revers of each copi initi and
number the copi in the same sequenc thei were produc by the machin as outlin in
the first step
third place a sampl document contain both typewritten and handwritten text on the
glass document surfac in the standard posit close the document cover and again print
analyz document investig
3118 2011 fraud examin manual
six copi initi and number as previous direct also includ the sampl
document with the copi sampl
place all of the sampl copi and sampl document into a larg sturdi paper or cardboard
envelop or folder do not us a plastic envelop on which you have previous note the
make model and locat of the machin initi date and seal the envelop and submit it
to the document examin along with the question evid document
date a document
is the document genuin or a backdat fabric thi question sometim aris dure
fraud inquiri and the answer can be determin through scientif examin of the
document by forens expert the fraud examin should be alert for thi type of fraud and
have some knowledg of what can be done as well as an awar of the limit
the alibi document
these document suddenli appear from out of nowher and often late in the cours of
an investig inquiri or trial thei ar alwai favor to the suspect and refut
previous develop inform or evid that is damag to the suspect mani prove
to be fabric
the long lost will
the sudden appear of a new will that postdat and supersed all other will is all too
common amazingli it often leav larg portion of the estat to the person who found it
and onli a photocopi can be locat mani prove to have been fabric us the cutandpast
method although not involv photocopi the much public fabric and
forg mormon will of howard hugh in the mid1970 is a prime exampl
valuabl histor and collect document
the product of phoni histor and collect document artwork and antiqu ha
been a lucr field for fraud artist for hundr of year and continu to the present
recent major fraud involv loss of million of dollar have involv such divers phoni
document as the fake hitler diari counterfeit rare basebal card forg autograph
of histor figur and celebr fake old treati with nativ american tribe newli
discov handwritten rough draft of the us declar of independ lincoln
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3119
gettysburg address and other famou histor document sever counterfeit and
forg mormon document counterfeit first edit book and mani other
anachron in documentari materi
exposur of fraudul histor document often reli upon the combin skill of
investig histor expert scientif laboratori and forens document examin
accur handwrit comparison ar rare possibl in the absenc of adequ
contemporan genuin write of the purport author instead examin ar made
of the materi us to produc the document such as paper ink print adhes and
seal bind and cover detect of backdat contemporari document usual reli
upon dilig investig and the techniqu of the forens document examin
when adequ handwrit or signatur sampl ar avail expert comparison can
expos the forgeri otherwis in order to disprov the purport date of the document
analys of the materi might prove that thei did not exist at the time the document wa
supposedli prepar expert examin of contemporari documentari materi includ
ink analys and comparison with a librari of ink standard maintain by the us
secret servic laboratori in washington dc to determin the kind of ink and when it
wa first manufactur
examin of typewrit and comparison with collect of typewrit refer
standard maintain by forens laboratori to determin the kind of typewrit that
wa us and when the typewrit wa first manufactur
examin of paper especi watermark paper and search of refer
materi to determin who manufactur the paper and when it wa first produc
examin of photocopi and fax copi and comparison with refer standard
to determin what kind of machin wa us and when those machin were first
produc
comparison of question photocopi with photocopi known to have been
produc on a particular machin on a particular date can prove or disprov the date of
the question copi
fraud examin should note that there ar current no method for accur determin
how long ink typewrit or photocopierprint toner have been on paper
analyz document investig
3120 2011 fraud examin manual
indent write
fraud examin should be alert for the presenc of incrimin indent write or the
absenc of logic indent both of which can be valuabl in prove fraud in some
situat document ar routin kept in multiplepag set such as in legal form
multiplecopi invoic notebook tablet pad clipboard and so on in these situat
the write on on sheet should correspond to indent on the follow sheet the
absenc of correspond indent write on the follow sheet or the presenc of
indent write on on sheet that do not correspond with the text of the write on the
preced sheet could provid proof that page have been remov and substitut
develop indent write
never attempt to develop indent write by shade or scratch on the surfac of a
sheet of paper with a pencil thi will reveal deep indent but it will not reveal the faint
on and will perman prevent expert examin from develop them other type
of technic examin might also be prevent by thi defac of the document
some indent write can be visual by take the document to an area with subdu
overhead light place the document on a flat surfac and shine a bright beam of light
from a smallbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp across the paper surfac at a low
obliqu angl or parallel to the surfac sinc shadow in the indent will onli show at
right angl to the beam of light it will be necessari to move the light around in sever
posit and note the chang shadow as thei form the text of the indent
document expert us special light and photograph techniqu and sensit
instrument such as the electrostat detect apparatu esda to detect and perman
record extrem faint indent write that cannot be visual by the obliquelight
method
counterfeit print document
most document that have monetari valu such as currenc bank check travel check
monei order bearer bond postag stamp gift certif or lotteri ticket have all been
counterfeit at on time or anoth ident document ar also often counterfeit for
exampl passport birth certif driver licens and govern and commerci
employe ident card other counterfeit document includ commerci product label
busi stationeri and form busi logo motor vehicl titl and registr form
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3121
and safeti inspect sticker despit most prevent measur if a document ha ani
valu it can be and probabl ha been counterfeit counterfeit ha becom big
busi especi in some thirdworld countri where the latest develop in print
technolog ar be us to produc larg quantiti of highqual counterfeit document
and knockoff phoni product in violat of intern copyright and trademark law
counterfeit method
the dai of oldstyl counterfeit who were skill artisan who carefulli etch
counterfeit print plate ar over todai most counterfeit document ar prepar by
variou photoreproduct process such as the photooffset print process
lithographi and flexographi which us rubber print plate these process
begin with the photograph reproduct of a genuin document the photograph
neg ar then carefulli retouch to remov the filledin text serial number and other
distinguish featur that appear on the genuin document print plate ar then
made from the retouch neg and counterfeit copi ar print from the plate
rapidli advanc technolog now allow larcen novic with no commerci print
experi to us sophist computer scanner comput graphic softwar
multicolor comput printer and fullcolor photocopi machin to produc rel highqual
counterfeit document
detect counterfeit
mani counterfeit can be detect by make a sidebysid comparison with a
correspond genuin document be alert for differ version or form revis look for
subtl differ in ink color and brillianc differ type of paper substrat the us of
differ typestyl and type size font and evid of the retouch the text on the
genuin document us in the reproduct the retouch will be most evid in area
where text serial number and the like ar superimpos on a background design especi
if thei ar print in black ink
when furnish with genuin document for comparison with suspect counterfeit
forens document examin can also make expert differenti between the print
process ink formul and paper substrat us in some instanc it ha been
possibl for the expert to reconstruct portion of the filledin text or serial number that
appear on the genuin document but were remov in the retouch process in thi
fashion the specif origin document us by the counterfeit can sometim be
analyz document investig
3122 2011 fraud examin manual
determin by trace the histori of the document ownership the counterfeit can be
locat and identifi treatment of the origin genuin document for latent
fingerprint might posit identifi the counterfeit and other peopl who handl the
genuin document
fingerprint
latent nonvis print ar left on surfac by the bodi oil salt and amino acid
cling to or exud by friction ridg in the skin on finger palm of the hand and sole
of the feet and ar uniqu person identifi latent print might also be deposit on
surfac by hand finger and bare feet through the transfer of oil and greas patent
visibl print ar sometim deposit on surfac by hand finger and bare feet through
the transfer of materi such as blood paint soot and soil
latent print absorb into protect porou sur face such as paper in file or page in
book have been known to surviv for decad and still be identifi after chemic
develop howev latent fingerprint on hard nonpor surfac can be destroi or
deterior rapidli if handl not protect fr om the environ or expos to high
temperatur humid or water
fraud examin should wear protect glove or carefulli us tweezer when handl
latent fingerprint evid to avoid smudg and contamin tweezer should not be
us on document if indent write or photocopi examin ar plan
fingerprint on paper or other absorb porou surfac
fraud examin should never try to develop latent fingerprint that have been absorb into
paper or other porou materi by dust with fingerprint powder or ani other mean
such effort will not onli be unsuccess but will prevent addit examin preserv
the evid by place the item into a plastic bag or cellophan protector label the
contain with the examin initi the date and an identifi exhibit number expert
will us variou method on these materi includ iodin fume and brush or
sprai silver nitrat solut or ninhydrin sprai which react with the bodi chemic and
other substanc in the latent print that have soak into the absorb surfac some of
these method will perman discolor a document
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3123
fingerprint on hard nonpor surfac
item with hard nonpor surfac such as plastic metal and glass can be dust for the
presenc of latent fingerprint left on their surfac special fingerprint dust powder and
lift materi ar avail from law enforc supplier the dry powder toner us
in some photocopi machin ha also been us successfulli for fingerprint dust
after dust the surfac and locat a suspect print or partial print blow or gentli brush
off the excess powder remov the develop print with adhes lift tape and place the
tape on an index card that contrast in color with the dust powder us mark the card
with initi the date an identifi exhibit number and where the print wa found
some latent print on nonpor surfac might not be develop by the dust method
if possibl rather than dust the item the fraud examin should retain it place it in a
protect contain initi date and label the contain with an identifi exhibit number
and submit it to a fingerprint expert for process rather than dust fingerprint expert
might us cyanoacryl superglu fume or a laser to successfulli develop and
photograph the latent print on some materi such as black plastic bag
fingerprint comparison standard
the fingerprint of million of peopl ar on record in repositori of fingerprint card
maintain by law enforc agenc throughout the world these card contain the
ink fingerprint of peopl who have been arrest serv in the militari appli for
employ at variou level of govern and volunt their fingerprint to assist in
person identif in the event of their death mani of these fingerprint databas have
been computer and ar link by network howev million of peopl do not fit in
ani of these categori and have never been fingerprint
if a suspect ha never been fingerprint or refus to voluntarili furnish ink print
sampl it might be necessari for the fraud examin to obtain a legal court order direct
the suspect to furnish ink print for identif purpos even though the evid
item might have been handl by sever peopl thei might still bear latent print of the
guilti parti if the item have been inadvert handl by other known peopl includ
the fraud examin then ink print of all of those peopl should also be obtain and
submit to the fingerprint expert along with the evid item and the ink print
of suspect
analyz document investig
3124 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc for expert document examin
law enforc laboratori
in case where crimin prosecut ar like there ar excel forens laboratori
avail through law enforc agenc at the local state and nation level of the
crimin justic system
forens document expert in privat practic
when an expert servic ar need a fraud examin can identifi and locat fulli
qualifi courtcertifi expert forens document examin avail in a particular
geograph area by contact the follow organ
american board of forens document examin
7887 san felip suit 122
houston texa 77063
713 7849537
wwwabfdeorg
american academi of forens scienc
410 north 21st street
colorado spring colorado 809042798
719 6361100
wwwaafsorg
graphologist graphoanalyst
grapholog graphoanalysi ha been describ as a pseudosci whose practition
have the purport abil to determin a person charact moral trait person and
mental state base upon an analysi of that person handwrit grapholog is often
erron confus with forens document examin especi by the media fraud
examin should be awar that some peopl who practic grapholog analys might have
littl academ and scientif train thei might be selftaught or graduat of a
correspond cours sinc a conclus accuraci level ha not been establish for those
examin expert testimoni by graphologist is often reject by the court fraud
examin should be cautiou in reli on handwrit identif made by some of
these handwrit expert
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3201
interview theori and applic
an interview is a questionandansw session design to elicit inform it differ from an
ordinari convers in that the interview is structur not freeform and is design for a
purpos an interview might consist of onli on question or a seri of question
prepar
befor embark on an interview the examin should review the case file to ensur that it
doe not contain import inform that ha been overlook in addit the examin
should review the case file to learn what inform is known to the wit the
hypothesi should be review to make sure it reflect the obtain document
the examin should consid what type of inform can be suppli by each of the
potenti wit gener the most vulner wit should be interview after the
more reluct wit thi will provid the examin with a broader base of inform
that can be us to formul later question howev the time of interview is at the
discret of the examin team
