2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Question Typology


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Question Typology 
When conducting an interview, there are five general types of questions an interviewer can 
ask: introductory, informational, assessment, closing, and admission-seeking.  
 
Because fraud examinations move in a linear order, starting with the general and working to 
the specific, the first interviews should be with those that are least likely to be involved, 
working towards those that are more likely to be involved. The first interviews are 
conducted for the purpose of gathering information, and therefore they should be non-confrontational, 
non-threatening, and should encourage open communication. In these 
routine interview situations, only three of the five types of questions will normally be asked: 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.203 
introductory, informational, and closing questions. If the interviewer has reasonable cause to 
believe the respondent is not being truthful, assessment questions can be asked. Finally, if 
the interviewer decides with reasonable cause that the respondent is responsible for 
misdeeds, admission-seeking questions can be posed. 
 
Introductory Questions 
Introductory questions are designed to meet the four objectives below: to provide an 
introduction, establish rapport, to get the respondent to verbally agree to cooperate in the 
interview (i.e., establish the interview theme), and to observe the respondent’s reactions to 
questions. 
 
Informational Questions 
Once the proper format for the interview is set, the interviewer then turns to the fact-gathering 
portion. Typically, the interviewer will ask three types of questions during this 
stage: open, closed, and leading. These question types are discussed in more detail below. 
Each type is used in a logical sequence to maximize the development of information. If the 
interviewer has reason to believe that the respondent is being untruthful, then assessment 
questions can be posed. Otherwise, the interview is brought to a logical close.  
 
Closing Questions 
Closing questions seek to close the interview positively. In routine interviews, closing 
questions serve the following purposes: reconfirm facts, gather additional facts, and 
conclude to interview and maintain goodwill.  
 
Assessment Questions 
If the interviewer has reason to believe the respondent is being deceptive, he should begin 
asking assessment questions. These are questions specifically designed to establish the 
respondent’s credibility. When assessing credibility, the interviewer must observe the 
subject’s verbal and nonverbal responses. By observing the verbal and nonverbal responses 
of the respondent to these questions, the interviewer can assess the respondent’s credibility 
with some degree of accuracy. That assessment will form the basis of the interviewer’s 
decision about whether to pose admission-seeking questions to obtain a legal admission  
of wrongdoing.  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.204   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Admission-Seeking Questions 
The choice of when to conduct an admission-seeking interview of a suspect is critical. 
Admission-seeking interviews are reserved specifically for individuals whose culpability is 
reasonably certain; all other reasonable investigative steps have been completed and as much 
information as possible has been developed from other sources; and the interviewer can 
reasonably control the place, time, and subject matter of the interview.  
 
Admission-seeking questions serve at least two purposes: (1) to clear an innocent person or 
(2) to encourage the culpable person to confess. However, the interviewer must be careful to 
pose these questions in a way that does not violate the rights and privileges of the person 
being interviewed. 
 
 



:


question typolog
when conduct an interview there ar five gener type of question an interview can
ask introductori inform assess close and admissionseek
becaus fraud examin move in a linear order start with the gener and work to
the specif the first interview should be with those that ar least like to be involv
work toward those that ar more like to be involv the first interview ar
conduct for the purpos of gather inform and therefor thei should be nonconfront
nonthreaten and should encourag open commun in these
routin interview situat onli three of the five type of question will normal be ask
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3203
introductori inform and close question if the interview ha reason caus to
believ the respond is not be truth assess question can be ask final if
the interview decid with reason caus that the respond is respons for
misde admissionseek question can be pose
introductori question
introductori question ar design to meet the four object below to provid an
introduct establish rapport to get the respond to verbal agre to cooper in the
interview ie establish the interview theme and to observ the respond reaction to
question
inform question
onc the proper format for the interview is set the interview then turn to the factgath
portion typic the interview will ask three type of question dure thi
stage open close and lead these question type ar discuss in more detail below
each type is us in a logic sequenc to maxim the develop of inform if the
interview ha reason to believ that the respond is be untruth then assess
question can be pose otherwis the interview is brought to a logic close
close question
close question seek to close the interview posit in routin interview close
question serv the follow purpos reconfirm fact gather addit fact and
conclud to interview and maintain goodwil
assess question
if the interview ha reason to believ the respond is be decept he should begin
ask assess question these ar question specif design to establish the
respond credibl when assess credibl the interview must observ the
subject verbal and nonverb respons by observ the verbal and nonverb respons
of the respond to these question the interview can assess the respond credibl
with some degre of accuraci that assess will form the basi of the interview
decis about whether to pose admissionseek question to obtain a legal admiss
of wrongdo
interview theori and applic investig
3204 2011 fraud examin manual
admissionseek question
the choic of when to conduct an admissionseek interview of a suspect is critic
admissionseek interview ar reserv specif for individu whose culpabl is
reason certain all other reason investig step have been complet and as much
inform as possibl ha been develop from other sourc and the interview can
reason control the place time and subject matter of the interview
admissionseek question serv at least two purpos 1 to clear an innoc person or
2 to encourag the culpabl person to confess howev the interview must be care to
pose these question in a wai that doe not violat the right and privileg of the person
be interview
