2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Legal Considerations When Conducting an Interview


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Legal Considerations When Conducting an Interview 
Interviews, and especially admission-seeking interviews, may expose the company and the 
fraud examiner to certain legal risks. Thus, before engaging in an interview, fraud examiners 
must understand the ramifications of their actions. This requires an understanding of certain 
legal issues and how they limit or affect the ways in which an interview may be conducted. 
However, because employee rights vary from case to case, fraud examiners should always 
consult with an attorney regarding the specific laws and regulations for their state or locality. 
 
Legal Authority to Conduct Interviews 
In most instances, legal authority is not required to interview people or to inquire into 
matters. The federal constitution gives any citizen the authority to inquire into virtually any 
subject area, as long as the rights of individuals are not transgressed in the process. 
Generally, no license is required to conduct interviews; however, if the interviewer 
represents himself as an investigator, some states require a license. 
 
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment is the restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another without 
consent or legal justification. In the context of employee interviews, a claim of false 
imprisonment may be made if the interviewer locks the interview room, stands in front of 
the exit, or refuses to let the suspect leave.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.205 
Use of Deception in Interviews 
Surprisingly, the use of deception to gain information can sometimes be employed legally. 
The theory is that information can be obtained by nearly any means, with the exception of 
force or threats. The interviewer, however, might not employ any deception likely to cause 
an innocent person to confess. The use of deception is not justified regarding promises of 
leniency, promises of confidentiality, or to obtain a monetary or business advantage. 
 
Frazier v. Cupp  
In Frazier v. Cupp, 394 U.S. 731 (1961), the U.S. Supreme Court indirectly recognized the 
necessity of using deception during interviews. In this case, the suspect confessed to a 
homicide after the interrogator falsely told him that his alleged accomplice had confessed to 
the crime. On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled that the deception alone was insufficient to 
invalidate the confession.  
 
Recording Interviews 
In some circumstances, recording an interview might be illegal. Both state and federal law 
limit an employer’s right to record employee interviews during an investigation. In fact, in 
some states, audio recording an interview is permitted only with the consent of all parties to 
the communication. Thus, fraud examiners should always consult with an attorney when 
deciding whether to record an interview.  
 
If recording an interview without the respondent’s consent is legal, consider tape recording 
the interview covertly. Covertly recording offers an advantage in that it provides an accurate 
record without disturbing the flow of the interview. If there is to be a covert tape recording 
and the subject asks if the interview is being recorded, do not lie. Explain that it is in the 
subject’s best interest that an accurate recording be made and that he can have a copy when 
completed. 
  
 



:


legal consider when conduct an interview
interview and especi admissionseek interview mai expos the compani and the
fraud examin to certain legal risk thu befor engag in an interview fraud examin
must understand the ramif of their action thi requir an understand of certain
legal issu and how thei limit or affect the wai in which an interview mai be conduct
howev becaus employe right vari from case to case fraud examin should alwai
consult with an attornei regard the specif law and regul for their state or local
legal author to conduct interview
in most instanc legal author is not requir to interview peopl or to inquir into
matter the feder constitut give ani citizen the author to inquir into virtual ani
subject area as long as the right of individu ar not transgress in the process
gener no licens is requir to conduct interview howev if the interview
repres himself as an investig some state requir a licens
fals imprison
fals imprison is the restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth without
consent or legal justif in the context of employe interview a claim of fals
imprison mai be made if the interview lock the interview room stand in front of
the exit or refus to let the suspect leav
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3205
us of decept in interview
surprisingli the us of decept to gain inform can sometim be emploi legal
the theori is that inform can be obtain by nearli ani mean with the except of
forc or threat the interview howev might not emploi ani decept like to caus
an innoc person to confess the us of decept is not justifi regard promis of
lenienc promis of confidenti or to obtain a monetari or busi advantag
frazier v cupp
in frazier v cupp 394 us 731 1961 the us suprem court indirectli recogn the
necess of us decept dure interview in thi case the suspect confess to a
homicid after the interrog fals told him that hi alleg accomplic had confess to
the crime on appeal the suprem court rule that the decept alon wa insuffici to
invalid the confess
record interview
in some circumst record an interview might be illeg both state and feder law
limit an employ right to record employe interview dure an investig in fact in
some state audio record an interview is permit onli with the consent of all parti to
the commun thu fraud examin should alwai consult with an attornei when
decid whether to record an interview
if record an interview without the respond consent is legal consid tape record
the interview covertli covertli record offer an advantag in that it provid an accur
record without disturb the flow of the interview if there is to be a covert tape record
and the subject ask if the interview is be record do not lie explain that it is in the
subject best interest that an accur record be made and that he can have a copi when
complet
