2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Elements of Conversations


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Elements of Conversations 
Since an interview is essentially a structured conversation, it is helpful to understand the 
basic elements of communications. Whenever two or more human beings are conversing, 
several types of communication occur — either one at a time or in combination.  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.206   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Expression 
A common function of conversation is self-expression. One or more of the 
conversationalists might need to express ideas, feelings, attitudes, or moods. The illusion of 
an audience is central to a personal expression. The urge for spontaneous expression can be 
a vital asset in interviewing, and it should be encouraged in the respondent. It can be 
directed by the interviewer toward information-gathering objectives, but the interviewer 
should not give way to the urge for personal self-expression. 
 
One of the most common errors made by novice interviewers is to yield to the temptation to 
impress the respondent with their knowledge of the subject of the interview. In doing so, 
interviewers run the risk of making the respondent feel threatened, with the resultant 
tendency for respondents to guard responses rather than express their feelings frankly. 
Experienced interviewers will have the discipline to control their own responses. 
 
Persuasion 
The concepts of persuasion and expression differ in that persuasion is essentially aimed at 
convincing the other person. There are times when persuasion can be used effectively in the 
interview. This is mostly through convincing the person of the legitimacy of the interview. 
 
Therapy 
Making people feel good about themselves is often a function of conversation. In an 
ordinary conversation with a friend, a person often expresses ideas and feelings to remove 
emotional tension. This release is called catharsis, and is encouraged, for example, in 
psychiatric interviews. There are many times when the information sought in an interview is 
closely related to the respondent’s inner conflicts and tensions. For example, in the area of 
fraud, a person embezzling money from the company will typically feel guilty. A skillful 
interviewer will know the therapeutic implication of such a feeling when attempting to 
develop information.  
 
Ritual 
Some aspects of conversation are ritualistic; that is, they are merely a form of verbal behavior 
that has no real significance other than to provide security in interpersonal relations. 
Examples include “Good Morning!” and “How are you today?” In interviewing, we must 
learn to detect ritualistic answers by the respondent, and avoid giving them ourselves. The 
interviewer must be aware of the danger of engaging in ritualistic conversation and then 
confusing the results with valid information.  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.207 
Information Exchange  
Information exchange is the central purpose of the interview. The word exchange reminds us 
that the flow of information in an interview goes both ways. Too frequently, interviewers 
become so concerned with the information they wish to obtain that they do not properly 
exchange information with the respondent. Although details of what the interviewer says 
should be carefully measured, don’t be cagey.  This tactic rarely works. Two basic problems 
occur in the exchange of information. First, the information sought by the interviewer is not 
of equal importance to the respondent. Second, there is often a communication barrier 
between people of diverse backgrounds. These barriers are common between people who 
don’t know one another.  
 
 



:


element of convers
sinc an interview is essenti a structur convers it is help to understand the
basic element of commun whenev two or more human be ar convers
sever type of commun occur either on at a time or in combin
interview theori and applic investig
3206 2011 fraud examin manual
express
a common function of convers is selfexpress on or more of the
conversationalist might need to express idea feel attitud or mood the illus of
an audienc is central to a person express the urg for spontan express can be
a vital asset in interview and it should be encourag in the respond it can be
direct by the interview toward informationgath object but the interview
should not give wai to the urg for person selfexpress
on of the most common error made by novic interview is to yield to the temptat to
impress the respond with their knowledg of the subject of the interview in do so
interview run the risk of make the respond feel threaten with the result
tendenc for respond to guard respons rather than express their feel frankli
experienc interview will have the disciplin to control their own respons
persuas
the concept of persuas and express differ in that persuas is essenti aim at
convinc the other person there ar time when persuas can be us effect in the
interview thi is mostli through convinc the person of the legitimaci of the interview
therapi
make peopl feel good about themselv is often a function of convers in an
ordinari convers with a friend a person often express idea and feel to remov
emot tension thi releas is call catharsi and is encourag for exampl in
psychiatr interview there ar mani time when the inform sought in an interview is
close relat to the respond inner conflict and tension for exampl in the area of
fraud a person embezzl monei from the compani will typic feel guilti a skill
interview will know the therapeut implic of such a feel when attempt to
develop inform
ritual
some aspect of convers ar ritualist that is thei ar mere a form of verbal behavior
that ha no real signific other than to provid secur in interperson relat
exampl includ good morn and how ar you todai in interview we must
learn to detect ritualist answer by the respond and avoid give them ourselv the
interview must be awar of the danger of engag in ritualist convers and then
confus the result with valid inform
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3207
inform exchang
inform exchang is the central purpos of the interview the word exchang remind us
that the flow of inform in an interview goe both wai too frequent interview
becom so concern with the inform thei wish to obtain that thei do not properli
exchang inform with the respond although detail of what the interview sai
should be carefulli measur dont be cagei thi tactic rare work two basic problem
occur in the exchang of inform first the inform sought by the interview is not
of equal import to the respond second there is often a commun barrier
between peopl of divers background these barrier ar common between peopl who
dont know on anoth
