2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Inhibitors of Communication


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Inhibitors of Communication 
To be an effective interviewer, one must understand that certain matters inhibit 
communication, while others facilitate it. It is the interviewer’s task to minimize inhibitors 
and maximize facilitators. An inhibitor is any social-psychological barrier that impedes the 
flow of relevant information by making the respondent unable or unwilling to provide the 
information to the interviewer. Eight inhibitors to communication are listed below. The first 
four tend to make the respondent unwilling; the last four make the respondent unable to 
give the information, even though willing.  
 
Competing Demands for Time 
The respondent might hesitate to begin an interview because of other time demands. The 
subject does not necessarily place a negative value on being interviewed, but weighs the value 
of being interviewed against doing something else. The successful interviewer must convince 
the respondent that the interview is a good use of time.  
 
Ego Threat 
The respondent in some cases might withhold information because of a perceived threat to 
his self-esteem. There are three broad categories of ego threats: repression, disapproval, and 
loss of status. 
 
Repression 
The strongest ego threat is repression. Respondents might not only refuse to admit 
information to the interviewer, they might also refuse to admit the information inwardly. 
They are being honest when answering that they do not know or that they have forgotten. 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.208   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Embezzlers, for example, might repress memory of the act because it does not conform to 
their moral code.  
 
Disapproval 
A less intense but more common effect of ego threat is found when respondents possess 
information but are hesitant to admit it because they anticipate disapproval from the 
interviewer. If respondents are made to feel that the interviewer will not condemn them, 
they might welcome the opportunity to divulge information. A generally accepting and 
sympathetic attitude toward the respondent goes far toward eliciting candid responses.  
 
Loss of Status 
Sometimes respondents fear losing status if the information provided becomes public. This 
can sometimes be overcome by the interviewer’s assurance that the information will be 
handled confidentially. 
 
Etiquette 
The etiquette barrier operates when an answer to the interviewer’s question contains 
information perceived by the respondent as inappropriate. Answering candidly would be 
considered in poor taste or evidence of a lack of proper etiquette. For example, there are 
certain things that men do not discuss in front of women and vice versa, things that students 
do not tell teachers, and things that doctors do not tell patients. The desire to avoid 
embarrassing, shocking, or threatening answers is distinct from the fear of exposing oneself. 
Often, the negative effects of the etiquette barrier might be forestalled by selecting the 
appropriate interviewer and setting for the interview.  
 
Trauma 
Trauma denotes an acutely unpleasant feeling associated with crisis experiences. The 
unpleasant feeling is often brought to the surface when the respondent is reporting the 
experience. Trauma is common when talking to victims, and can usually be overcome by 
sensitive handling of the issue.  
 
Forgetting 
A frequent inhibitor to communication is the respondent’s inability to recall certain types of 
information. This is not a problem if the objectives of the interview deal only with current 
attitudes, beliefs, or expectations. The natural fading of the memory over time makes it 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.209 
easier for the ego-defense system to reconstruct one’s own image of the past by omission, 
addition, or distortion.  
 
The memory problem is a much more frequent obstacle than is generally expected by 
interviewers. Even some of the most simple and obvious facts cannot be elicited because of 
the respondent’s memory problems. There are three factors that contribute to recollection of 
an event. 
 
First, the vividness of the person’s recall is related to the event’s original emotional impact, 
its meaningfulness at the time, and the degree to which the person’s ego is involved. A 
second factor is the amount of time that has elapsed since the event. Third is the nature of 
the interview situation, including the interviewer’s techniques and tactics.  
 
Knowledge of these factors will help the inter viewer anticipate problems that might occur. 
And there are certain techniques, discussed later, that will help the interviewer overcome 
many of these memory problems.  
 
Chronological Confusion 
Chronological confusion is commonly encountered in interviews seeking case history 
information. This term refers to the respondent’s tendency to confuse the order of 
experiences and can occur in two ways: two or more events might be correctly recalled, but 
the respondent is unsure of the sequence, or only one event might be recalled, and it is 
incorrectly assumed to have been true at an earlier point. 
 
Inferential Confusion 
Inferential confusion denotes confusion and inaccuracies resulting from errors of inference. 
These errors generally fall into two categories: induction or deduction. Induction occurs when 
the respondent is asked to convert concrete experiences into a higher level of generalization. 
Deduction occurs when the respondent is asked to give concrete examples of certain 
categories of experience. 
 
Unconscious Behavior 
Often the interview process reveals information about a person’s unconscious behavior. 
There are three types of unconscious behavior: customs or habits, circular reactions, and 
reactions to acute emotional crises. A custom or habit is a settled tendency or usual pattern of 
behavior; it is the behavior that an individual engages in regularly. A circular reaction  is the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.210   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
immediate, unwitting response of one person to the subliminal, nonverbal clues of another. 
A response to an acute emotional crisis does not follow a habitual pattern or result from a 
reaction to others. It arises only in special circumstances when the interviewee is 
experiencing an emotional dilemma.  
 
 



:


inhibitor of commun
to be an effect interview on must understand that certain matter inhibit
commun while other facilit it it is the interview task to minim inhibitor
and maxim facilit an inhibitor is ani socialpsycholog barrier that imped the
flow of relev inform by make the respond unabl or unwil to provid the
inform to the interview eight inhibitor to commun ar list below the first
four tend to make the respond unwil the last four make the respond unabl to
give the inform even though will
compet demand for time
the respond might hesit to begin an interview becaus of other time demand the
subject doe not necessarili place a neg valu on be interview but weigh the valu
of be interview against do someth els the success interview must convinc
the respond that the interview is a good us of time
ego threat
the respond in some case might withhold inform becaus of a perceiv threat to
hi selfesteem there ar three broad categori of ego threat repress disapprov and
loss of statu
repress
the strongest ego threat is repress respond might not onli refus to admit
inform to the interview thei might also refus to admit the inform inwardli
thei ar be honest when answer that thei do not know or that thei have forgotten
interview theori and applic investig
3208 2011 fraud examin manual
embezzl for exampl might repress memori of the act becaus it doe not conform to
their moral code
disapprov
a less intens but more common effect of ego threat is found when respond possess
inform but ar hesit to admit it becaus thei anticip disapprov from the
interview if respond ar made to feel that the interview will not condemn them
thei might welcom the opportun to divulg inform a gener accept and
sympathet attitud toward the respond goe far toward elicit candid respons
loss of statu
sometim respond fear lose statu if the inform provid becom public thi
can sometim be overcom by the interview assur that the inform will be
handl confidenti
etiquett
the etiquett barrier oper when an answer to the interview question contain
inform perceiv by the respond as inappropri answer candidli would be
consid in poor tast or evid of a lack of proper etiquett for exampl there ar
certain thing that men do not discuss in front of women and vice versa thing that student
do not tell teacher and thing that doctor do not tell patient the desir to avoid
embarrass shock or threaten answer is distinct from the fear of expos oneself
often the neg effect of the etiquett barrier might be forestal by select the
appropri interview and set for the interview
trauma
trauma denot an acut unpleas feel associ with crisi experi the
unpleas feel is often brought to the surfac when the respond is report the
experi trauma is common when talk to victim and can usual be overcom by
sensit handl of the issu
forget
a frequent inhibitor to commun is the respond inabl to recal certain type of
inform thi is not a problem if the object of the interview deal onli with current
attitud belief or expect the natur fade of the memori over time make it
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3209
easier for the egodefens system to reconstruct on own imag of the past by omiss
addit or distort
the memori problem is a much more frequent obstacl than is gener expect by
interview even some of the most simpl and obviou fact cannot be elicit becaus of
the respond memori problem there ar three factor that contribut to recollect of
an event
first the vivid of the person recal is relat to the event origin emot impact
it meaning at the time and the degre to which the person ego is involv a
second factor is the amount of time that ha elaps sinc the event third is the natur of
the interview situat includ the interview techniqu and tactic
knowledg of these factor will help the inter viewer anticip problem that might occur
and there ar certain techniqu discuss later that will help the interview overcom
mani of these memori problem
chronolog confus
chronolog confus is commonli encount in interview seek case histori
inform thi term refer to the respond tendenc to confus the order of
experi and can occur in two wai two or more event might be correctli recal but
the respond is unsur of the sequenc or onli on event might be recal and it is
incorrectli assum to have been true at an earlier point
inferenti confus
inferenti confus denot confus and inaccuraci result from error of infer
these error gener fall into two categori induct or deduct induct occur when
the respond is ask to convert concret experi into a higher level of gener
deduct occur when the respond is ask to give concret exampl of certain
categori of experi
unconsci behavior
often the interview process reveal inform about a person unconsci behavior
there ar three type of unconsci behavior custom or habit circular reaction and
reaction to acut emot crise a custom or habit is a settl tendenc or usual pattern of
behavior it is the behavior that an individu engag in regularli a circular reaction is the
interview theori and applic investig
3210 2011 fraud examin manual
immedi unwit respons of on person to the sublimin nonverb clue of anoth
a respons to an acut emot crisi doe not follow a habitu pattern or result from a
reaction to other it aris onli in special circumst when the interviewe is
experienc an emot dilemma
