2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Inhibitors of Communication/Forgetting


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Forgetting 
A frequent inhibitor to communication is the respondent’s inability to recall certain types of 
information. This is not a problem if the objectives of the interview deal only with current 
attitudes, beliefs, or expectations. The natural fading of the memory over time makes it 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.209 
easier for the ego-defense system to reconstruct one’s own image of the past by omission, 
addition, or distortion.  
 
The memory problem is a much more frequent obstacle than is generally expected by 
interviewers. Even some of the most simple and obvious facts cannot be elicited because of 
the respondent’s memory problems. There are three factors that contribute to recollection of 
an event. 
 
First, the vividness of the person’s recall is related to the event’s original emotional impact, 
its meaningfulness at the time, and the degree to which the person’s ego is involved. A 
second factor is the amount of time that has elapsed since the event. Third is the nature of 
the interview situation, including the interviewer’s techniques and tactics.  
 
Knowledge of these factors will help the inter viewer anticipate problems that might occur. 
And there are certain techniques, discussed later, that will help the interviewer overcome 
many of these memory problems.  
 



:


forget
a frequent inhibitor to commun is the respond inabl to recal certain type of
inform thi is not a problem if the object of the interview deal onli with current
attitud belief or expect the natur fade of the memori over time make it
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3209
easier for the egodefens system to reconstruct on own imag of the past by omiss
addit or distort
the memori problem is a much more frequent obstacl than is gener expect by
interview even some of the most simpl and obviou fact cannot be elicit becaus of
the respond memori problem there ar three factor that contribut to recollect of
an event
first the vivid of the person recal is relat to the event origin emot impact
it meaning at the time and the degre to which the person ego is involv a
second factor is the amount of time that ha elaps sinc the event third is the natur of
the interview situat includ the interview techniqu and tactic
knowledg of these factor will help the inter viewer anticip problem that might occur
and there ar certain techniqu discuss later that will help the interview overcom
mani of these memori problem
