2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Facilitators of Communication


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Facilitators of Communication 
Facilitators of communication are those social-psychological forces that make conversations, 
including interviews, easier to accomplish. These facilitators require a basic understanding of 
what motivates people.  
 
Fulfilling Expectations 
One of the important forces in social interaction is the tendency of one person to 
communicate, verbally or nonverbally, his expectations to the other person. The second 
person then tends to respond, consciously or unconsciously, to those expectations. This 
might be viewed as one manifestation of the more general human tendency to conform to 
the group and to the anticipations of higher-status people. It is in this conformity to group 
norms that security is sought. 
 
In the interview setting, the interviewer communicates expectations to the respondent. The 
interviewer should be able to transmit both a general expectation of cooperation and a more 
specific expectation that the respondent will answer the questions truthfully. The interviewer 
must clearly distinguish between asking for information and expecting it. The former is 
mainly achieved with verbal communication, while the latter is accomplished through 
nonverbal behavior. The interviewer who expects the respondent to cooperate will likely be 
more successful than one who only asks questions.  
 
Recognition 
All human beings need the recognition and the esteem of others. Social interaction often 
depends on an exchange of social goods. People will “perform” in exchange for recognition 
and other social rewards. The need for recognition can be fulfilled by attention from people 
outside the individual’s social circle. The skillful and insightful interviewer takes advantage of 
every opportunity to give the respondent sincere recognition.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.211 
Altruistic Appeals 
There seems to be a need for humans to identify with some higher value or cause beyond 
immediate self-interest. This might sometimes take the form of identification with the 
objectives of a larger group. Altruistic deeds usually increase self-esteem, whether or not the 
deeds have been made public. This distinguishes altruism from publicity. Altruism is of 
major importance in motivating many respondents. Interviewers who understand the 
respondent’s value system can use strategy and techniques that appeal to altruism.  
 
Sympathetic Understanding 
Human beings need the sympathetic response of others. They like to share their joys, fears, 
successes, and failures. This need for understanding differs from the need for recognition 
that requires success and increased status. Interviewers who reflect a sympathetic attitude 
and who know how to direct that attitude toward the objectives of the interview will find 
their percentages of success much higher than those who do not.  
 
New Experience 
People welcome new experiences. Although variety might not be the only spice of life, 
escape from the dreary routine is sought by everyone. Sometimes the respondent is 
motivated by curiosity regarding the interviewer. Interviewers should consider this when 
deciding what to say about themselves. One must not assume that just because an interview 
is a new experience, it will satisfy the respondent’s needs. Aspects of the respondent’s 
perception of the new experience can be ego threatening. The respondent might be anxious 
about the impression left with the interviewer. This apprehensiveness can often be detected 
by the interviewer at the beginning of the contact. Once these fears are dispelled, the 
respondent frequently finds the interview a new and interesting experience.  
 
Catharsis 
Catharsis is the process by which a person obtains a release from unpleasant emotional 
tensions by talking about the source of these tensions. We often feel better by talking about 
something that upsets us. Although we are all familiar with the frequent necessity for 
catharsis in ourselves, we do not always perceive the same need in others. The need for 
sympathetic understanding and the need for catharsis are related, but they are not the same 
thing. The interviewer who does not have time to listen to what he considers inconsequential 
or egocentric talk will often find the respondent unwilling to share important consequences.  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.212   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Need for Meaning 
Another general trait common to people is the need for meaning. Every society has a set of 
assumptions, values, explanations, and myths lending order to the society. The concept of 
need for meaning is related to cognitive dissonance. Psychological tension is created when an 
individual becomes aware of incongruence of facts, assumptions, and interpretations. This 
tension is painful, and its reduction is rewarding to the individual. In cases where the 
interview topic deals directly with the sources disturbing a person’s system of meaning, there 
is a strong motivation for the respondent to talk it through, if he is convinced of the 
interviewer’s interest.  
 
Extrinsic Rewards 
Extrinsic rewards are rewards the interviewee receives that are not directly related to the 
interview experience, and they cause the respondent to see the interview as a means to an 
end. Extrinsic rewards for interviewees can include money, job advancement, and retention 
of privileges. What is irrelevant to the interviewer might not be to the respondent. A 
sensitive interviewer will be able to recognize what extrinsic rewards the respondent receives, 
if any, from being interviewed.  
 
 



:


facilit of commun
facilit of commun ar those socialpsycholog forc that make convers
includ interview easier to accomplish these facilit requir a basic understand of
what motiv peopl
fulfil expect
on of the import forc in social interact is the tendenc of on person to
commun verbal or nonverb hi expect to the other person the second
person then tend to respond conscious or unconsci to those expect thi
might be view as on manifest of the more gener human tendenc to conform to
the group and to the anticip of higherstatu peopl it is in thi conform to group
norm that secur is sought
in the interview set the interview commun expect to the respond the
interview should be abl to transmit both a gener expect of cooper and a more
specif expect that the respond will answer the question truthfulli the interview
must clearli distinguish between ask for inform and expect it the former is
mainli achiev with verbal commun while the latter is accomplish through
nonverb behavior the interview who expect the respond to cooper will like be
more success than on who onli ask question
recognit
all human be need the recognit and the esteem of other social interact often
depend on an exchang of social good peopl will perform in exchang for recognit
and other social reward the need for recognit can be fulfil by attent from peopl
outsid the individu social circl the skill and insight interview take advantag of
everi opportun to give the respond sincer recognit
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3211
altruist appeal
there seem to be a need for human to identifi with some higher valu or caus beyond
immedi selfinterest thi might sometim take the form of identif with the
object of a larger group altruist deed usual increas selfesteem whether or not the
deed have been made public thi distinguish altruism from public altruism is of
major import in motiv mani respond interview who understand the
respond valu system can us strategi and techniqu that appeal to altruism
sympathet understand
human be need the sympathet respons of other thei like to share their joi fear
success and failur thi need for understand differ from the need for recognit
that requir success and increas statu interview who reflect a sympathet attitud
and who know how to direct that attitud toward the object of the interview will find
their percentag of success much higher than those who do not
new experi
peopl welcom new experi although varieti might not be the onli spice of life
escap from the dreari routin is sought by everyon sometim the respond is
motiv by curios regard the interview interview should consid thi when
decid what to sai about themselv on must not assum that just becaus an interview
is a new experi it will satisfi the respond need aspect of the respond
percept of the new experi can be ego threaten the respond might be anxiou
about the impress left with the interview thi apprehens can often be detect
by the interview at the begin of the contact onc these fear ar dispel the
respond frequent find the interview a new and interest experi
catharsi
catharsi is the process by which a person obtain a releas from unpleas emot
tension by talk about the sourc of these tension we often feel better by talk about
someth that upset us although we ar all familiar with the frequent necess for
catharsi in ourselv we do not alwai perceiv the same need in other the need for
sympathet understand and the need for catharsi ar relat but thei ar not the same
thing the interview who doe not have time to listen to what he consid inconsequenti
or egocentr talk will often find the respond unwil to share import consequ
interview theori and applic investig
3212 2011 fraud examin manual
need for mean
anoth gener trait common to peopl is the need for mean everi societi ha a set of
assumpt valu explan and myth lend order to the societi the concept of
need for mean is relat to cognit disson psycholog tension is creat when an
individu becom awar of incongru of fact assumpt and interpret thi
tension is pain and it reduct is reward to the individu in case where the
interview topic deal directli with the sourc disturb a person system of mean there
is a strong motiv for the respond to talk it through if he is convinc of the
interview interest
extrins reward
extrins reward ar reward the interviewe receiv that ar not directli relat to the
interview experi and thei caus the respond to see the interview as a mean to an
end extrins reward for interviewe can includ monei job advanc and retent
of privileg what is irrelev to the interview might not be to the respond a
sensit interview will be abl to recogn what extrins reward the respond receiv
if ani from be interview
