2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Interview Mechanics


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Interview Mechanics 
As with all other phases of a fraud examination, an interview will be most successful if the 
investigator is thoroughly prepared, which requires that the interviewer understands the 
mechanics of interviewing.  
 
Note-Taking 
The interviewer will frequently need to take notes during the interview. Start each interview 
on a separate sheet of paper. This procedure can be especially helpful should documents 
from a particular interview be subpoenaed. Do not try to write down all the information you 
are given during an interview, only the pertinent facts. Taking too many notes will make the 
interview process cumbersome and might inhibit the respondent. If a quote is particularly 
relevant, try to write it down verbatim. Enclose all direct quotes in quotation marks. 
 
Do not slow down the interview process for note taking. Instead, jot down key words or 
phrases, and then go back over the details at the end of the interview. In general, it is better 
to err on the side of taking too few notes rather than too many. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.213 
Maintain Eye Contact 
The interviewer should maintain eye contact with the respondent as much as possible during 
note taking. Just as eye contact personalizes all human communication, it creates a more 
comfortable environment and facilitates the flow of information during the interview 
process. 
 
Opinions 
Avoid making notes regarding your overall opinions or impressions of a witness. Such notes 
can cause you problems with your credibility if they are later produced in court. Be careful 
not to show excitement when taking notes. During interviews of targets and adverse 
witnesses, take notes in a manner that does not indicate the significance of the information; 
that is, never allow note taking to “telegraph” your emotions. 
 
Writing Down Questions 
Whenever possible, do not write down a list of interview questions. Let the interview flow 
freely. Inadvertently allowing the respondent to read a written list of questions can provide 
an opportunity to fabricate an answer. However, writing down key points the interviewer 
wants to discuss might be appropriate. 
 
Documenting Results  
Expound the notes from the results of questioning as soon as possible after concluding the 
interview — preferably immediately afterward. If this procedure is followed, the examiner will 
not have to take copious notes during the interview. Law enforcement officials are generally 
required to maintain notes. In the private sector, the notes can usually be destroyed once a 
memorandum has been prepared summarizing the interview. (See the Law section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual  for more information.) 
 
 



:


interview mechan
as with all other phase of a fraud examin an interview will be most success if the
investig is thoroughli prepar which requir that the interview understand the
mechan of interview
notetak
the interview will frequent need to take note dure the interview start each interview
on a separ sheet of paper thi procedur can be especi help should document
from a particular interview be subpoena do not try to write down all the inform you
ar given dure an interview onli the pertin fact take too mani note will make the
interview process cumbersom and might inhibit the respond if a quot is particularli
relev try to write it down verbatim enclos all direct quot in quotat mark
do not slow down the interview process for note take instead jot down kei word or
phrase and then go back over the detail at the end of the interview in gener it is better
to err on the side of take too few note rather than too mani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3213
maintain ey contact
the interview should maintain ey contact with the respond as much as possibl dure
note take just as ey contact person all human commun it creat a more
comfort environ and facilit the flow of inform dure the interview
process
opinion
avoid make note regard your overal opinion or impress of a wit such note
can caus you problem with your credibl if thei ar later produc in court be care
not to show excit when take note dure interview of target and advers
wit take note in a manner that doe not indic the signific of the inform
that is never allow note take to telegraph your emot
write down question
whenev possibl do not write down a list of interview question let the interview flow
freeli inadvert allow the respond to read a written list of question can provid
an opportun to fabric an answer howev write down kei point the interview
want to discuss might be appropri
document result
expound the note from the result of question as soon as possibl after conclud the
interview prefer immedi afterward if thi procedur is follow the examin will
not have to take copiou note dure the interview law enforc offici ar gener
requir to maintain note in the privat sector the note can usual be destroi onc a
memorandum ha been prepar summar the interview see the law section of the
fraud examin manual for more inform
