2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Introductory Questions 
One of the most difficult aspects of an inter view is getting started. Indeed, the introduction 
might be the hardest part. The interviewer and the respondent, in many instances, have not 
met before. The interviewer has a tall order: meet the person, state a reason for the 
interview, establish necessary rapport, and get the information. The introduction is 
accomplished through questions as opposed to statements. The questions allow the 
interviewer to assess feedback from the respondent. This is an important aspect of the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.214   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
introduction. If the respondent is reluctant to be interviewed, that fact will come out  
through the introductory questions.  
  
Four Objectives 
Introductory questions are designed to meet the four objectives below.  
 
Provide the Introduction 
Obviously, the interviewer must introduce himself before the interview commences. The 
interviewer should generally indicate his name and company, avoiding titles. This is not 
always the case, but the more informal the interview, generally the more relaxed  
the respondent. 
 
Establish Rapport 
Webster’s defines rapport as a “relation marked by harmony, conformity, accord, or affinity.” 
In other words, there must be some common ground established before questioning begins. 
This is usually accomplished by the interviewer spending a few minutes with the respondent 
in “small talk.” This aspect, however, should not be overdone. Most people are aware that 
the interviewer is there for a meaningful purpose and not to chitchat.  
 
Establish the Interview Theme 
The interviewer must state the purpose of the interview in some way prior to the 
commencement of serious questioning. Otherwise, the respondent might be confused, 
threatened, or overly cautious. Stating the purpose of the interview is known as establishing 
the interview theme. 
 
Additionally, the purpose of the interview should be general and not specific. The specific 
interview purpose will be conveyed to the respondent later. The stated purpose of the 
interview should be one that is logical for the respondent to accept and easy for the 
interviewer to explain, but it might be related only indirectly to the actual purpose of the 
interview. Normally, the more general the theme is the better.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I am working on a matter and I need your help.” 
OR 
“I am doing a review of procedures here at the company.” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.215 
OR 
“I am developing some information on our purchasing procedures.” 
 
The goal of the theme is to get the respondent to make a commitment for assistance. Failure 
to get a commitment to assist from the respondent is one of the common mistakes made 
even by experienced interviewers. This is a critical step in setting the tone for the interview. 
A commitment of assistance requires positive action on the part of the person being 
interviewed. Remaining silent or simply nodding the head is generally not sufficient. 
  
The interviewer should ask for the commitment before the interview commences, and 
should encourage the respondent to voice that “yes” aloud. If the interviewer encounters 
silence the first time, the question should be repeated in a slightly different way until the 
respondent verbalizes commitment. In the Linda Reed Collins case, included in the 
Appendix to this section, Bridges, the Certified Fraud Examiner, introduces himself to Mary 
Rodriguez De La Garza, who works in the purchasing department of Bailey Books 
Incorporated. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I’m Loren Bridges. I’m doing a review of our purchasing function. Do 
you have a few minutes?” 
 
Respondent: 
“ Yes.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I am gathering some information on certain company procedures. Maybe you can help me?” 
 
Respondent: 
No response. 
 
Interviewer: 
“Could I get you to help me, if you can?” 
 
Respondent : 
“Yes. What’s this about?” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.216   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Generally, the most effective interview theme is that help is being sought. Nearly all human 
beings get satisfaction from helping others. Thus, in most interviews, the interviewer should 
approach the respondent so that person is made to feel important in helping out.  
 
During this phase of the interview, the respondent must not feel threatened in any way. An 
effective approach is the “Columbo style” (although perhaps not in such a rumpled way), in 
which at least two thoughts go through the mind of Columbo’s subjects: (1) he is no threat 
to me, and (2) he really needs my help. 
 
In the following examples, the interviewer is introducing himself to a fellow employee. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I am Loren Bridges, a Certified Fraud Examiner with Bailey Books’ 
fraud examination unit. I am investigating a case of suspected fraud, and you might know 
something about it. How long have you worked here at the company?” 
 
RIGHT 
Interviewer : 
“Ms. De La Garza, I am Loren Bridges. I work here at the company. Have we met before?” 
 
Respondent: 
“I don’t think so.” 
 
Interviewer : 
“I am working on an assignment and I need your help. Do you have a few minutes I can spend 
with you?” 
 
Observe Reactions 
The interviewer must be skilled in interpreting the respondent’s reactions to questions. Social 
scientists say that more than half of the communication between individuals is nonspoken. 
The interviewer must, therefore, observe systematically, though in a nondescript manner, the 
various responses the respondent gives during the course of the conversation.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.217 
To observe the respondent’s reactions, move from nonsensitive to sensitive questions. That 
is, the interview process should begin by posing nonsensitive questions while establishing 
rapport. Asking nonsensitive questions will help the interviewer find some common ground 
on which to connect with the respondent.  
 
Sensitive questions should be scrupulously avoided until well into the interview. And then 
such questions should be asked only after careful deliberation and planning. Moreover, all 
questions should be nonaccusatory. Nothing closes up the lines of communication in an 
interview like an accusatory question. If the respondent starts to become uncomfortable with 
the questioning, the interviewer should move into a different area and approach the sensitive 
question later from a different vantage point. 
 
Likewise, interviewers are encouraged to formulate their questions in a way that will not 
bring about a strong emotional reaction from the respondent, and emotive words of all types 
should be avoided during the introductory phase. Such words put people on the defensive, 
and they are more reluctant to answer and to cooperate. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of Use  
Investigation Inquiry  
Audit Review  
Interview Ask a few questions  
Embezzle/steal/theft Shortage or paperwork 
problems
  
Furthermore, some people will not volunteer information; they must be asked. The 
interviewer must not be reluctant to ask sensitive questions after the proper basis has been 
established. If the interviewer poses the question with confidence and with the attitude that 
an answer is expected, the respondent will be much more likely to furnish the requested 
information. If the interviewer is apologetic or lacks confidence in the question, the 
respondent is much less likely to answer. 
 
After the interviewer establishes rapport through normal conversation, the respondent’s 
reactions are observed. This will serve as a baseline for observing behavior when questions 
that are more sensitive are asked. If the respondent’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors are 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.218   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
inconsistent from one type of question to another, the interviewer will attempt to determine 
why.  
 
To determine why the respondent’s behaviors are inconsistent, the interviewer must be 
knowledgeable about nonverbal clues of behavior, which generally fall within one of the 
following categories: proxemics, chr onemics, kinetics, or paralinguistics. 
 
PROXEMICS 
Proxemic communication is the use of interpersonal space to convey meaning. The relationship 
between the interviewer and respondent is both a cause and effect of proxemic behavior. If 
the distance between the interviewer and the respondent is greater, there is more of a 
tendency for them to watch each other’s eyes for clues to meaning.  
 
It is important to position the respondent’s chair and the interviewer’s chair at an acceptable 
distance. The correct conversational distance varies from one culture to another. In the 
Middle East, the distance is quite short; in Latin America, equals of the same sex carry on a 
conversation at a much closer distance than in North America. Often, as the subject matter 
of the interview changes, the interviewer can note the changes in the proxemic behavior of 
the respondent. If the person is free to back away, he might do so when the topic becomes 
unpleasant or sensitive.  
 
CHRONEMICS 
Chronemic communication refers to the use of time in interpersonal relationships to convey 
meaning, attitudes, and desires. If the respondent is late in keeping an appointment, for 
example, this might convey a lack of interest in or an avoidance of the interview.  
 
The most important chronemic technique used by interviewers is in the timing of questions. 
The interviewer can control the length of pauses and the rate of his speech. This is called 
pacing. The interviewer can also control the length of time after the respondent has finished a 
sentence before another question is posed. This is called the silent probe. 
 
Pacing is one of the principal nonverbal methods of setting an appropriate mood. The tense 
interviewer often communicates anxiety by a rapid-fire rate of speech, which in turn might 
increase anxiety in the respondent. To establish the more thoughtful, deliberative mood 
usually needed to stimulate free association, the interviewer must take the initiative in setting 
a more relaxed, deliberate pace. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.219 
KINETICS 
Kinetic communication involves the use of body movement to convey meaning. Even though 
posture, hands, and feet all communicate, interviewers tend to focus attention on the face 
and are more accurate in their judgments of others if they can see facial movements and 
expressions. When the interviewer concentrates on facial expressions, the primary interest is 
eye contact. Eye contact primarily communicates the desire to make or avoid 
communication. A person who feels shame normally will drop the eyes to avoid the glance 
of another. This is not only to avoid seeing disapproval, but to conceal personal shame  
and confusion. 
 
PARALINGUISTICS 
Paralinguistic communication involves the use of volume, pitch, and voice quality to convey 
meaning. One of the basic differences between  written and verbal communication is that 
oral speech gives the full range of nonverbal accompaniment. For example, a “yes” response 
might not mean complete agreement; it depends on the way in which the “yes” is said. 
 
The interviewer must learn to listen and observe changes in the nonverbal accompaniment 
and whether the verbal and nonverbal are harmoniously reinforcing or tend to give 
conflicting signals, as in cases where the respondent is trying to deceive the interviewer. Ten 
emotions have been studied by social scientists: anger, fear, happiness, jealousy, love, 
nervousness, pride, sadness, satisfaction, and sympathy. Some emotions, like anger and 
nervousness, can be more reliably identified than the others. 
 
Methodology 
Respondents must perceive that they have something in common with the interviewer, and 
should feel good about the situation. This is best accomplished when respondents perceive 
the interviewer as being open and friendly. The following techniques promote this 
perception. 
 
Physical Contact 
Make physical contact with the person being interviewed by shaking hands. Making  
physical contact helps break down psychological barriers to communication. The interviewer 
should not invade the respondent’s personal space, however, as this might make the  
person uncomfortable. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.220   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The interviewer uses body language to create the impression of trust during the interview by 
gesturing openly with the arms, clasping hands together, and leaning forward in a manner to 
indicate interest. Rapport can be established through verbal techniques, such as using soft 
words, agreeing with the respondent, and avoiding negative terms. 
 
When contacting a respondent for the first time, the interviewer must identify himself. This 
is best accomplished by stating your name. Unless a specific reason exists, the interviewer 
should generally omit a title. The less formality in general, the better. In some instances, 
stating a title cannot be avoided. In those cases, the title used should not conjure up emotion 
or possible fear in the mind of the respondent.  
 
Don’t Interview More Than One Person 
One of the basic rules is to question only one person at a time. The testimony of one 
respondent will invariably influence the testimony of another. There are few hard and fast 
rules, but this is one of them.  
 
Privacy 
Another basic rule is to conduct interviews under conditions of privacy. The interview is 
best conducted out of the sight and sound of friends, relatives, or fellow employees. People 
are very reluctant to furnish information within the hearing of others. 
 
Establish Transitional Statement 
Once the interviewer has a commitment for assistance, he must describe in more detail the 
purpose of the interview. This is done with the transitional statement used to provide a 
legitimate basis for the inquiry and to explain to respondents how they fit into the inquiry. 
This is usually done by means of a broad description. When interviewing employees in the 
same company, most of them already presume the legitimacy of your request for assistance. 
After describing the basic nature of the inquiry with the transitional statement, the 
interviewer should seek a second commitment for assistance. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“It’s pretty routine, really. I’m gathering some information about the purchasing function and 
how it is supposed to work. It would be helpful to me if I could start by asking you to tell me 
about your job. Okay?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.221 
When interviewing strangers, the interviewer might have to describe with more particularity 
how the respondent’s assistance is needed. This can be accomplished by one or more of the 
methods illustrated below, where the interviewer is talking to an outside vendor. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ It’s pretty routine, really. As I say, I work for Bailey Books and I’ve been assigned a project 
to gather some information about some of our procedures. And because you work for one of our 
vendors, I thought it might be helpful to talk to you. Okay ?” 
OR 
“It’s pretty routine, really. I have been asked by the company to gather information on some of 
our procedures. I thought you might be able to help by answering a few questions. Okay?” 
OR 
“ It’s pretty routine, really. I have been asked by the company to gather some information, and 
they suggested I might contact you. Okay?” 
 
Seek Continuous Agreement 
Throughout the interview process — from the introduction to the close — the interviewer 
should attempt to phrase questions so that they can be answered “yes.” It is easier for people 
to reply in the affirmative than the negative. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“Okay?” 
 
“Can you help me?” 
 
“That’s okay, isn’t it?” 
 
Do Not Invade Body Space 
During the introductory part of the interview, the interviewer generally should remain at a 
distance of four to six feet. Do not invade the personal zone (closer than about three feet), 
as it might make the respondent uncomfortable.  
 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.222   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


introductori question
on of the most difficult aspect of an inter view is get start inde the introduct
might be the hardest part the interview and the respond in mani instanc have not
met befor the interview ha a tall order meet the person state a reason for the
interview establish necessari rapport and get the inform the introduct is
accomplish through question as oppos to statement the question allow the
interview to assess feedback from the respond thi is an import aspect of the
interview theori and applic investig
3214 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct if the respond is reluct to be interview that fact will come out
through the introductori question
four object
introductori question ar design to meet the four object below
provid the introduct
obvious the interview must introduc himself befor the interview commenc the
interview should gener indic hi name and compani avoid titl thi is not
alwai the case but the more inform the interview gener the more relax
the respond
establish rapport
webster defin rapport as a relat mark by harmoni conform accord or affin
in other word there must be some common ground establish befor question begin
thi is usual accomplish by the interview spend a few minut with the respond
in small talk thi aspect howev should not be overdon most peopl ar awar that
the interview is there for a meaning purpos and not to chitchat
establish the interview theme
the interview must state the purpos of the interview in some wai prior to the
commenc of seriou question otherwis the respond might be confus
threaten or overli cautiou state the purpos of the interview is known as establish
the interview theme
addition the purpos of the interview should be gener and not specif the specif
interview purpos will be convei to the respond later the state purpos of the
interview should be on that is logic for the respond to accept and easi for the
interview to explain but it might be relat onli indirectli to the actual purpos of the
interview normal the more gener the theme is the better
exampl
interview
i am work on a matter and i need your help
or
i am do a review of procedur here at the compani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3215
or
i am develop some inform on our purchas procedur
the goal of the theme is to get the respond to make a commit for assist failur
to get a commit to assist from the respond is on of the common mistak made
even by experienc interview thi is a critic step in set the tone for the interview
a commit of assist requir posit action on the part of the person be
interview remain silent or simpli nod the head is gener not suffici
the interview should ask for the commit befor the interview commenc and
should encourag the respond to voic that ye aloud if the interview encount
silenc the first time the question should be repeat in a slightli differ wai until the
respond verbal commit in the linda reed collin case includ in the
appendix to thi section bridg the certifi fraud examin introduc himself to mari
rodriguez de la garza who work in the purchas depart of bailei book
incorpor
exampl
interview
ms de la garza im loren bridg im do a review of our purchas function do
you have a few minut
respond
ye
interview
i am gather some inform on certain compani procedur mayb you can help me
respond
no respons
interview
could i get you to help me if you can
respond
ye what thi about
interview theori and applic investig
3216 2011 fraud examin manual
gener the most effect interview theme is that help is be sought nearli all human
be get satisfact from help other thu in most interview the interview should
approach the respond so that person is made to feel import in help out
dure thi phase of the interview the respond must not feel threaten in ani wai an
effect approach is the columbo style although perhap not in such a rumpl wai in
which at least two thought go through the mind of columbo subject 1 he is no threat
to me and 2 he realli need my help
in the follow exampl the interview is introduc himself to a fellow employe
exampl
wrong
interview
ms de la garza i am loren bridg a certifi fraud examin with bailei book
fraud examin unit i am investig a case of suspect fraud and you might know
someth about it how long have you work here at the compani
right
interview
ms de la garza i am loren bridg i work here at the compani have we met befor
respond
i dont think so
interview
i am work on an assign and i need your help do you have a few minut i can spend
with you
observ reaction
the interview must be skill in interpret the respond reaction to question social
scientist sai that more than half of the commun between individu is nonspoken
the interview must therefor observ systemat though in a nondescript manner the
variou respons the respond give dure the cours of the convers
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3217
to observ the respond reaction move from nonsensit to sensit question that
is the interview process should begin by pose nonsensit question while establish
rapport ask nonsensit question will help the interview find some common ground
on which to connect with the respond
sensit question should be scrupul avoid until well into the interview and then
such question should be ask onli after care deliber and plan moreov all
question should be nonaccusatori noth close up the line of commun in an
interview like an accusatori question if the respond start to becom uncomfort with
the question the interview should move into a differ area and approach the sensit
question later from a differ vantag point
likewis interview ar encourag to formul their question in a wai that will not
bring about a strong emot reaction from the respond and emot word of all type
should be avoid dure the introductori phase such word put peopl on the defens
and thei ar more reluct to answer and to cooper
exampl
instead of us
investig inquiri
audit review
interview ask a few question
embezzlestealtheft shortag or paperwork
problem
furthermor some peopl will not volunt inform thei must be ask the
interview must not be reluct to ask sensit question after the proper basi ha been
establish if the interview pose the question with confid and with the attitud that
an answer is expect the respond will be much more like to furnish the request
inform if the interview is apologet or lack confid in the question the
respond is much less like to answer
after the interview establish rapport through normal convers the respond
reaction ar observ thi will serv as a baselin for observ behavior when question
that ar more sensit ar ask if the respond verbal and nonverb behavior ar
interview theori and applic investig
3218 2011 fraud examin manual
inconsist from on type of question to anoth the interview will attempt to determin
why
to determin why the respond behavior ar inconsist the interview must be
knowledg about nonverb clue of behavior which gener fall within on of the
follow categori proxem chr onem kinet or paralinguist
proxem
proxem commun is the us of interperson space to convei mean the relationship
between the interview and respond is both a caus and effect of proxem behavior if
the distanc between the interview and the respond is greater there is more of a
tendenc for them to watch each other ey for clue to mean
it is import to posit the respond chair and the interview chair at an accept
distanc the correct convers distanc vari from on cultur to anoth in the
middl east the distanc is quit short in latin america equal of the same sex carri on a
convers at a much closer distanc than in north america often as the subject matter
of the interview chang the interview can note the chang in the proxem behavior of
the respond if the person is free to back awai he might do so when the topic becom
unpleas or sensit
chronem
chronem commun refer to the us of time in interperson relationship to convei
mean attitud and desir if the respond is late in keep an appoint for
exampl thi might convei a lack of interest in or an avoid of the interview
the most import chronem techniqu us by interview is in the time of question
the interview can control the length of paus and the rate of hi speech thi is call
pace the interview can also control the length of time after the respond ha finish a
sentenc befor anoth question is pose thi is call the silent probe
pace is on of the princip nonverb method of set an appropri mood the tens
interview often commun anxieti by a rapidfir rate of speech which in turn might
increas anxieti in the respond to establish the more thought delib mood
usual need to stimul free associ the interview must take the initi in set
a more relax deliber pace
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3219
kinet
kinet commun involv the us of bodi movement to convei mean even though
postur hand and feet all commun interview tend to focu attent on the face
and ar more accur in their judgment of other if thei can see facial movement and
express when the interview concentr on facial express the primari interest is
ey contact ey contact primarili commun the desir to make or avoid
commun a person who feel shame normal will drop the ey to avoid the glanc
of anoth thi is not onli to avoid see disapprov but to conceal person shame
and confus
paralinguist
paralinguist commun involv the us of volum pitch and voic qualiti to convei
mean on of the basic differ between written and verbal commun is that
oral speech give the full rang of nonverb accompani for exampl a ye respons
might not mean complet agreement it depend on the wai in which the ye is said
the interview must learn to listen and observ chang in the nonverb accompani
and whether the verbal and nonverb ar harmoni reinforc or tend to give
conflict signal as in case where the respond is try to deceiv the interview ten
emot have been studi by social scientist anger fear happi jealousi love
nervous pride sad satisfact and sympathi some emot like anger and
nervous can be more reliabl identifi than the other
methodolog
respond must perceiv that thei have someth in common with the interview and
should feel good about the situat thi is best accomplish when respond perceiv
the interview as be open and friendli the follow techniqu promot thi
percept
physic contact
make physic contact with the person be interview by shake hand make
physic contact help break down psycholog barrier to commun the interview
should not invad the respond person space howev as thi might make the
person uncomfort
interview theori and applic investig
3220 2011 fraud examin manual
the interview us bodi languag to creat the impress of trust dure the interview by
gestur openli with the arm clasp hand togeth and lean forward in a manner to
indic interest rapport can be establish through verbal techniqu such as us soft
word agre with the respond and avoid neg term
when contact a respond for the first time the interview must identifi himself thi
is best accomplish by state your name unless a specif reason exist the interview
should gener omit a titl the less formal in gener the better in some instanc
state a titl cannot be avoid in those case the titl us should not conjur up emot
or possibl fear in the mind of the respond
dont interview more than on person
on of the basic rule is to question onli on person at a time the testimoni of on
respond will invari influenc the testimoni of anoth there ar few hard and fast
rule but thi is on of them
privaci
anoth basic rule is to conduct interview under condit of privaci the interview is
best conduct out of the sight and sound of friend rel or fellow employe peopl
ar veri reluct to furnish inform within the hear of other
establish transit statement
onc the interview ha a commit for assist he must describ in more detail the
purpos of the interview thi is done with the transit statement us to provid a
legitim basi for the inquiri and to explain to respond how thei fit into the inquiri
thi is usual done by mean of a broad descript when interview employe in the
same compani most of them alreadi presum the legitimaci of your request for assist
after describ the basic natur of the inquiri with the transit statement the
interview should seek a second commit for assist
exampl
interview
it pretti routin realli im gather some inform about the purchas function and
how it is suppos to work it would be help to me if i could start by ask you to tell me
about your job okai
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3221
when interview stranger the interview might have to describ with more particular
how the respond assist is need thi can be accomplish by on or more of the
method illustr below where the interview is talk to an outsid vendor
exampl
interview
it pretti routin realli as i sai i work for bailei book and iv been assign a project
to gather some inform about some of our procedur and becaus you work for on of our
vendor i thought it might be help to talk to you okai
or
it pretti routin realli i have been ask by the compani to gather inform on some of
our procedur i thought you might be abl to help by answer a few question okai
or
it pretti routin realli i have been ask by the compani to gather some inform and
thei suggest i might contact you okai
seek continu agreement
throughout the interview process from the introduct to the close the interview
should attempt to phrase question so that thei can be answer ye it is easier for peopl
to repli in the affirm than the neg
exampl
interview
okai
can you help me
that okai isnt it
do not invad bodi space
dure the introductori part of the interview the interview gener should remain at a
distanc of four to six feet do not invad the person zone closer than about three feet
as it might make the respond uncomfort
interview theori and applic investig
3222 2011 fraud examin manual
