2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions/Observe Reactions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Observe Reactions 
The interviewer must be skilled in interpreting the respondent’s reactions to questions. Social 
scientists say that more than half of the communication between individuals is nonspoken. 
The interviewer must, therefore, observe systematically, though in a nondescript manner, the 
various responses the respondent gives during the course of the conversation.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.217 
To observe the respondent’s reactions, move from nonsensitive to sensitive questions. That 
is, the interview process should begin by posing nonsensitive questions while establishing 
rapport. Asking nonsensitive questions will help the interviewer find some common ground 
on which to connect with the respondent.  
 
Sensitive questions should be scrupulously avoided until well into the interview. And then 
such questions should be asked only after careful deliberation and planning. Moreover, all 
questions should be nonaccusatory. Nothing closes up the lines of communication in an 
interview like an accusatory question. If the respondent starts to become uncomfortable with 
the questioning, the interviewer should move into a different area and approach the sensitive 
question later from a different vantage point. 
 
Likewise, interviewers are encouraged to formulate their questions in a way that will not 
bring about a strong emotional reaction from the respondent, and emotive words of all types 
should be avoided during the introductory phase. Such words put people on the defensive, 
and they are more reluctant to answer and to cooperate. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of Use  
Investigation Inquiry  
Audit Review  
Interview Ask a few questions  
Embezzle/steal/theft Shortage or paperwork 
problems
  
Furthermore, some people will not volunteer information; they must be asked. The 
interviewer must not be reluctant to ask sensitive questions after the proper basis has been 
established. If the interviewer poses the question with confidence and with the attitude that 
an answer is expected, the respondent will be much more likely to furnish the requested 
information. If the interviewer is apologetic or lacks confidence in the question, the 
respondent is much less likely to answer. 
 
After the interviewer establishes rapport through normal conversation, the respondent’s 
reactions are observed. This will serve as a baseline for observing behavior when questions 
that are more sensitive are asked. If the respondent’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors are 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.218   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
inconsistent from one type of question to another, the interviewer will attempt to determine 
why.  
 
To determine why the respondent’s behaviors are inconsistent, the interviewer must be 
knowledgeable about nonverbal clues of behavior, which generally fall within one of the 
following categories: proxemics, chr onemics, kinetics, or paralinguistics. 
 
PROXEMICS 
Proxemic communication is the use of interpersonal space to convey meaning. The relationship 
between the interviewer and respondent is both a cause and effect of proxemic behavior. If 
the distance between the interviewer and the respondent is greater, there is more of a 
tendency for them to watch each other’s eyes for clues to meaning.  
 
It is important to position the respondent’s chair and the interviewer’s chair at an acceptable 
distance. The correct conversational distance varies from one culture to another. In the 
Middle East, the distance is quite short; in Latin America, equals of the same sex carry on a 
conversation at a much closer distance than in North America. Often, as the subject matter 
of the interview changes, the interviewer can note the changes in the proxemic behavior of 
the respondent. If the person is free to back away, he might do so when the topic becomes 
unpleasant or sensitive.  
 
CHRONEMICS 
Chronemic communication refers to the use of time in interpersonal relationships to convey 
meaning, attitudes, and desires. If the respondent is late in keeping an appointment, for 
example, this might convey a lack of interest in or an avoidance of the interview.  
 
The most important chronemic technique used by interviewers is in the timing of questions. 
The interviewer can control the length of pauses and the rate of his speech. This is called 
pacing. The interviewer can also control the length of time after the respondent has finished a 
sentence before another question is posed. This is called the silent probe. 
 
Pacing is one of the principal nonverbal methods of setting an appropriate mood. The tense 
interviewer often communicates anxiety by a rapid-fire rate of speech, which in turn might 
increase anxiety in the respondent. To establish the more thoughtful, deliberative mood 
usually needed to stimulate free association, the interviewer must take the initiative in setting 
a more relaxed, deliberate pace. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.219 
KINETICS 
Kinetic communication involves the use of body movement to convey meaning. Even though 
posture, hands, and feet all communicate, interviewers tend to focus attention on the face 
and are more accurate in their judgments of others if they can see facial movements and 
expressions. When the interviewer concentrates on facial expressions, the primary interest is 
eye contact. Eye contact primarily communicates the desire to make or avoid 
communication. A person who feels shame normally will drop the eyes to avoid the glance 
of another. This is not only to avoid seeing disapproval, but to conceal personal shame  
and confusion. 
 
PARALINGUISTICS 
Paralinguistic communication involves the use of volume, pitch, and voice quality to convey 
meaning. One of the basic differences between  written and verbal communication is that 
oral speech gives the full range of nonverbal accompaniment. For example, a “yes” response 
might not mean complete agreement; it depends on the way in which the “yes” is said. 
 
The interviewer must learn to listen and observe changes in the nonverbal accompaniment 
and whether the verbal and nonverbal are harmoniously reinforcing or tend to give 
conflicting signals, as in cases where the respondent is trying to deceive the interviewer. Ten 
emotions have been studied by social scientists: anger, fear, happiness, jealousy, love, 
nervousness, pride, sadness, satisfaction, and sympathy. Some emotions, like anger and 
nervousness, can be more reliably identified than the others. 
 



:


observ reaction
the interview must be skill in interpret the respond reaction to question social
scientist sai that more than half of the commun between individu is nonspoken
the interview must therefor observ systemat though in a nondescript manner the
variou respons the respond give dure the cours of the convers
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3217
to observ the respond reaction move from nonsensit to sensit question that
is the interview process should begin by pose nonsensit question while establish
rapport ask nonsensit question will help the interview find some common ground
on which to connect with the respond
sensit question should be scrupul avoid until well into the interview and then
such question should be ask onli after care deliber and plan moreov all
question should be nonaccusatori noth close up the line of commun in an
interview like an accusatori question if the respond start to becom uncomfort with
the question the interview should move into a differ area and approach the sensit
question later from a differ vantag point
likewis interview ar encourag to formul their question in a wai that will not
bring about a strong emot reaction from the respond and emot word of all type
should be avoid dure the introductori phase such word put peopl on the defens
and thei ar more reluct to answer and to cooper
exampl
instead of us
investig inquiri
audit review
interview ask a few question
embezzlestealtheft shortag or paperwork
problem
furthermor some peopl will not volunt inform thei must be ask the
interview must not be reluct to ask sensit question after the proper basi ha been
establish if the interview pose the question with confid and with the attitud that
an answer is expect the respond will be much more like to furnish the request
inform if the interview is apologet or lack confid in the question the
respond is much less like to answer
after the interview establish rapport through normal convers the respond
reaction ar observ thi will serv as a baselin for observ behavior when question
that ar more sensit ar ask if the respond verbal and nonverb behavior ar
interview theori and applic investig
3218 2011 fraud examin manual
inconsist from on type of question to anoth the interview will attempt to determin
why
to determin why the respond behavior ar inconsist the interview must be
knowledg about nonverb clue of behavior which gener fall within on of the
follow categori proxem chr onem kinet or paralinguist
proxem
proxem commun is the us of interperson space to convei mean the relationship
between the interview and respond is both a caus and effect of proxem behavior if
the distanc between the interview and the respond is greater there is more of a
tendenc for them to watch each other ey for clue to mean
it is import to posit the respond chair and the interview chair at an accept
distanc the correct convers distanc vari from on cultur to anoth in the
middl east the distanc is quit short in latin america equal of the same sex carri on a
convers at a much closer distanc than in north america often as the subject matter
of the interview chang the interview can note the chang in the proxem behavior of
the respond if the person is free to back awai he might do so when the topic becom
unpleas or sensit
chronem
chronem commun refer to the us of time in interperson relationship to convei
mean attitud and desir if the respond is late in keep an appoint for
exampl thi might convei a lack of interest in or an avoid of the interview
the most import chronem techniqu us by interview is in the time of question
the interview can control the length of paus and the rate of hi speech thi is call
pace the interview can also control the length of time after the respond ha finish a
sentenc befor anoth question is pose thi is call the silent probe
pace is on of the princip nonverb method of set an appropri mood the tens
interview often commun anxieti by a rapidfir rate of speech which in turn might
increas anxieti in the respond to establish the more thought delib mood
usual need to stimul free associ the interview must take the initi in set
a more relax deliber pace
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3219
kinet
kinet commun involv the us of bodi movement to convei mean even though
postur hand and feet all commun interview tend to focu attent on the face
and ar more accur in their judgment of other if thei can see facial movement and
express when the interview concentr on facial express the primari interest is
ey contact ey contact primarili commun the desir to make or avoid
commun a person who feel shame normal will drop the ey to avoid the glanc
of anoth thi is not onli to avoid see disapprov but to conceal person shame
and confus
paralinguist
paralinguist commun involv the us of volum pitch and voic qualiti to convei
mean on of the basic differ between written and verbal commun is that
oral speech give the full rang of nonverb accompani for exampl a ye respons
might not mean complet agreement it depend on the wai in which the ye is said
the interview must learn to listen and observ chang in the nonverb accompani
and whether the verbal and nonverb ar harmoni reinforc or tend to give
conflict signal as in case where the respond is try to deceiv the interview ten
emot have been studi by social scientist anger fear happi jealousi love
nervous pride sad satisfact and sympathi some emot like anger and
nervous can be more reliabl identifi than the other
