2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions/Physical Contact


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Physical Contact 
Make physical contact with the person being interviewed by shaking hands. Making  
physical contact helps break down psychological barriers to communication. The interviewer 
should not invade the respondent’s personal space, however, as this might make the  
person uncomfortable. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.220   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The interviewer uses body language to create the impression of trust during the interview by 
gesturing openly with the arms, clasping hands together, and leaning forward in a manner to 
indicate interest. Rapport can be established through verbal techniques, such as using soft 
words, agreeing with the respondent, and avoiding negative terms. 
 
When contacting a respondent for the first time, the interviewer must identify himself. This 
is best accomplished by stating your name. Unless a specific reason exists, the interviewer 
should generally omit a title. The less formality in general, the better. In some instances, 
stating a title cannot be avoided. In those cases, the title used should not conjure up emotion 
or possible fear in the mind of the respondent.  
 



:


physic contact
make physic contact with the person be interview by shake hand make
physic contact help break down psycholog barrier to commun the interview
should not invad the respond person space howev as thi might make the
person uncomfort
interview theori and applic investig
3220 2011 fraud examin manual
the interview us bodi languag to creat the impress of trust dure the interview by
gestur openli with the arm clasp hand togeth and lean forward in a manner to
indic interest rapport can be establish through verbal techniqu such as us soft
word agre with the respond and avoid neg term
when contact a respond for the first time the interview must identifi himself thi
is best accomplish by state your name unless a specif reason exist the interview
should gener omit a titl the less formal in gener the better in some instanc
state a titl cannot be avoid in those case the titl us should not conjur up emot
or possibl fear in the mind of the respond
