2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Informational Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Informational Questions 
Informational questions are nonconfrontational, nonthreatening, and are asked for 
information-gathering purposes. The great majority of the interviewer’s questions fall into 
this category. These types of questions may be asked during any of the following types of 
interviews: 
• Interviews to gain an understanding of accounting control systems 
• Interviews concerning documents 
• Interviews to gather information regarding business operations or systems 
• Pre-employment interviews 
  
Informational questions seek to elicit unbiased factual information. The interviewer will be 
alert to inconsistency in facts or behavior.  
 
Question Sequences 
As a general rule, questioning should proceed from the general to the specific; that is, it is 
best to seek general information before seeking details. A variation is to “reach backward” 
with the questions, by beginning with known information and working toward unknown 
areas. An efficient method of doing this is to recount the known information and then frame 
the next question as a logical continuation of the facts previously related. 
 
It is common, especially in accounting and fraud-related matters, for figures or numbers to 
be critical. Unfortunately, some witnesses are unable to recall specific amounts. The 
interviewer can jog the memory of the respondent by comparing unknown items with items 
of known quantity. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“Was the amount of money involved more than last year’s figure?” 
 
Questioning Techniques 
Asking the right question is necessary to conduct an effective interview. By using the right 
questions, the interviewer can improve a whole range of communications skills. 
Informational questions — as well as others — fall into several general categories. But 
generally, informational questions will be one of three types: open, closed, or leading. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.223 
Open Questions 
Open questions are those worded in a way that makes it difficult to answer “yes” or “no.” 
The answer is also not dependent on the question. The typical open question calls for a 
monologue response, and it can be answered in several different ways. During the 
information phase of the interview, the interviewer should endeavor to ask primarily  
open questions. This is to stimulate conversation. Some of the best open questions are 
subtle commands. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Please tell me about your job.” 
 
“Please tell me about the operation of your department.” 
 
“What do you think about this problem?” 
 
“Please describe the procedures to me.” 
 
Closed Questions 
Closed questions are those that require a precise answer: usually “yes” or “no.” Closed 
questions also deal with specifics, such as amounts, dates, and times. As far as possible, 
closed questions should be avoided in the informational part of the interview. They are used 
extensively in closing questions. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“Do you work here?” 
 
“What day of the week did it happen?” 
 
Leading Questions 
Leading questions contain the answer as a part of the question. Most commonly, they are 
used to confirm facts already known. This type of question gives the subject much less room 
to maneuver than an open or closed question because they direct the subject to answer in a 
particular way. Leading questions imply that the interviewer already knows the answer, 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.224   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
asking the subject to confirm what is already known, and they can be particularly effective in 
interview situations. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“So there have been no changes in the operation since last year?” 
 
“Are you still employed by the Bailey Books Corporation?” 
 
“You got promoted, right?” 
 
“Don’t you get your income from various sources?” 
 
Double-Negative Questions 
Questions or statements containing double-negatives are confusing and often suggest an 
answer opposite to the correct one. They should not be used. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Didn’t you suspect that something wasn’t right?” (What does a negative answer  
mean here?)  
 
Complex Questions 
Complex questions and statements are too complicated to be easily understood, cover more 
than one subject or topic, require more than one answer, and/or require a complicated 
answer. They should be avoided. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What are your duties here, and ho w long have you been employed?” 
 
Attitude Questions 
The attitude of the interviewer can be conveyed by the structure of the question or 
statement, and by the manner in which the question is asked. When the interviewer wishes 
to establish a friendly mood, these questions can be employed. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.225 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“How are you doing this morning, Ms. De La Garza?” 
 
“Do you like sports?” 
 
It is always a good idea, however, to ask a question for which you know beforehand 
that the answer will be “yes.”  
 
Controlled Answer Techniques 
Controlled answer techniques or statements might be used to stimulate a desired answer or 
impression. These techniques direct the interview toward a specific point. For example, it 
might be possible to get a person to admit knowledge of a matter by phrasing the question 
like this, “I understand you were present when the internal controls were developed; would you please describe 
how they were constructed?” This phrasing provides a stronger incentive for the respondent to 
admit knowledge than does, “Were you present when the internal controls were developed?” 
 
To stimulate the person to agree to talk or provide information, you might use a prompt, 
such as, “Because you are not involved in this matter, I am sure you would not mind discussing it with me.” 
This provides a stronger incentive to cooperate than, “Do you have any objections to telling me 
what you know?” Avoid negative construction, such as, “I don’t guess you would mind answering a 
few questions?” 
 
Free Narratives 
The free narrative is an orderly, continuous account of an event or incident, given with or 
without prompting. It is used to get a quick résumé of what is known about a matter. Be 
sure to designate specifically the occurrence that you wish to discuss. 
 
Sometimes the respondent must be controlled to prevent unnecessary digression. Otherwise, 
use a minimum of interruptions, and do not stop the narrative without good reason. The 
respondent will sometimes provide valuable clues when talking about things that are only 
partially related to the matter under inquiry. 
 
Suggestions 
Below are suggestions to improve the quality of the interview during the information-gathering 
phase. 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.226   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Begin by asking questions that are not likely to cause the respondent to become 
defensive or hostile. 
• Ask the questions in a manner that will develop the facts in the order of their 
occurrence, or in some other systematic order. 
• Ask only one question at a time, and frame the question so that only one answer  
is required. 
• Ask straightforward and frank questions; generally avoid shrewd approaches. 
• Give the respondent ample time to answer; do not rush. 
• Try to help the respondent remember, but do not suggest answers; and be careful not to 
imply any particular answer by facial expressions, gestures, methods of asking questions, 
or types of questions asked. 
• Repeat or rephrase questions, if necessary, to get the desired facts. 
• Be sure you understand the answers, and if they are not perfectly clear, have the 
respondent interpret them at the time instead of asking for more explanation later. 
• Give the respondent an opportunity to qualify his answers. 
• Separate facts from inferences. 
• Have the respondent give comparisons by percentages, fractions, estimates of time and 
distance, and other such comparisons to ascertain accuracy. 
• Get all of the facts; almost every respondent can give you information beyond what was 
initially provided. 
• After the respondent has given a narrative account, ask questions about every item that 
has been discussed. 
• Upon conclusion of the direct questioning, ask the respondent to summarize the 
information given. Then summarize the facts as you understand them, and have the 
respondent verify that these conclusions are correct. 
 
Methodology  
Once the introduction has been completed, the interviewer needs a transition into the body 
of the interview. This is usually accomplished by asking people an easy question about 
themselves or their duties.  
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.227 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“As I said, I am informally gathering information about Bailey’s operations. I don’t know if 
you can really help me. Can you give me an idea of what you do here?” 
 
Begin with Background Questions 
Assuming the respondent does not have a problem answering the transitional question, the 
interviewer should then ask a series of easy, open questions designed to get the respondent 
to talk about himself. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What is your exact title?” 
 
“What do your responsibilities involve?” 
 
“How long have you been assigned here?” 
 
“What do you like best about your job?” 
 
“What do you like least about your job?” 
 
“What would you eventually like to do for the company?” 
 
“Overall, how do you like your current job?” 
 
Observe Verbal and Nonverbal Behavior 
During the period when the respondent is talking about himself, the interviewer should 
discreetly observe verbal and nonverbal behavior. 
 
Ask Nonleading (Open) Questions 
Open questioning techniques are used almost exclusively in the informational phase of the 
interview. The questions must be inquisitory and not accusatory. Remember, the most 
effective question is constructed as a subtle command. 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.228   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Please tell me about ________.” 
 
“Please tell me about your current job procedures.” 
 
“Please tell me what paperwork you are responsible for.” 
 
“Please explain the chain of command in your department.” 
 
“Please tell me what procedures are in effect to prevent errors in the paperwork.” 
 
“Please explain what you understand to be the system of checks and balances (or internal 
controls) in your department.” 
 
“Please explain where you see areas that need to be improved in the system of checks and 
balances in your department.” 
 
Once the respondent has answered open questions, the interviewer can go back and review 
the facts in greater detail. If the answers are inconsistent, try to clarify them. But the 
interviewer should not challenge the honesty or integrity of the respondent at this point. 
 
Approach Sensitive Questions Carefully  
Words such as “routine questions” can be used to play down the significance of the inquiry. 
It is important for information-gathering purposes that the interviewer does not react 
excessively to the respondent’s statements. The interviewer should not express shock, 
disgust, or similar emotions during the interview. Following are examples of ways to  
discuss fraud within a company. The questions are posed in a hypothetical way to avoid 
being accusatory. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Part of my job is to prevent and uncover waste, fraud, and abuse. You understand that, don’t 
you?” 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.229 
“Please tell me where you think the company is wasting assets or money.” 
 
“Where do you think the company is vulnerable to someone here abusing their position?” 
 
Dealing with Resistance 
There is always the possibility that the respondent will refuse a request for interview. When 
the respondent and the interviewer have no connection, studies show that as many as 65 
percent of the respondents will refuse an interview if contacted first by telephone. In 
contrast, one study concluded that only one-third of respondents will be reluctant to be 
interviewed when contacted in person. The more unpleasant the topic, the more likely the 
respondent is to refuse.  
 
With inexperienced interviewers, there is a danger that the interviewer will perceive 
resistance when there is none. As a result, the interviewer might become defensive. It is 
incumbent upon the interviewer to overcome such feelings to complete the interview. The 
following are specific examples of the types of resistance that will be encountered and how 
to try to overcome them. 
 
“I’m Too Busy” 
When the interviewer contacts the respondent without a previous appointment, there is a 
possibility that the respondent will be too busy at the moment to cooperate. “I’m too busy” 
is also used as an excuse for the real source of the person’s resistance, which might be 
lethargy, ego threat, or a dislike of talking to strangers. These situations can be diffused by 
the interviewer stressing that: 
• The interview will be short. 
• The interviewer is already there. 
• The project is important. 
• The interview will not be difficult. 
• The interviewer needs help. 
 
“I Don’t Know Anything About It” 
The interviewer will sometimes get this response immediately after stating the purpose of the 
interview. This resistance is typically diffused by accepting the statement, and then 
responding with a question. For example, if a person says, “I don’t know anything,” a typical 
response would be: 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.230   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I see. What do your duties involve, then?” 
OR 
“Well, that was one of the things I wanted to find out. Do you know about internal controls, 
then?” 
 
“I Don’t Remember” 
Usually, this is not an expression of resistance. Instead, it is an expression of modesty, 
tentativeness, or caution. One of the best ways to respond is to simply remain silent while 
the person is deliberating. He is saying, in effect, “Give me a moment to think.” If this is not 
successful, the best way to counter is to pose an alternate, narrower question. As with other 
symptoms of resistance, the resistance is accepted and diffused, and an alternate question  
is posed. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Mr. McGuire, I understand you might not remember the entire transaction. Do you remember 
if it was more than $10,000?” 
OR 
“It’s okay if you don’t remember the details. Do you remember how it made you react at the 
time?” 
 
“What Do You Mean by That?” 
When the respondent asks this question, it might represent a symptom of mild resistance 
with which the respondent is attempting to shift the attention from himself to the 
interviewer. It also might be a way for the respondent to stall for time while deliberating. Or 
it could be that the respondent is not sure what the interviewer’s question means. The 
interviewer should typically react to such a question by treating it as a mere request for 
clarification. The interviewer should not become defensive; to do so generally will escalate 
the resistance.  
 
Difficult People 
The interviewer will invariably encounter a few difficult people. There are five common-
 sense steps to take with such people.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.231 
Don’t React 
Sometimes a respondent will insist on giving the interviewer a “hard time” for no apparent 
reason, though, in reality, there can be a multitude of reasons why the person refuses to 
cooperate. There are three natural reactions for the interviewer verbally assailed by the 
respondent: to strike back, to give in, or to terminate the interview. None of these tactics is 
satisfactory, as none leads to a productive interview. Instead, the interviewer should 
consciously ensure that he does not react to anger with hostility.  
 
Disarm the Person 
A common mistake is to try to reason with an unreceptive person. You must disarm the 
hostile person. The best tactic is surprise. If the person is stonewalling, he expects the 
interviewer to apply pressure; if attacking, the person expects the interviewer to resist. To 
disarm the person, listen, acknowledge the point, and agree wherever you can. 
 
Change Tactics 
In some situations, changing tactics to reduce hostility might be the only viable option. This 
means casting what the respondent says in a form that directs attention back to the problem 
and to the interests of both sides. This normally means asking the respondent what he would 
do to solve the problem. 
 
Make It Easy to Say “Yes” 
In trying to negotiate with difficult people, the usual tactic is for the interviewer to make a 
statement and attempt to get the respondent to agree with it. A better choice is to agree with 
one of the respondent’s statements  and go from there. It is better to break statements into 
smaller ones that would be difficult to disagree with. This helps the difficult person  
save face.  
 
Make It Hard to Say “No” 
One way of making it difficult to say “no” is by asking re ality-based (what-if) questions. 
These types of questions are used to get the respondent to think of the consequences of  
not agreeing.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What do you think will happen if we don’t agree?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.232   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“What do you think I will have to do from here?” 
 
“What will you do?” 
 
Volatile Interviews 
A volatile interview  is one that has the potential to bring about strong emotional reactions in 
the respondent. Typical volatile interviews involve close friends and relatives of a miscreant, 
co-conspirators, and similar individuals. 
 
The personality characteristics of those involved in the volatile interview vary. The types 
listed represent the most common personality characteristics associated with volatile 
interviews. Some individuals, by nature, are resentful of authority figures, such as fraud 
examiners and law enforcement officers. 
 
Friends, relatives, and romantic interests of a target often make for a difficult interview. They 
perceive that the examiner is “out to get” someone close to them.  
 
Physical Symptoms 
In volatile interviews, the individual typically reacts, rather than thinks; and frequently the 
individual is openly hostile to the interviewer. Individuals experiencing heightened emotions 
frequently have a dry mouth and tend to lick their lips and swallow more frequently than 
normal. Throat clearing is also an audible sign of emotion. Restlessness can be indicated by 
fidgeting, shifting in a chair, and foot-tapping. People under emotional stress frequently 
perspire more than normal. 
 
Under stress, a person’s complexion frequently changes. People might look red or flushed, 
or might appear to be pale. During stress, the heart beats more frequently, and a keen 
observer can see the carotid artery actually pulsate. The carotid artery is the large artery on 
each side of the neck. 
 
If an individual in a normal situation maintains eye contact, an avoidance of eye contact 
could indicate that he is under stress. It is important to realize that symptoms are not present 
in all emotional situations.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.233 
Other Considerations 
There should be two interviewers involved in potentially volatile situations. This procedure 
provides psychological strength for the interviewers. Additionally, the second person can 
serve as a witness in the event the interview turns bad.  
 
Surprise should be employed in any interview that is considered potentially volatile. In many 
instances, the potentially volatile respondent is unaware that he is going to be questioned, 
and will therefore be off guard. If the interview is not conducted by surprise, the interviewer 
runs the risk of the respondent not showing up, showing up with a witness, or being present 
with counsel. 
 
In a potentially volatile interview, the order of questions should be out of sequence. This is 
to keep the volatile respondent from knowing exactly the nature of the inquiry, and where it 
is leading. Although the interviewer will endeavor to obtain information regarding who, 
what, why, when, where, and how, the order of the questioning will vary from that of other 
interviews. This technique is especially important in situations where the respondent might 
be attempting to protect himself.  
 
The hypothetical question is generally considered to be less threatening, and is, therefore, 
ideally suited for the potentially volatile interview. For example, if you are interviewing Mr. 
Smith regarding Mr. Jones, rather than saying, “Did Mr. Jones do it?” ask, “Is there any reason why 
Mr. Jones would have done it?” 
 
Overcoming Objections 
Volatile witnesses voice numerous objections to being interviewed. Some of the most 
common objections (along with suggested responses) are listed below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I don’t want to be involved.” 
 
Interviewer: 
The interviewer should answer this question by pointing out that he would not be 
there, asking questions, if the respondent were not involved. Point out that you are 
saving the respondent trouble by discussing the matter “informally” (do not say “off 
the record”). 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.234   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Respondent : 
“Why should I talk to you?” 
 
Interviewer: 
The interviewer should answer that he is trying to clear up a problem, and that the 
respondent’s assistance is important. 
 
Respondent : 
“You can’t prove that!” 
 
Interviewer: 
The interviewer should tell the person that he is not trying to prove or disprove; you 
are simply gathering information. 
 
Respondent : 
“ You can’t make me talk!” 
 
Interviewer: 
Tell the person that you are not attempting to make him do anything; you are trying 
to resolve a problem, and would deeply appreciate help.  
 
 



:


inform question
inform question ar nonconfront nonthreaten and ar ask for
informationgath purpos the great major of the interview question fall into
thi categori these type of question mai be ask dure ani of the follow type of
interview
interview to gain an understand of account control system
interview concern document
interview to gather inform regard busi oper or system
preemploy interview
inform question seek to elicit unbias factual inform the interview will be
alert to inconsist in fact or behavior
question sequenc
as a gener rule question should proce from the gener to the specif that is it is
best to seek gener inform befor seek detail a variat is to reach backward
with the question by begin with known inform and work toward unknown
area an effici method of do thi is to recount the known inform and then frame
the next question as a logic continu of the fact previous relat
it is common especi in account and fraudrel matter for figur or number to
be critic unfortun some wit ar unabl to recal specif amount the
interview can jog the memori of the respond by compar unknown item with item
of known quantiti
exampl
interview
wa the amount of monei involv more than last year figur
question techniqu
ask the right question is necessari to conduct an effect interview by us the right
question the interview can improv a whole rang of commun skill
inform question as well as other fall into sever gener categori but
gener inform question will be on of three type open close or lead
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3223
open question
open question ar those word in a wai that make it difficult to answer ye or no
the answer is also not depend on the question the typic open question call for a
monologu respons and it can be answer in sever differ wai dure the
inform phase of the interview the interview should endeavor to ask primarili
open question thi is to stimul convers some of the best open question ar
subtl command
exampl
interview
pleas tell me about your job
pleas tell me about the oper of your depart
what do you think about thi problem
pleas describ the procedur to me
close question
close question ar those that requir a precis answer usual ye or no close
question also deal with specif such as amount date and time as far as possibl
close question should be avoid in the inform part of the interview thei ar us
extens in close question
exampl
interview
do you work here
what dai of the week did it happen
lead question
lead question contain the answer as a part of the question most commonli thei ar
us to confirm fact alreadi known thi type of question give the subject much less room
to maneuv than an open or close question becaus thei direct the subject to answer in a
particular wai lead question impli that the interview alreadi know the answer
interview theori and applic investig
3224 2011 fraud examin manual
ask the subject to confirm what is alreadi known and thei can be particularli effect in
interview situat
exampl
interview
so there have been no chang in the oper sinc last year
ar you still emploi by the bailei book corpor
you got promot right
dont you get your incom from variou sourc
doubleneg question
question or statement contain doubleneg ar confus and often suggest an
answer opposit to the correct on thei should not be us
exampl
interview
didnt you suspect that someth wasnt right what doe a neg answer
mean here
complex question
complex question and statement ar too complic to be easili understood cover more
than on subject or topic requir more than on answer andor requir a complic
answer thei should be avoid
exampl
interview
what ar your duti here and ho w long have you been emploi
attitud question
the attitud of the interview can be convei by the structur of the question or
statement and by the manner in which the question is ask when the interview wish
to establish a friendli mood these question can be emploi
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3225
exampl
interview
how ar you do thi morn ms de la garza
do you like sport
it is alwai a good idea howev to ask a question for which you know beforehand
that the answer will be ye
control answer techniqu
control answer techniqu or statement might be us to stimul a desir answer or
impress these techniqu direct the interview toward a specif point for exampl it
might be possibl to get a person to admit knowledg of a matter by phrase the question
like thi i understand you were present when the intern control were develop would you pleas describ
how thei were construct thi phrase provid a stronger incent for the respond to
admit knowledg than doe were you present when the intern control were develop
to stimul the person to agre to talk or provid inform you might us a prompt
such as becaus you ar not involv in thi matter i am sure you would not mind discuss it with me
thi provid a stronger incent to cooper than do you have ani object to tell me
what you know avoid neg construct such as i dont guess you would mind answer a
few question
free narr
the free narr is an orderli continu account of an event or incid given with or
without prompt it is us to get a quick rsum of what is known about a matter be
sure to design specif the occurr that you wish to discuss
sometim the respond must be control to prevent unnecessari digress otherwis
us a minimum of interrupt and do not stop the narr without good reason the
respond will sometim provid valuabl clue when talk about thing that ar onli
partial relat to the matter under inquiri
suggest
below ar suggest to improv the qualiti of the interview dure the informationgath
phase
interview theori and applic investig
3226 2011 fraud examin manual
begin by ask question that ar not like to caus the respond to becom
defens or hostil
ask the question in a manner that will develop the fact in the order of their
occurr or in some other systemat order
ask onli on question at a time and frame the question so that onli on answer
is requir
ask straightforward and frank question gener avoid shrewd approach
give the respond ampl time to answer do not rush
try to help the respond rememb but do not suggest answer and be care not to
impli ani particular answer by facial express gestur method of ask question
or type of question ask
repeat or rephras question if necessari to get the desir fact
be sure you understand the answer and if thei ar not perfectli clear have the
respond interpret them at the time instead of ask for more explan later
give the respond an opportun to qualifi hi answer
separ fact from infer
have the respond give comparison by percentag fraction estim of time and
distanc and other such comparison to ascertain accuraci
get all of the fact almost everi respond can give you inform beyond what wa
initi provid
after the respond ha given a narr account ask question about everi item that
ha been discuss
upon conclus of the direct question ask the respond to summar the
inform given then summar the fact as you understand them and have the
respond verifi that these conclus ar correct
methodolog
onc the introduct ha been complet the interview need a transit into the bodi
of the interview thi is usual accomplish by ask peopl an easi question about
themselv or their duti
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3227
exampl
interview
as i said i am inform gather inform about bailei oper i dont know if
you can realli help me can you give me an idea of what you do here
begin with background question
assum the respond doe not have a problem answer the transit question the
interview should then ask a seri of easi open question design to get the respond
to talk about himself
exampl
interview
what is your exact titl
what do your respons involv
how long have you been assign here
what do you like best about your job
what do you like least about your job
what would you eventu like to do for the compani
overal how do you like your current job
observ verbal and nonverb behavior
dure the period when the respond is talk about himself the interview should
discreetli observ verbal and nonverb behavior
ask nonlead open question
open question techniqu ar us almost exclus in the inform phase of the
interview the question must be inquisitori and not accusatori rememb the most
effect question is construct as a subtl command
interview theori and applic investig
3228 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
pleas tell me about
pleas tell me about your current job procedur
pleas tell me what paperwork you ar respons for
pleas explain the chain of command in your depart
pleas tell me what procedur ar in effect to prevent error in the paperwork
pleas explain what you understand to be the system of check and balanc or intern
control in your depart
pleas explain where you see area that need to be improv in the system of check and
balanc in your depart
onc the respond ha answer open question the interview can go back and review
the fact in greater detail if the answer ar inconsist try to clarifi them but the
interview should not challeng the honesti or integr of the respond at thi point
approach sensit question carefulli
word such as routin question can be us to plai down the signific of the inquiri
it is import for informationgath purpos that the interview doe not react
excess to the respond statement the interview should not express shock
disgust or similar emot dure the interview follow ar exampl of wai to
discuss fraud within a compani the question ar pose in a hypothet wai to avoid
be accusatori
exampl
interview
part of my job is to prevent and uncov wast fraud and abus you understand that dont
you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3229
pleas tell me where you think the compani is wast asset or monei
where do you think the compani is vulner to someon here abus their posit
deal with resist
there is alwai the possibl that the respond will refus a request for interview when
the respond and the interview have no connect studi show that as mani as 65
percent of the respond will refus an interview if contact first by telephon in
contrast on studi conclud that onli onethird of respond will be reluct to be
interview when contact in person the more unpleas the topic the more like the
respond is to refus
with inexperienc interview there is a danger that the interview will perceiv
resist when there is none as a result the interview might becom defens it is
incumb upon the interview to overcom such feel to complet the interview the
follow ar specif exampl of the type of resist that will be encount and how
to try to overcom them
im too busi
when the interview contact the respond without a previou appoint there is a
possibl that the respond will be too busi at the moment to cooper im too busi
is also us as an excus for the real sourc of the person resist which might be
lethargi ego threat or a dislik of talk to stranger these situat can be diffus by
the interview stress that
the interview will be short
the interview is alreadi there
the project is import
the interview will not be difficult
the interview need help
i dont know anyth about it
the interview will sometim get thi respons immedi after state the purpos of the
interview thi resist is typic diffus by accept the statement and then
respond with a question for exampl if a person sai i dont know anyth a typic
respons would be
interview theori and applic investig
3230 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
i see what do your duti involv then
or
well that wa on of the thing i want to find out do you know about intern control
then
i dont rememb
usual thi is not an express of resist instead it is an express of modesti
tent or caution on of the best wai to respond is to simpli remain silent while
the person is deliber he is sai in effect give me a moment to think if thi is not
success the best wai to counter is to pose an altern narrow question as with other
symptom of resist the resist is accept and diffus and an altern question
is pose
exampl
interview
mr mcguir i understand you might not rememb the entir transact do you rememb
if it wa more than 10000
or
it okai if you dont rememb the detail do you rememb how it made you react at the
time
what do you mean by that
when the respond ask thi question it might repres a symptom of mild resist
with which the respond is attempt to shift the attent from himself to the
interview it also might be a wai for the respond to stall for time while deliber or
it could be that the respond is not sure what the interview question mean the
interview should typic react to such a question by treat it as a mere request for
clarif the interview should not becom defens to do so gener will escal
the resist
difficult peopl
the interview will invari encount a few difficult peopl there ar five common
sens step to take with such peopl
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3231
dont react
sometim a respond will insist on give the interview a hard time for no appar
reason though in realiti there can be a multitud of reason why the person refus to
cooper there ar three natur reaction for the interview verbal assail by the
respond to strike back to give in or to termin the interview none of these tactic is
satisfactori as none lead to a product interview instead the interview should
conscious ensur that he doe not react to anger with hostil
disarm the person
a common mistak is to try to reason with an unrecept person you must disarm the
hostil person the best tactic is surpris if the person is stonewal he expect the
interview to appli pressur if attack the person expect the interview to resist to
disarm the person listen acknowledg the point and agre wherev you can
chang tactic
in some situat chang tactic to reduc hostil might be the onli viabl option thi
mean cast what the respond sai in a form that direct attent back to the problem
and to the interest of both side thi normal mean ask the respond what he would
do to solv the problem
make it easi to sai ye
in try to negoti with difficult peopl the usual tactic is for the interview to make a
statement and attempt to get the respond to agre with it a better choic is to agre with
on of the respond statement and go from there it is better to break statement into
smaller on that would be difficult to disagre with thi help the difficult person
save face
make it hard to sai no
on wai of make it difficult to sai no is by ask re alitybas whatif question
these type of question ar us to get the respond to think of the consequ of
not agre
exampl
interview
what do you think will happen if we dont agre
interview theori and applic investig
3232 2011 fraud examin manual
what do you think i will have to do from here
what will you do
volatil interview
a volatil interview is on that ha the potenti to bring about strong emot reaction in
the respond typic volatil interview involv close friend and rel of a miscreant
coconspir and similar individu
the person characterist of those involv in the volatil interview vari the type
list repres the most common person characterist associ with volatil
interview some individu by natur ar resent of author figur such as fraud
examin and law enforc offic
friend rel and romant interest of a target often make for a difficult interview thei
perceiv that the examin is out to get someon close to them
physic symptom
in volatil interview the individu typic react rather than think and frequent the
individu is openli hostil to the interview individu experienc heighten emot
frequent have a dry mouth and tend to lick their lip and swallow more frequent than
normal throat clear is also an audibl sign of emot restless can be indic by
fidget shift in a chair and foottap peopl under emot stress frequent
perspir more than normal
under stress a person complexion frequent chang peopl might look red or flush
or might appear to be pale dure stress the heart beat more frequent and a keen
observ can see the carotid arteri actual pulsat the carotid arteri is the larg arteri on
each side of the neck
if an individu in a normal situat maintain ey contact an avoid of ey contact
could indic that he is under stress it is import to realiz that symptom ar not present
in all emot situat
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3233
other consider
there should be two interview involv in potenti volatil situat thi procedur
provid psycholog strength for the interview addition the second person can
serv as a wit in the event the interview turn bad
surpris should be emploi in ani interview that is consid potenti volatil in mani
instanc the potenti volatil respond is unawar that he is go to be question
and will therefor be off guard if the interview is not conduct by surpris the interview
run the risk of the respond not show up show up with a wit or be present
with counsel
in a potenti volatil interview the order of question should be out of sequenc thi is
to keep the volatil respond from know exactli the natur of the inquiri and where it
is lead although the interview will endeavor to obtain inform regard who
what why when where and how the order of the question will vari from that of other
interview thi techniqu is especi import in situat where the respond might
be attempt to protect himself
the hypothet question is gener consid to be less threaten and is therefor
ideal suit for the potenti volatil interview for exampl if you ar interview mr
smith regard mr jone rather than sai did mr jone do it ask is there ani reason why
mr jone would have done it
overcom object
volatil wit voic numer object to be interview some of the most
common object along with suggest respons ar list below
exampl
respond
i dont want to be involv
interview
the interview should answer thi question by point out that he would not be
there ask question if the respond were not involv point out that you ar
save the respond troubl by discuss the matter inform do not sai off
the record
interview theori and applic investig
3234 2011 fraud examin manual
respond
why should i talk to you
interview
the interview should answer that he is try to clear up a problem and that the
respond assist is import
respond
you cant prove that
interview
the interview should tell the person that he is not try to prove or disprov you
ar simpli gather inform
respond
you cant make me talk
interview
tell the person that you ar not attempt to make him do anyth you ar try
to resolv a problem and would deepli appreci help
