2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Informational Questions/Suggestions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Suggestions 
Below are suggestions to improve the quality of the interview during the information-gathering 
phase. 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.226   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Begin by asking questions that are not likely to cause the respondent to become 
defensive or hostile. 
• Ask the questions in a manner that will develop the facts in the order of their 
occurrence, or in some other systematic order. 
• Ask only one question at a time, and frame the question so that only one answer  
is required. 
• Ask straightforward and frank questions; generally avoid shrewd approaches. 
• Give the respondent ample time to answer; do not rush. 
• Try to help the respondent remember, but do not suggest answers; and be careful not to 
imply any particular answer by facial expressions, gestures, methods of asking questions, 
or types of questions asked. 
• Repeat or rephrase questions, if necessary, to get the desired facts. 
• Be sure you understand the answers, and if they are not perfectly clear, have the 
respondent interpret them at the time instead of asking for more explanation later. 
• Give the respondent an opportunity to qualify his answers. 
• Separate facts from inferences. 
• Have the respondent give comparisons by percentages, fractions, estimates of time and 
distance, and other such comparisons to ascertain accuracy. 
• Get all of the facts; almost every respondent can give you information beyond what was 
initially provided. 
• After the respondent has given a narrative account, ask questions about every item that 
has been discussed. 
• Upon conclusion of the direct questioning, ask the respondent to summarize the 
information given. Then summarize the facts as you understand them, and have the 
respondent verify that these conclusions are correct. 
 



:


suggest
below ar suggest to improv the qualiti of the interview dure the informationgath
phase
interview theori and applic investig
3226 2011 fraud examin manual
begin by ask question that ar not like to caus the respond to becom
defens or hostil
ask the question in a manner that will develop the fact in the order of their
occurr or in some other systemat order
ask onli on question at a time and frame the question so that onli on answer
is requir
ask straightforward and frank question gener avoid shrewd approach
give the respond ampl time to answer do not rush
try to help the respond rememb but do not suggest answer and be care not to
impli ani particular answer by facial express gestur method of ask question
or type of question ask
repeat or rephras question if necessari to get the desir fact
be sure you understand the answer and if thei ar not perfectli clear have the
respond interpret them at the time instead of ask for more explan later
give the respond an opportun to qualifi hi answer
separ fact from infer
have the respond give comparison by percentag fraction estim of time and
distanc and other such comparison to ascertain accuraci
get all of the fact almost everi respond can give you inform beyond what wa
initi provid
after the respond ha given a narr account ask question about everi item that
ha been discuss
upon conclus of the direct question ask the respond to summar the
inform given then summar the fact as you understand them and have the
respond verifi that these conclus ar correct
