2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Closing Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Closing Questions 
In routine, informational interviews, closing the interview on a positive note is a must. 
During interviews, closing questions are asked for the following purposes: to reconfirm 
facts, to gather additional facts, and to conclude the interview.  
 
Reconfirm Facts 
It is not unusual for the interviewer to have misunderstood or misinterpreted statements of 
the respondent. Therefore, to ensure that the interviewer understood the information that 
the witness provided, he should review the key facts during the closing phase of the 
interview. However, the interviewer should not attempt to revisit all the information 
provided by the subject, only the facts that are most relevant.  
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.235 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I want to make sure I have my information straight. Let me take a 
minute and summarize what we’ve discussed.” 
 
Go over each of the key facts in summary form. The questions should be closed, so that the 
witness can respond either “yes” or “no.” 
 
Gather Additional Facts 
The closing-questions phase also seeks to obtain facts previously unknown. It provides the 
respondent further opportunity to say whatever they want about the matter at hand.  
If appropriate, the interviewer can ask if there are other documents or witnesses that would 
be helpful to the case. Do not promise confidentiality; instead, say, “I’ll keep your name as quiet 
as possible.” Finally, the interviewer wants to leave the discussion on a positive note.  
 
People being interviewed often do not volunteer additional information regarding other 
witnesses or evidence. The theme, therefore, is to provide the respondent an opportunity to 
furnish further relevant facts or opinions. At the conclusion, attempt to determine which 
facts provided by the respondent are the most relevant. Do not attempt to go over all the 
information a second time.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“You have known Linda Reed Collins eight years, correct?” 
 
“You knew Collins had some financial problems, is that right?” 
 
“You suspected—but didn’t know for sure—th at Collins might have had an improper 
relationship with one of our vendors. Is that correct?” 
 
On absolutely vital facts provided by the respondent, add “Are you sure?”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ Ms. De La Garza, are you sure you su spected Ms. Collins falsified invoices?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.236   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
To obtain additional facts, ask the respondent if there is something else she would like to 
say. This gives the correct impression that the interviewer is interested in all relevant 
information, regardless of which side it favors. Try to actively involve the respondent in 
helping solve the case—“If you were trying to resolve this issue, what would you do?” This 
technique gives the respondent an opportunity to assist the interviewer, and it makes the 
respondent feel like a vital part of the interview. In addition, asking the witness if there is 
anything else they would like to say opens the door for them to provide additional 
information that was not specifically asked for. Similarly, asking the subject if they know of 
someone else whom you might talk to can be helpful and lead to other potential sources  
of information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, there might be someone else I should talk to. Are there documents 
available that relate to this that we haven’t already discussed? If I keep your name as quiet as 
possible, are there any suggestions you can give me  about whom else I might talk to about this?” 
OR 
“Are there any other documents or evidence I might look for?” 
OR 
“If you were in my shoes, what would you do next?” 
 
Conclude the Interview 
Establishing rapport with the subject is important because it helps ensure future 
cooperation. Ask if the respondent has anything else to say. This gives the respondent one 
final time chance to make any statement. Also ask if the interviewer can call with any 
additional questions. It leaves the door open to additional cooperation. 
 
To maintain good will, it is also a good idea to ask respondents if they have been treated 
fairly. It is especially helpful to ask this when the respondent has not been cooperative, or at 
the conclusion of an admission-seeking interview. The interviewer generally should ask the 
question as if it were perfunctory. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, this is just a standard que stion. Do you feel that I have treated you fairly 
in this interview?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.237 
In addition, leave the respondent a business card or a telephone number. Invite the 
respondent to call about anything else relevant.  
 
Also, in some cases, the interviewer should attempt to obtain a commitment that the 
respondent will not discuss the matter. However, this step is not recommended with adverse 
or hostile respondents, it may give them the idea to share the information. Here is an 
example of the proper approach. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“In these kinds of situations, innocent people ca n have their reputation hurt because of rumor 
and innuendo. We don’t want that to happen and neither do you. Therefore, I’d like your 
cooperation. Can I count on you not to discuss this until all the facts are out?” 
 
Finally, the interviewer should shake hands with the respondents and thank them for their 
time and information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I know you have given your time and effort to help me. I appreciate it. 
Good-bye.”  
 
 



:


close question
in routin inform interview close the interview on a posit note is a must
dure interview close question ar ask for the follow purpos to reconfirm
fact to gather addit fact and to conclud the interview
reconfirm fact
it is not unusu for the interview to have misunderstood or misinterpret statement of
the respond therefor to ensur that the interview understood the inform that
the wit provid he should review the kei fact dure the close phase of the
interview howev the interview should not attempt to revisit all the inform
provid by the subject onli the fact that ar most relev
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3235
exampl
interview
ms de la garza i want to make sure i have my inform straight let me take a
minut and summar what weve discuss
go over each of the kei fact in summari form the question should be close so that the
wit can respond either ye or no
gather addit fact
the closingquest phase also seek to obtain fact previous unknown it provid the
respond further opportun to sai whatev thei want about the matter at hand
if appropri the interview can ask if there ar other document or wit that would
be help to the case do not promis confidenti instead sai ill keep your name as quiet
as possibl final the interview want to leav the discuss on a posit note
peopl be interview often do not volunt addit inform regard other
wit or evid the theme therefor is to provid the respond an opportun to
furnish further relev fact or opinion at the conclus attempt to determin which
fact provid by the respond ar the most relev do not attempt to go over all the
inform a second time
exampl
interview
you have known linda reed collin eight year correct
you knew collin had some financi problem is that right
you suspectedbut didnt know for sureth at collin might have had an improp
relationship with on of our vendor is that correct
on absolut vital fact provid by the respond add ar you sure
exampl
interview
ms de la garza ar you sure you su spect ms collin falsifi invoic
interview theori and applic investig
3236 2011 fraud examin manual
to obtain addit fact ask the respond if there is someth els she would like to
sai thi give the correct impress that the interview is interest in all relev
inform regardless of which side it favor try to activ involv the respond in
help solv the caseif you were try to resolv thi issu what would you do thi
techniqu give the respond an opportun to assist the interview and it make the
respond feel like a vital part of the interview in addit ask the wit if there is
anyth els thei would like to sai open the door for them to provid addit
inform that wa not specif ask for similarli ask the subject if thei know of
someon els whom you might talk to can be help and lead to other potenti sourc
of inform
exampl
interview
ms de la garza there might be someon els i should talk to ar there document
avail that relat to thi that we havent alreadi discuss if i keep your name as quiet as
possibl ar there ani suggest you can give me about whom els i might talk to about thi
or
ar there ani other document or evid i might look for
or
if you were in my shoe what would you do next
conclud the interview
establish rapport with the subject is import becaus it help ensur futur
cooper ask if the respond ha anyth els to sai thi give the respond on
final time chanc to make ani statement also ask if the interview can call with ani
addit question it leav the door open to addit cooper
to maintain good will it is also a good idea to ask respond if thei have been treat
fairli it is especi help to ask thi when the respond ha not been cooper or at
the conclus of an admissionseek interview the interview gener should ask the
question as if it were perfunctori
exampl
interview
ms de la garza thi is just a standard que stion do you feel that i have treat you fairli
in thi interview
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3237
in addit leav the respond a busi card or a telephon number invit the
respond to call about anyth els relev
also in some case the interview should attempt to obtain a commit that the
respond will not discuss the matter howev thi step is not recommend with advers
or hostil respond it mai give them the idea to share the inform here is an
exampl of the proper approach
exampl
interview
in these kind of situat innoc peopl ca n have their reput hurt becaus of rumor
and innuendo we dont want that to happen and neither do you therefor id like your
cooper can i count on you not to discuss thi until all the fact ar out
final the interview should shake hand with the respond and thank them for their
time and inform
exampl
interview
ms de la garza i know you have given your time and effort to help me i appreci it
goodby
