2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Assessment Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Assessment Questions 
The closer you get to the admission-seeking interview, the greater chance of facing 
deception. Witnesses might try to cover up what they know, and the target may lie to try to 
convince you that they are not guilty. When you believe the respondent’s answers may be 
deceptive, you should begin asking assessment questions. 
 
Assessment  questions  seek to establish the credibility of the respondent. They are used only 
when the interviewer considers previous statements by the respondent to be inconsistent 
because of possible deception.  
 
Once the respondent has answered all questions  about the event, and the interviewer has 
reason to believe the respondent is being deceptive, a theme must be established to justify 
additional questions. This theme can ordinarily be put forth by saying, “I have a few additional 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.238   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
questions.” Do not indicate in any way that these questions are for a different purpose than 
seeking information.  
 
Norming or Calibrating 
Norming  or calibrating  is the process of observing behavior before critical questions are asked, 
as opposed to doing so during questioning. Norming should be a routine part of all 
interviews. People with truthful attitudes will answer questions one way; those with 
untruthful attitudes will generally answer them differently. Assessment questions ask the 
subject to agree with matters that go against the principles of most honest people. In other 
words, dishonest people are likely to agree with many of the statements, while honest people 
won’t. Assessment questions are designed primarily to get a verbal or nonverbal reaction 
from the respondent. The interviewer will then carefully assess that reaction.  
 
Suggestions for observing the verbal and physical behavior of the respondent include: 
• Use your senses of touch, sight, and hearing to establish a norm. 
• Do not stare or call attention to the person’s behavior symptoms. 
• Be aware of the respondent’s entire body. 
• Observe the timing and consistency of behavior. 
• Note clusters of behaviors. 
 
The best way to calibrate a witness is through the use of noncritical questions on 
background information, place of employment, and the like. If the witness displays general 
nervousness or other verbal and non-verbal clues during this phase of questioning, 
subsequent indicators may not be reliable. The key is to observe changes in behavior when 
pertinent questions are asked.  
 
Based on the respondent’s reaction to the assessment questions, the interviewer then 
considers all the verbal and nonverbal responses together (not in isolation) to decide 
whether to proceed to the admission-seeking phase of the interview. No one behavior 
should be isolated or a conclusion drawn from it. They should be considered together. 
 
Physiology of Deception 
It is said that everyone lies and does so for one of two reasons: to receive rewards or to 
avoid punishment. In most people, lying produces stress. The human body will attempt to 
relieve this stress (even in practiced liars) through verbal and nonverbal clues. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.239 
Conclusions concerning behavior must be tempered by a number of factors. The physical 
environment in which the interview is conducted can affect behavior. If the respondent is 
comfortable, fewer behavior quirks might be exhibited. The more intelligent the respondent, 
the more reliable verbal and nonverbal clues will be. If the respondent is biased toward the 
interviewer, or vice versa, this will affect behavior. 
 
People who are mentally unstable, or are under the influence of drugs, will be unsuitable to 
interview. Behavior symptoms of juveniles are generally unreliable. Racial, ethnic, and 
economic factors should be carefully noted. Some cultures, for example, discourage looking 
directly at someone. Other cultures use certain body language that might be misinterpreted. 
Because professional pathological liars often are familiar with interview techniques, they are 
less likely to furnish observable behavioral clues.  
 
Verbal Clues 
Verbal clues are those relating to wordings, expressions, and responses to specific questions. 
Verbal responses include spoken words and gestures that serve as word substitutes, 
including nodding or shaking the head to indicate “yes” and “no.” The following are some 
examples of verbal clues. 
 
CHANGES IN SPEECH PATTERNS 
Deceptive people often speed up or slow down their speech, or speak louder. There might 
be a change in the voice pitch; as a person becomes tense, the vocal chords constrict. 
Deceptive people also have a tendency to cough or clear their throats during times of 
deception. 
 
REPETITION OF THE QUESTION 
Repeating the question is a means for a deceptive respondent to gain more time to think of 
what to say. The respondent may repeat the question verbatim, or he may frame the answer 
with a request to repeat the question (e.g., “What was that again?”  or similar language). 
Conversely, a truthful subject usually does not have to contemplate his answer.  
 
COMMENTS REGARDING INTERVIEW 
Deceptive people will often complain about the physical environment of the interview room, 
such as, “It’s cold in here.” They will also sometimes ask how much longer the interview  
will take. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.240   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SELECTIVE MEMORY 
In some cases, the deceptive person will have a fine memory for insignificant events, but 
when it comes to the important facts, “just can’t seem to remember.” 
 
MAKING EXCUSES 
Dishonest people will frequently make excuses about things that look bad for them, such as, 
“ I’m always nervous; don’t pay any attention to that.” 
 
EMPHASIS ON CERTAIN WORDS 
On frequent occasions, dishonest people will a dd what they believe to be credibility to their 
lies by use of emphasis.  
 
OATHS 
Dishonest persons frequently use expressions such as “I swear to God,” “Honestly,” “Frankly,” 
or “To tell the truth” to add credibility to their lies. 
 
CHARACTER TESTIMONY 
A liar will often request that the interviewer, “Check with my wife,” or “Talk to my minister.” 
This is frequently done to add credibility to a false statement. 
 
ANSWERING WITH A QUESTION 
Rather than deny the allegations outright, the liar might frequently answer with a question, 
such as, “Why would I do something like that?” As a variation, the deceptive person will 
sometimes question the interview procedure by asking, “Why are you picking on me?” 
 
OVERUSE OF RESPECT 
Some deceptive people will go out of their way to be respectful and friendly. When accused 
of wrongdoing, it is unnatural for a person to react in a friendly and respectful manner.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I’m sorry, sir, I know you’re just doing your job. But I didn’t do it.” 
 
INCREASINGLY WEAKER DENIALS 
When an honest person is accused of something he did not do, that person is likely to 
become angry or forceful in making denials. The more the innocent person is accused, the 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.241 
more forceful the denial becomes. The dishonest person, on the other hand, is likely to make 
a weak denial. Upon repeated accusations, the dishonest person’s denials become weaker, to 
the point that the person becomes silent. 
 
FAILURE TO DENY 
Dishonest people are more likely than honest people to deny an event specifically. An 
honest person might offer a simple and clear “no” while the dishonest person will qualify the 
denial: “No, I did not steal $43,500 fr om the company on June 27.” Other qualified denial phrases 
include, “To the best of my memory,” and “As far as I recall,” or similar language. 
 
AVOIDANCE OF EMOTIVE WORDS 
A liar will often avoid emotionally provocative terms such as steal, lie, and crime. Instead, the 
dishonest person frequently prefers “soft” words such as borrow, and it (referring to the deed 
in question). 
 
REFUSAL TO IMPLICATE OTHER SUSPECTS 
Both the honest respondent and the liar will have a natural reluctance to name others 
involved in misdeeds. However, the liar will frequently refuse to implicate possible suspects, 
no matter how much pressure is applied by the interviewer. This is because the culpable 
person does not want the circle of suspicion to be narrowed. 
 
TOLERANT ATTITUDES 
Dishonest people typically have tolerant attitudes toward miscreant conduct. The interviewer 
in an internal theft case might ask, “What should happen to this person when he is caught?” The 
honest person will usually say, “They should be fired/prosecuted.” The dishonest individual is 
much more likely to reply, “How should I know?” or, “Maybe he is a good employee who got into 
problems. Perhaps he should be given a second chance.” 
 
RELUCTANCE TO TERMINATE INTERVIEW 
Dishonest people will generally be more reluctant than honest ones to terminate the 
interview. The dishonest individual wants to convince the interviewer that he is not 
responsible, so that the investigation will not continue. The honest person, on the other 
hand, generally has no such reluctance. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.242   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FEIGNED UNCONCERN 
The dishonest person will often try to appear casual and unconcerned, will frequently adopt 
an unnatural slouching posture, and might react to questions with nervous or false laughter 
or feeble attempts at humor. The honest person, conversely, will typically be very concerned 
about being suspected of wrongdoing, and will treat the interviewer’s questions seriously. 
 
Nonverbal Clues 
Nonverbal clues to deception include various body movements and postures accompanying 
the verbal reply. Some of these are discussed below. 
 
FULL-BODY MOTIONS 
When asked sensitive or emotive questions, the dishonest person will typically change his 
posture completely, as if moving away from the interviewer. The honest person will 
frequently lean forward toward the interviewer when questions are serious. 
 
ANATOMICAL PHYSICAL RESPONSES 
Anatomical physical responses are those involuntary reactions by the body to fright such as 
increased heart rate, shallow or labored breathing, or excessive perspiration. These reactions 
are typical of dishonest people accused of wrongdoing. 
 
ILLUSTRATORS 
Illustrators are the motions made primarily with the hands to demonstrate points when 
talking. During nonthreatening questions, the illustrators might be done at one rate. During 
threatening questions, the use of illustrators might increase or decrease. 
 
HANDS OVER THE MOUTH 
Frequently, dishonest people will cover the mouth with the hand or fingers during 
deception. This reaction goes back to childhood, when many children cover their mouths 
when telling a lie. It is done subconsciously to conceal the statement. 
 
MANIPULATORS 
Manipulators are motions like picking lint from clothing, playing with objects such as 
pencils, or holding one’s hands while talking. Manipulators are displacement activities that 
reduce nervousness. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.243 
FLEEING POSITIONS 
During the interview, dishonest people will often posture themselves in a “fleeing position.” 
While the head and trunk might be facing the interviewer, the feet and lower portion of the 
body might be pointing toward the door in an unconscious effort to flee from the 
interviewer. 
 
CROSSING THE ARMS 
Crossing one’s arms over the middle zones of the body is a classic defensive reaction to 
difficult or uncomfortable questions. A variation is crossing the feet under the chair and 
locking them. These crossing motions occur mostly when being deceptive. 
 
REACTION TO EVIDENCE 
While trying to be outwardly concerned, the guilty person will have a keen interest in 
implicating evidence. The dishonest person will often look at documents presented by the 
interviewer, attempt to be casual about observing them, and then shove them away, as if 
wanting nothing to do with the evidence. 
 
Most actions that are designed to interrupt the flow of speech are stress related. Examples 
include:  
• Closing the mouth tightly 
• Pursing the lips 
• Covering the mouth with the hand 
• Lip and tongue biting 
• Licking the lips 
• Chewing on objects 
 
Genuine smiles usually involve the whole mouth; false ones are confined to the upper half. 
People involved in deception tend to smirk rather than to smile. 
 
CROSSING 
The body or legs might be crossed to reduce stress. When the hands are crossing the body, it 
is a defensive gesture, to protect the “soft underbelly.” 
 
Methodology of Assessment Questions 
Assessment questions should proceed logically from the least to the most sensitive. The 
following questions illustrate the pattern that an interviewer might take in questioning a 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.244   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witness when he has some reason to believe the respondent, a company employee, has 
knowledge of a suspected fraud. In most examples, the question’s basis is explained before 
the question is asked. The initial questions seek agreement. 
 
The following questions assume the examiner has some reason to believe the respondent, a 
company employee, has knowledge of a suspected fraud. 
 
EXAMPLE  
Interviewer: 
“The company is particularly concerned about fraud and abuse. There are some new laws in 
effect that will cost the company millions if abus es go on and we don’t try to find them. Do you 
know which law I am talking about?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Most individuals will not know about the laws concerning corporate sentencing 
guidelines, and will, therefore, answer “no.” The purpose of this question is to get the 
respondent to understand the serious nature of fraud and abuse. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Congress recently passed a law last year that can levy fines of more than $200 million against 
companies that don’t try to clean their own houses.  $200 million is a lot of money, so you can 
understand why the company’s concerned, can’t you?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The majority of people will say “yes” to this question. In the event of a “no” answer, the 
interviewer should explain the issue fully and, thereafter, attempt to get the respondent’s 
agreement. If that agreement is not forthcoming, the interviewer should assess why not. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Of course, they are not talking about a loyal employee who gets in a bind. They’re talking 
more about senior management. Have you ever read in the newspapers  about what kind of 
people engage in company misdeeds?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.245 
EXPLANATION 
Most people read the newspapers and are at least generally familiar with the problem of 
fraud and abuse. Agreement by the respondent is expected to this question. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Most of them aren’t criminals at all. A lot of times, they’re just trying to save their jobs or just 
trying to get by because the company is so cheap that it won’t pay people what they are worth. 
Do you know what I mean?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Although the honest person and the dishonest person will both probably answer “yes” 
to this question, the honest individual is less likely to accept the premise that these 
people are not wrongdoers. Many honest people might reply, “Yes, I understand, but that 
doesn’t justify stealing.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Why do you think someone around here might be justified in taking  company property?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Because fraud perpetrators frequently justify their acts, the dishonest individual is more 
likely than the honest person to attempt a justification, such as, “Everyone does it,”  or “The 
company should treat people better if they don’t want them to steal.”  The honest person, on the 
other hand, is much more likely to say, “There is no justification for stealing from the company. It 
is dishonest.”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“How do you think we should deal with someone who got in a bind and did something wrong in 
the eyes of the company?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Similar to other questions in this series, the ho nest person wants to “throw the book” at the 
miscreant, while the culpable individual typically will say, “How should I know? It’s not up to 
me,” or, “If they were a good employee, maybe we should give them another chance.”  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.246   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Do you think someone in your department might have taken something from the company 
because they thought they were justified?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Most people — honest or dishonest — will answer “no” to this question. The culpable 
person, however, will more likely say “yes” wi thout elaborating. The honest person, if 
answering “yes,” will most likely provide details. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Have you ever felt yourself—even though you di dn’t go through with it—justified in taking 
advantage of your position?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Again, most people, both honest and dishonest, will answer this question “no.” The 
dishonest person, however, is more likely to acknowledge having at least “thought” of 
doing it. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Who in your department do you feel would think they were justified in doing something against 
the company?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The dishonest person will not likely furnish an answer to this question, saying instead 
that, “I guess anyone could have a justification if they wanted to.” The honest individual, on the 
other hand, is more likely to name names—albeit reluctantly. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Do you believe that most people will tell their manager if they believed a colleague was doing 
something wrong, like committin g fraud against the company?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.247 
EXPLANATION 
The honest person has more of a sense of integrity, and is much more likely to report a 
misdeed. The dishonest person is more likely to say “no.” When pressed for an 
explanation, this person will typically say, “No, nothing would be done about it, and they 
wouldn’t believe me anyhow.”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Is there any reason why someone who works with  you would say they thought you might feel 
justified in doing something wrong?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
This is a hypothetical question designed to place the thought in the mind of a wrongdoer 
that someone has named him as a suspect. The honest person will typically say “no.” 
The dishonest person is more likely to try to explain by saying something like, “I know 
there are people around here who don’t like me.”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What would concern you most if you did something wrong and it was found out?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The dishonest person is likely to say something like, “I wouldn’t want to go to jail.” The 
honest person, however, might reject the notion by saying, “I’m not concerned at all, because 
I haven’t done anything.” If the honest person does explain, it will usually be along the lines 
of disappointing friends or family; the di shonest person is more likely to mention 
punitive measures. 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.248   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
TYPICAL ATTITUDES DISPLAYED BY RESPONDENTS 
 
Truthful  Untruthful  
  
Calm Impatient 
Relaxed Tense 
Cooperative Defensive 
Concerned Outwardly unconcerned 
Sincere Overly friendly, polite 
Inflexible Defeated 
Cordial Surly 
 
 



:


assess question
the closer you get to the admissionseek interview the greater chanc of face
decept wit might try to cover up what thei know and the target mai lie to try to
convinc you that thei ar not guilti when you believ the respond answer mai be
decept you should begin ask assess question
assess question seek to establish the credibl of the respond thei ar us onli
when the interview consid previou statement by the respond to be inconsist
becaus of possibl decept
onc the respond ha answer all question about the event and the interview ha
reason to believ the respond is be decept a theme must be establish to justifi
addit question thi theme can ordinarili be put forth by sai i have a few addit
interview theori and applic investig
3238 2011 fraud examin manual
question do not indic in ani wai that these question ar for a differ purpos than
seek inform
norm or calibr
norm or calibr is the process of observ behavior befor critic question ar ask
as oppos to do so dure question norm should be a routin part of all
interview peopl with truth attitud will answer question on wai those with
untruth attitud will gener answer them differ assess question ask the
subject to agre with matter that go against the principl of most honest peopl in other
word dishonest peopl ar like to agre with mani of the statement while honest peopl
wont assess question ar design primarili to get a verbal or nonverb reaction
from the respond the interview will then carefulli assess that reaction
suggest for observ the verbal and physic behavior of the respond includ
us your sens of touch sight and hear to establish a norm
do not stare or call attent to the person behavior symptom
be awar of the respond entir bodi
observ the time and consist of behavior
note cluster of behavior
the best wai to calibr a wit is through the us of noncrit question on
background inform place of employ and the like if the wit displai gener
nervous or other verbal and nonverb clue dure thi phase of question
subsequ indic mai not be reliabl the kei is to observ chang in behavior when
pertin question ar ask
base on the respond reaction to the assess question the interview then
consid all the verbal and nonverb respons togeth not in isol to decid
whether to proce to the admissionseek phase of the interview no on behavior
should be isol or a conclus drawn from it thei should be consid togeth
physiolog of decept
it is said that everyon li and doe so for on of two reason to receiv reward or to
avoid punish in most peopl ly produc stress the human bodi will attempt to
reliev thi stress even in practic liar through verbal and nonverb clue
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3239
conclus concern behavior must be temper by a number of factor the physic
environ in which the interview is conduct can affect behavior if the respond is
comfort fewer behavior quirk might be exhibit the more intellig the respond
the more reliabl verbal and nonverb clue will be if the respond is bias toward the
interview or vice versa thi will affect behavior
peopl who ar mental unstabl or ar under the influenc of drug will be unsuit to
interview behavior symptom of juvenil ar gener unreli racial ethnic and
econom factor should be carefulli note some cultur for exampl discourag look
directli at someon other cultur us certain bodi languag that might be misinterpret
becaus profession patholog liar often ar familiar with interview techniqu thei ar
less like to furnish observ behavior clue
verbal clue
verbal clue ar those relat to word express and respons to specif question
verbal respons includ spoken word and gestur that serv as word substitut
includ nod or shake the head to indic ye and no the follow ar some
exampl of verbal clue
chang in speech pattern
decept peopl often speed up or slow down their speech or speak louder there might
be a chang in the voic pitch as a person becom tens the vocal chord constrict
decept peopl also have a tendenc to cough or clear their throat dure time of
decept
repetit of the question
repeat the question is a mean for a decept respond to gain more time to think of
what to sai the respond mai repeat the question verbatim or he mai frame the answer
with a request to repeat the question eg what wa that again or similar languag
convers a truth subject usual doe not have to contempl hi answer
comment regard interview
decept peopl will often complain about the physic environ of the interview room
such as it cold in here thei will also sometim ask how much longer the interview
will take
interview theori and applic investig
3240 2011 fraud examin manual
select memori
in some case the decept person will have a fine memori for insignific event but
when it come to the import fact just cant seem to rememb
make excus
dishonest peopl will frequent make excus about thing that look bad for them such as
im alwai nervou dont pai ani attent to that
emphasi on certain word
on frequent occas dishonest peopl will a dd what thei believ to be credibl to their
li by us of emphasi
oath
dishonest person frequent us express such as i swear to god honestli frankli
or to tell the truth to add credibl to their li
charact testimoni
a liar will often request that the interview check with my wife or talk to my minist
thi is frequent done to add credibl to a fals statement
answer with a question
rather than deni the alleg outright the liar might frequent answer with a question
such as why would i do someth like that as a variat the decept person will
sometim question the interview procedur by ask why ar you pick on me
overus of respect
some decept peopl will go out of their wai to be respect and friendli when accus
of wrongdo it is unnatur for a person to react in a friendli and respect manner
exampl
respond
im sorri sir i know your just do your job but i didnt do it
increasingli weaker denial
when an honest person is accus of someth he did not do that person is like to
becom angri or forc in make denial the more the innoc person is accus the
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3241
more forc the denial becom the dishonest person on the other hand is like to make
a weak denial upon repeat accus the dishonest person denial becom weaker to
the point that the person becom silent
failur to deni
dishonest peopl ar more like than honest peopl to deni an event specif an
honest person might offer a simpl and clear no while the dishonest person will qualifi the
denial no i did not steal 43500 fr om the compani on june 27 other qualifi denial phrase
includ to the best of my memori and as far as i recal or similar languag
avoid of emot word
a liar will often avoid emotion provoc term such as steal lie and crime instead the
dishonest person frequent prefer soft word such as borrow and it refer to the deed
in question
refus to implic other suspect
both the honest respond and the liar will have a natur reluct to name other
involv in misde howev the liar will frequent refus to implic possibl suspect
no matter how much pressur is appli by the interview thi is becaus the culpabl
person doe not want the circl of suspicion to be narrow
toler attitud
dishonest peopl typic have toler attitud toward miscreant conduct the interview
in an intern theft case might ask what should happen to thi person when he is caught the
honest person will usual sai thei should be firedprosecut the dishonest individu is
much more like to repli how should i know or mayb he is a good employe who got into
problem perhap he should be given a second chanc
reluct to termin interview
dishonest peopl will gener be more reluct than honest on to termin the
interview the dishonest individu want to convinc the interview that he is not
respons so that the investig will not continu the honest person on the other
hand gener ha no such reluct
interview theori and applic investig
3242 2011 fraud examin manual
feign unconcern
the dishonest person will often try to appear casual and unconcern will frequent adopt
an unnatur slouch postur and might react to question with nervou or fals laughter
or feebl attempt at humor the honest person convers will typic be veri concern
about be suspect of wrongdo and will treat the interview question serious
nonverb clue
nonverb clue to decept includ variou bodi movement and postur accompani
the verbal repli some of these ar discuss below
fullbodi motion
when ask sensit or emot question the dishonest person will typic chang hi
postur complet as if move awai from the interview the honest person will
frequent lean forward toward the interview when question ar seriou
anatom physic respons
anatom physic respons ar those involuntari reaction by the bodi to fright such as
increas heart rate shallow or labor breath or excess perspir these reaction
ar typic of dishonest peopl accus of wrongdo
illustr
illustr ar the motion made primarili with the hand to demonstr point when
talk dure nonthreaten question the illustr might be done at on rate dure
threaten question the us of illustr might increas or decreas
hand over the mouth
frequent dishonest peopl will cover the mouth with the hand or finger dure
decept thi reaction goe back to childhood when mani children cover their mouth
when tell a lie it is done subconsci to conceal the statement
manipul
manipul ar motion like pick lint from cloth plai with object such as
pencil or hold on hand while talk manipul ar displac activ that
reduc nervous
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3243
flee posit
dure the interview dishonest peopl will often postur themselv in a flee posit
while the head and trunk might be face the interview the feet and lower portion of the
bodi might be point toward the door in an unconsci effort to flee from the
interview
cross the arm
cross on arm over the middl zone of the bodi is a classic defens reaction to
difficult or uncomfort question a variat is cross the feet under the chair and
lock them these cross motion occur mostli when be decept
reaction to evid
while try to be outwardli concern the guilti person will have a keen interest in
implic evid the dishonest person will often look at document present by the
interview attempt to be casual about observ them and then shove them awai as if
want noth to do with the evid
most action that ar design to interrupt the flow of speech ar stress relat exampl
includ
close the mouth tightli
purs the lip
cover the mouth with the hand
lip and tongu bite
lick the lip
chew on object
genuin smile usual involv the whole mouth fals on ar confin to the upper half
peopl involv in decept tend to smirk rather than to smile
cross
the bodi or leg might be cross to reduc stress when the hand ar cross the bodi it
is a defens gestur to protect the soft underbelli
methodolog of assess question
assess question should proce logic from the least to the most sensit the
follow question illustr the pattern that an interview might take in question a
interview theori and applic investig
3244 2011 fraud examin manual
wit when he ha some reason to believ the respond a compani employe ha
knowledg of a suspect fraud in most exampl the question basi is explain befor
the question is ask the initi question seek agreement
the follow question assum the examin ha some reason to believ the respond a
compani employe ha knowledg of a suspect fraud
exampl
interview
the compani is particularli concern about fraud and abus there ar some new law in
effect that will cost the compani million if abu es go on and we dont try to find them do you
know which law i am talk about
explan
most individu will not know about the law concern corpor sentenc
guidelin and will therefor answer no the purpos of thi question is to get the
respond to understand the seriou natur of fraud and abus
exampl
interview
congress recent pass a law last year that can levi fine of more than 200 million against
compani that dont try to clean their own hous 200 million is a lot of monei so you can
understand why the compani concern cant you
explan
the major of peopl will sai ye to thi question in the event of a no answer the
interview should explain the issu fulli and thereaft attempt to get the respond
agreement if that agreement is not forthcom the interview should assess why not
exampl
interview
of cours thei ar not talk about a loyal employe who get in a bind theyr talk
more about senior manag have you ever read in the newspap about what kind of
peopl engag in compani misde
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3245
explan
most peopl read the newspap and ar at least gener familiar with the problem of
fraud and abus agreement by the respond is expect to thi question
exampl
interview
most of them arent crimin at all a lot of time theyr just try to save their job or just
try to get by becaus the compani is so cheap that it wont pai peopl what thei ar worth
do you know what i mean
explan
although the honest person and the dishonest person will both probabl answer ye
to thi question the honest individu is less like to accept the premis that these
peopl ar not wrongdoer mani honest peopl might repli ye i understand but that
doesnt justifi steal
exampl
interview
why do you think someon around here might be justifi in take compani properti
explan
becaus fraud perpetr frequent justifi their act the dishonest individu is more
like than the honest person to attempt a justif such as everyon doe it or the
compani should treat peopl better if thei dont want them to steal the honest person on the
other hand is much more like to sai there is no justif for steal from the compani it
is dishonest
exampl
interview
how do you think we should deal with someon who got in a bind and did someth wrong in
the ey of the compani
explan
similar to other question in thi seri the ho nest person want to throw the book at the
miscreant while the culpabl individu typic will sai how should i know it not up to
me or if thei were a good employe mayb we should give them anoth chanc
interview theori and applic investig
3246 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
do you think someon in your depart might have taken someth from the compani
becaus thei thought thei were justifi
explan
most peopl honest or dishonest will answer no to thi question the culpabl
person howev will more like sai ye wi thout elabor the honest person if
answer ye will most like provid detail
exampl
interview
have you ever felt yourselfeven though you di dnt go through with itjustifi in take
advantag of your posit
explan
again most peopl both honest and dishonest will answer thi question no the
dishonest person howev is more like to acknowledg have at least thought of
do it
exampl
interview
who in your depart do you feel would think thei were justifi in do someth against
the compani
explan
the dishonest person will not like furnish an answer to thi question sai instead
that i guess anyon could have a justif if thei want to the honest individu on the
other hand is more like to name namesalbeit reluctantli
exampl
interview
do you believ that most peopl will tell their manag if thei believ a colleagu wa do
someth wrong like committin g fraud against the compani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3247
explan
the honest person ha more of a sens of integr and is much more like to report a
misde the dishonest person is more like to sai no when press for an
explan thi person will typic sai no noth would be done about it and thei
wouldnt believ me anyhow
exampl
interview
is there ani reason why someon who work with you would sai thei thought you might feel
justifi in do someth wrong
explan
thi is a hypothet question design to place the thought in the mind of a wrongdoer
that someon ha name him as a suspect the honest person will typic sai no
the dishonest person is more like to try to explain by sai someth like i know
there ar peopl around here who dont like me
exampl
interview
what would concern you most if you did someth wrong and it wa found out
explan
the dishonest person is like to sai someth like i wouldnt want to go to jail the
honest person howev might reject the notion by sai im not concern at all becaus
i havent done anyth if the honest person doe explain it will usual be along the line
of disappoint friend or famili the di shonest person is more like to mention
punit measur
interview theori and applic investig
3248 2011 fraud examin manual
typic attitud displai by respond
truth untruth
calm impati
relax tens
cooper defens
concern outwardli unconcern
sincer overli friendli polit
inflex defeat
cordial surli
