2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Assessment Questions/Verbal Clues


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Verbal Clues 
Verbal clues are those relating to wordings, expressions, and responses to specific questions. 
Verbal responses include spoken words and gestures that serve as word substitutes, 
including nodding or shaking the head to indicate “yes” and “no.” The following are some 
examples of verbal clues. 
 
CHANGES IN SPEECH PATTERNS 
Deceptive people often speed up or slow down their speech, or speak louder. There might 
be a change in the voice pitch; as a person becomes tense, the vocal chords constrict. 
Deceptive people also have a tendency to cough or clear their throats during times of 
deception. 
 
REPETITION OF THE QUESTION 
Repeating the question is a means for a deceptive respondent to gain more time to think of 
what to say. The respondent may repeat the question verbatim, or he may frame the answer 
with a request to repeat the question (e.g., “What was that again?”  or similar language). 
Conversely, a truthful subject usually does not have to contemplate his answer.  
 
COMMENTS REGARDING INTERVIEW 
Deceptive people will often complain about the physical environment of the interview room, 
such as, “It’s cold in here.” They will also sometimes ask how much longer the interview  
will take. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.240   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SELECTIVE MEMORY 
In some cases, the deceptive person will have a fine memory for insignificant events, but 
when it comes to the important facts, “just can’t seem to remember.” 
 
MAKING EXCUSES 
Dishonest people will frequently make excuses about things that look bad for them, such as, 
“ I’m always nervous; don’t pay any attention to that.” 
 
EMPHASIS ON CERTAIN WORDS 
On frequent occasions, dishonest people will a dd what they believe to be credibility to their 
lies by use of emphasis.  
 
OATHS 
Dishonest persons frequently use expressions such as “I swear to God,” “Honestly,” “Frankly,” 
or “To tell the truth” to add credibility to their lies. 
 
CHARACTER TESTIMONY 
A liar will often request that the interviewer, “Check with my wife,” or “Talk to my minister.” 
This is frequently done to add credibility to a false statement. 
 
ANSWERING WITH A QUESTION 
Rather than deny the allegations outright, the liar might frequently answer with a question, 
such as, “Why would I do something like that?” As a variation, the deceptive person will 
sometimes question the interview procedure by asking, “Why are you picking on me?” 
 
OVERUSE OF RESPECT 
Some deceptive people will go out of their way to be respectful and friendly. When accused 
of wrongdoing, it is unnatural for a person to react in a friendly and respectful manner.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I’m sorry, sir, I know you’re just doing your job. But I didn’t do it.” 
 
INCREASINGLY WEAKER DENIALS 
When an honest person is accused of something he did not do, that person is likely to 
become angry or forceful in making denials. The more the innocent person is accused, the 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.241 
more forceful the denial becomes. The dishonest person, on the other hand, is likely to make 
a weak denial. Upon repeated accusations, the dishonest person’s denials become weaker, to 
the point that the person becomes silent. 
 
FAILURE TO DENY 
Dishonest people are more likely than honest people to deny an event specifically. An 
honest person might offer a simple and clear “no” while the dishonest person will qualify the 
denial: “No, I did not steal $43,500 fr om the company on June 27.” Other qualified denial phrases 
include, “To the best of my memory,” and “As far as I recall,” or similar language. 
 
AVOIDANCE OF EMOTIVE WORDS 
A liar will often avoid emotionally provocative terms such as steal, lie, and crime. Instead, the 
dishonest person frequently prefers “soft” words such as borrow, and it (referring to the deed 
in question). 
 
REFUSAL TO IMPLICATE OTHER SUSPECTS 
Both the honest respondent and the liar will have a natural reluctance to name others 
involved in misdeeds. However, the liar will frequently refuse to implicate possible suspects, 
no matter how much pressure is applied by the interviewer. This is because the culpable 
person does not want the circle of suspicion to be narrowed. 
 
TOLERANT ATTITUDES 
Dishonest people typically have tolerant attitudes toward miscreant conduct. The interviewer 
in an internal theft case might ask, “What should happen to this person when he is caught?” The 
honest person will usually say, “They should be fired/prosecuted.” The dishonest individual is 
much more likely to reply, “How should I know?” or, “Maybe he is a good employee who got into 
problems. Perhaps he should be given a second chance.” 
 
RELUCTANCE TO TERMINATE INTERVIEW 
Dishonest people will generally be more reluctant than honest ones to terminate the 
interview. The dishonest individual wants to convince the interviewer that he is not 
responsible, so that the investigation will not continue. The honest person, on the other 
hand, generally has no such reluctance. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.242   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FEIGNED UNCONCERN 
The dishonest person will often try to appear casual and unconcerned, will frequently adopt 
an unnatural slouching posture, and might react to questions with nervous or false laughter 
or feeble attempts at humor. The honest person, conversely, will typically be very concerned 
about being suspected of wrongdoing, and will treat the interviewer’s questions seriously. 
 



:


verbal clue
verbal clue ar those relat to word express and respons to specif question
verbal respons includ spoken word and gestur that serv as word substitut
includ nod or shake the head to indic ye and no the follow ar some
exampl of verbal clue
chang in speech pattern
decept peopl often speed up or slow down their speech or speak louder there might
be a chang in the voic pitch as a person becom tens the vocal chord constrict
decept peopl also have a tendenc to cough or clear their throat dure time of
decept
repetit of the question
repeat the question is a mean for a decept respond to gain more time to think of
what to sai the respond mai repeat the question verbatim or he mai frame the answer
with a request to repeat the question eg what wa that again or similar languag
convers a truth subject usual doe not have to contempl hi answer
comment regard interview
decept peopl will often complain about the physic environ of the interview room
such as it cold in here thei will also sometim ask how much longer the interview
will take
interview theori and applic investig
3240 2011 fraud examin manual
select memori
in some case the decept person will have a fine memori for insignific event but
when it come to the import fact just cant seem to rememb
make excus
dishonest peopl will frequent make excus about thing that look bad for them such as
im alwai nervou dont pai ani attent to that
emphasi on certain word
on frequent occas dishonest peopl will a dd what thei believ to be credibl to their
li by us of emphasi
oath
dishonest person frequent us express such as i swear to god honestli frankli
or to tell the truth to add credibl to their li
charact testimoni
a liar will often request that the interview check with my wife or talk to my minist
thi is frequent done to add credibl to a fals statement
answer with a question
rather than deni the alleg outright the liar might frequent answer with a question
such as why would i do someth like that as a variat the decept person will
sometim question the interview procedur by ask why ar you pick on me
overus of respect
some decept peopl will go out of their wai to be respect and friendli when accus
of wrongdo it is unnatur for a person to react in a friendli and respect manner
exampl
respond
im sorri sir i know your just do your job but i didnt do it
increasingli weaker denial
when an honest person is accus of someth he did not do that person is like to
becom angri or forc in make denial the more the innoc person is accus the
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3241
more forc the denial becom the dishonest person on the other hand is like to make
a weak denial upon repeat accus the dishonest person denial becom weaker to
the point that the person becom silent
failur to deni
dishonest peopl ar more like than honest peopl to deni an event specif an
honest person might offer a simpl and clear no while the dishonest person will qualifi the
denial no i did not steal 43500 fr om the compani on june 27 other qualifi denial phrase
includ to the best of my memori and as far as i recal or similar languag
avoid of emot word
a liar will often avoid emotion provoc term such as steal lie and crime instead the
dishonest person frequent prefer soft word such as borrow and it refer to the deed
in question
refus to implic other suspect
both the honest respond and the liar will have a natur reluct to name other
involv in misde howev the liar will frequent refus to implic possibl suspect
no matter how much pressur is appli by the interview thi is becaus the culpabl
person doe not want the circl of suspicion to be narrow
toler attitud
dishonest peopl typic have toler attitud toward miscreant conduct the interview
in an intern theft case might ask what should happen to thi person when he is caught the
honest person will usual sai thei should be firedprosecut the dishonest individu is
much more like to repli how should i know or mayb he is a good employe who got into
problem perhap he should be given a second chanc
reluct to termin interview
dishonest peopl will gener be more reluct than honest on to termin the
interview the dishonest individu want to convinc the interview that he is not
respons so that the investig will not continu the honest person on the other
hand gener ha no such reluct
interview theori and applic investig
3242 2011 fraud examin manual
feign unconcern
the dishonest person will often try to appear casual and unconcern will frequent adopt
an unnatur slouch postur and might react to question with nervou or fals laughter
or feebl attempt at humor the honest person convers will typic be veri concern
about be suspect of wrongdo and will treat the interview question serious
