2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Assessment Questions/Nonverbal Clues


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Nonverbal Clues 
Nonverbal clues to deception include various body movements and postures accompanying 
the verbal reply. Some of these are discussed below. 
 
FULL-BODY MOTIONS 
When asked sensitive or emotive questions, the dishonest person will typically change his 
posture completely, as if moving away from the interviewer. The honest person will 
frequently lean forward toward the interviewer when questions are serious. 
 
ANATOMICAL PHYSICAL RESPONSES 
Anatomical physical responses are those involuntary reactions by the body to fright such as 
increased heart rate, shallow or labored breathing, or excessive perspiration. These reactions 
are typical of dishonest people accused of wrongdoing. 
 
ILLUSTRATORS 
Illustrators are the motions made primarily with the hands to demonstrate points when 
talking. During nonthreatening questions, the illustrators might be done at one rate. During 
threatening questions, the use of illustrators might increase or decrease. 
 
HANDS OVER THE MOUTH 
Frequently, dishonest people will cover the mouth with the hand or fingers during 
deception. This reaction goes back to childhood, when many children cover their mouths 
when telling a lie. It is done subconsciously to conceal the statement. 
 
MANIPULATORS 
Manipulators are motions like picking lint from clothing, playing with objects such as 
pencils, or holding one’s hands while talking. Manipulators are displacement activities that 
reduce nervousness. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.243 
FLEEING POSITIONS 
During the interview, dishonest people will often posture themselves in a “fleeing position.” 
While the head and trunk might be facing the interviewer, the feet and lower portion of the 
body might be pointing toward the door in an unconscious effort to flee from the 
interviewer. 
 
CROSSING THE ARMS 
Crossing one’s arms over the middle zones of the body is a classic defensive reaction to 
difficult or uncomfortable questions. A variation is crossing the feet under the chair and 
locking them. These crossing motions occur mostly when being deceptive. 
 
REACTION TO EVIDENCE 
While trying to be outwardly concerned, the guilty person will have a keen interest in 
implicating evidence. The dishonest person will often look at documents presented by the 
interviewer, attempt to be casual about observing them, and then shove them away, as if 
wanting nothing to do with the evidence. 
 
Most actions that are designed to interrupt the flow of speech are stress related. Examples 
include:  
• Closing the mouth tightly 
• Pursing the lips 
• Covering the mouth with the hand 
• Lip and tongue biting 
• Licking the lips 
• Chewing on objects 
 
Genuine smiles usually involve the whole mouth; false ones are confined to the upper half. 
People involved in deception tend to smirk rather than to smile. 
 
CROSSING 
The body or legs might be crossed to reduce stress. When the hands are crossing the body, it 
is a defensive gesture, to protect the “soft underbelly.” 
 



:


nonverb clue
nonverb clue to decept includ variou bodi movement and postur accompani
the verbal repli some of these ar discuss below
fullbodi motion
when ask sensit or emot question the dishonest person will typic chang hi
postur complet as if move awai from the interview the honest person will
frequent lean forward toward the interview when question ar seriou
anatom physic respons
anatom physic respons ar those involuntari reaction by the bodi to fright such as
increas heart rate shallow or labor breath or excess perspir these reaction
ar typic of dishonest peopl accus of wrongdo
illustr
illustr ar the motion made primarili with the hand to demonstr point when
talk dure nonthreaten question the illustr might be done at on rate dure
threaten question the us of illustr might increas or decreas
hand over the mouth
frequent dishonest peopl will cover the mouth with the hand or finger dure
decept thi reaction goe back to childhood when mani children cover their mouth
when tell a lie it is done subconsci to conceal the statement
manipul
manipul ar motion like pick lint from cloth plai with object such as
pencil or hold on hand while talk manipul ar displac activ that
reduc nervous
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3243
flee posit
dure the interview dishonest peopl will often postur themselv in a flee posit
while the head and trunk might be face the interview the feet and lower portion of the
bodi might be point toward the door in an unconsci effort to flee from the
interview
cross the arm
cross on arm over the middl zone of the bodi is a classic defens reaction to
difficult or uncomfort question a variat is cross the feet under the chair and
lock them these cross motion occur mostli when be decept
reaction to evid
while try to be outwardli concern the guilti person will have a keen interest in
implic evid the dishonest person will often look at document present by the
interview attempt to be casual about observ them and then shove them awai as if
want noth to do with the evid
most action that ar design to interrupt the flow of speech ar stress relat exampl
includ
close the mouth tightli
purs the lip
cover the mouth with the hand
lip and tongu bite
lick the lip
chew on object
genuin smile usual involv the whole mouth fals on ar confin to the upper half
peopl involv in decept tend to smirk rather than to smile
cross
the bodi or leg might be cross to reduc stress when the hand ar cross the bodi it
is a defens gestur to protect the soft underbelli
