2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Admission-Seeking Questions 
The choice of when to conduct an admission-seeking interview of a suspect is critical. 
Normally, the interviewer should ask accusatory or admission-seeking questions when there 
is a reasonable probability that the respondent has committed the act in question, all other 
reasonable investigative steps have been completed and as much information as possible has 
been developed from other sources, and the interviewer can reasonably control the place, 
time, and subject matter of the interview. An assessment of culpability might be based on 
verbal and nonverbal responses to interview questions, as well as documents, physical 
evidence, and other interviews.  
 
A transitional theme is necessary when proceeding from assessment-seeking questions to 
admission-seeking questions. Part of the purpose of this theme is to create in the mind of 
the miscreant that he has been caught. Under the ideal circumstance, the interviewer will 
leave the room for just a few minutes, saying this is to “check on something.” If the 
interviewer has incriminating documents, copies can be placed inside a file folder and 
brought back to the interview. If no documents exist, it might be appropriate to fill a file 
folder with blank paper. 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.249 
EXAMPLE 
 
When the interviewer returns to  the room, the file folder is placed on the desk, and the 
interviewer asks, “Is there something that  you would like to tell me about_________ _ ?” 
OR 
“Is there any reason why some one would say that you _________?” 
 
Hand the documents to the respondent and ask for “comments.” Do not introduce the 
evidence or explain it. In about 20 percent of the cases, the miscreant will admit to 
incriminating conduct. If not, proceed. Once the interviewer is reasonably convinced of 
guilt, it might be appropriate to confront the respondent.  
 
Purpose of Questions 
Admission-seeking questions have at least three purposes. The first purpose is to distinguish 
innocent people from guilty. A culpable individual will frequently confess during the 
admission-seeking phase of an interview, while an innocent person will not do so unless 
threats or coercion are used. In some instances, the only way to differentiate the culpable 
from the innocent is to seek an admission of guilt.  
 
The second purpose is to obtain a valid confession. Confessions, under the law, must be 
voluntarily obtained. The importance of a valid and binding confession to wrongdoing 
cannot be overstated. The third purpose of admission-seeking questions is to convince the 
confessor to sign a written statement acknowledging the facts. Although oral confessions are 
legally as binding as written ones, the written statement has greater credibility. It also 
discourages miscreants from later attempting to recant.  
 
Preparation 
The interview should be scheduled when the interviewer can control the situation. It 
normally should not be conducted on the accused’s turf and is best conducted by surprise. 
 
Interview Room 
When preparing a room for an admission-seeking interview, it is important that the 
interviewer consider the privacy afforded by the room. The location should establish a sense 
of privacy. The door should be closed but not locked, there should be no physical barriers 
preventing the target from leaving, and the suspect should be made aware that he is free to 
leave. This is to avoid allegations of “custodial interrogation.” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.250   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Distractions should be kept to a minimum. Ideally, there should be no photographs, 
windows, or other objects in the room. Chairs should be placed about four to six feet apart, 
and the accused should not be permitted to sit behind any physical barriers, such as chairs, 
tables, or desks. This is to prohibit a psychological barrier for the accused to “hide behind.”  
 
Note-Taking 
When conducting an admission-seeking interview, note taking should be kept to a minimum. 
In some cases, taking notes should be altogether avoided. Since the ultimate goal of the 
admission-seeking interview is to obtain a signed statement in which the suspect admits guilt, 
it is not necessary to take extensive notes, which can be distracting to the suspect and can 
reveal what points the examiner believes to be important. Notes, if taken during the 
interview, should be done in a way that does not reveal their significance. 
 
Presence of Outsiders 
It is usually not necessary to inform the subject that he may have counsel present. Of course, 
this right cannot be denied if the subject wishes to have an attorney present. If counsel is 
present, you should have an understanding that he will be an observer only; attorneys should 
not ask questions or object. Other than the subject and two examiners, no other observers 
should be permitted in the admission-seeking interview. If the accused is in a union, a union 
representative (or a union attorney) might have the right to attend. However, this might 
present legal problems in “broadcasting” the allegation to a third party. It is very difficult to 
obtain a confession with witnesses present. The examiner should therefore consider whether 
the case can be proven without the admission-seeking interview. (Please refer to the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual  for more information.) 
 
Miranda Warnings  
As a general rule, private employees conducting an internal investigation are not required to 
give Miranda  warnings; however, there are exceptions to the rule. (See the chapter on 
“Individual Rights” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for more information.) 
 
Theme Development 
People rarely confess voluntarily. People will confess to matters when they perceive that the 
benefits of confession outweigh the penalties. A good interviewer, through the application of 
sophisticated techniques, will be able to convince the respondent that the confession is in his 
best interest.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.251 
People generally will not confess if they believe that there is doubt in the mind of the accuser 
regarding their guilt. The interviewer must convey absolute confidence in the admission-seeking — 
even if not fully convinced. The inter viewer must make the accusation in the form 
of a statement of fact. Accusatory questions do not ask “Did you do it?” They ask, “Why did 
you do it?” 
 
An innocent person generally will not accept the question’s premise.  People confessing need 
adequate time to come to terms with their guilt; obtaining admissions and confessions takes 
patience. Therefore, admission-seeking interviews should be done only when there is 
sufficient privacy and time is not a factor. The interviewer must not express disgust, outrage, 
or moral condemnation about the confessor’s actions. To do so goes against the basic logic 
of obtaining confessions, which can be summed up as maximize sympathy and minimize the 
perception of moral wrongdoing.   
 
The interviewer must offer a morally acceptable reason for the confessor’s behavior. The 
interviewer cannot convey to the accused that he is a “bad person.” Guilty people will 
almost never confess under such conditions. To obtain a confession, the interviewer must be 
firm but must project compassion, understanding, and sympathy. The interviewer must 
attempt to keep the confessor from voicing a denial. Once the accused denies the act, 
overcoming that position will be very difficult. 
 
The threat of a lawsuit is always present when allegations of wrongdoing are made against 
certain employees. It is therefore important that examiners understand exactly what actions 
are permitted so that they can avoid potential liability. It is generally legal to accuse innocent 
people of misdeeds they did not commit as long as: 
• The accuser has reasonable suspicion or predication to believe the accused has 
committed an offense. 
• The accusation is made under conditions of privacy. 
• The accuser does not take any action likely to make an innocent person confess. 
• The accusation is conducted under reasonable conditions. 
 
Steps in the Admission-Seeking Interview 
Direct Accusation  
The accusation should not be made in the form of a question, but as a statement. Emotive 
words such as steal, fraud, and crime  should be avoided during the accusatory process. The 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.252   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
accusation should be phrased as though the accused’s guilt has already been established so 
that the accused is psychologically trapped with no way out.  
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG: 
“We have reason to believe that you ...” 
OR 
“We think (suspect) you might have ...” 
 
RIGHT: 
“Our investigation has clearly established that you: 
? made a false entry (avoid fraud) 
? took company assets without permission (avoid using theft, embezzlement, or stealing) 
? accepted money from a vendor (avoid bribe or kickback) 
? have not told the complete truth (avoid lie or fraud )” 
OR 
“ We have been conducting an  investigation into ________ _ _, and you are the only person we 
have not been able to eliminate as being responsible.” 
 
Observe Reaction 
When accused of wrongdoing, the typical guilty person will react with silence. If the accused 
does deny culpability, those denials will usually be weak. In some cases, the accused will 
almost mumble the denial. It is common for the culpable individual to avoid outright denials. 
Rather, that person will give reasons why he could not have committed the act in question. 
The innocent person will sometimes react with genuine shock at being accused. It is not at 
all unusual for an innocent person, wrongfully accused, to react with anger. As opposed to 
the guilty person, the innocent person will strongly deny carrying out the act or acts  
in question.  
 
Repeat Accusation 
If the accused does not strenuously object after the accusation is made, the interviewer 
should repeat the accusation with the same degree of conviction and strength.  
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.253 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“As I said, Linda, our examination has concluded that you are the responsible person. It is not 
so much a question of what you did, but why you did it.” 
 
Interrupt Denials 
Both the truthful and untruthful person will normally object to and deny the accusations. 
But when compared to an innocent person, a culpable person is more likely to stop short of 
an outright denial ( “I didn’t do it. ”) and is more apt to furnish the interviewer with 
explanations as to why he is not the responsible party. An innocent person is unlikely to 
allow the interviewer to prevail in stopping the denial.  
 
 EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I wasn’t even there the day  that entry was made.” 
OR 
“It could have been anybody.” 
OR 
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.” 
 
Both the innocent and the guilty person will make an outright denial if forced to do so. 
Accordingly, the interviewer should not solicit a denial at this stage of the admission-seeking 
interview. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer:  
“Did you do this?” 
OR 
“Are you the responsible person?” 
RIGHT 
Interviewer:  
“Why did you do this?” 
 
Additionally, the interviewer must prevent the subject from making an outright denial 
because it becomes extremely difficult to change a denial once it is uttered. If the person 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.254   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
denies the accusation and later admits it, he is admitting to lying, and this type of admission 
is hard to make. Therefore, the interviewer’s job is to prevent the subject from making an 
outright denial, thereby making it easier for the subject to confess to the act.  
 
Examiners can use several techniques to stop or interrupt denials.  
 
DELAYS 
One of the most effective techniques to stop or interrupt the denial is through a delaying 
tactic. The interviewer should not argue with the accused, but rather attempt to delay the 
outright denial. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I hear what you are saying, but let me finish first. Then you can talk.” 
 
The innocent person usually will not “hold on” or let the interviewer continue to develop 
the theme. 
 
REPEAT INTERRUPTIONS 
Occasionally, it might be necessary to interrupt  the accused’s attempted denial repeatedly. 
Because this stage is crucial, the interviewer should be prepared to increase the tone of the 
interruptions to the point when he is prepared to say: “Linda, if you keep interrupting, I am going 
to have to terminate this conversation.” The guilty individual will find this threatening, because she 
wants to know the extent of incriminating evidence in the interviewer’s possession.  
 
REASONING 
If the above techniques are unsuccessful, the interviewer might attempt to reason with the 
accused, and employ some of the tactics normally used for diffusing alibis (see below). 
Under these tactics, the accused is presented with evidence implicating him. The interviewer, 
however, normally should not disclose all the facts of the case, but rather small portions here 
and there. 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.255 
 EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I know what you say, Linda, but that doesn’t square with these invoices here in front of me. 
Look at the invoice in the amount of $102,1 36. The facts clearly show you are responsible.” 
(Do not ask the accused to explain the evidence at this point.)  
OR 
“Linda, I have talked to many pe ople before I sat down here with  you. I am not asking you if 
you’re responsible; I know you are. This is your opportunity to tell your side to someone who can 
understand.” (Do not disclose the identity or number of the witnesses who have 
been interviewed.) 
 
Establish Rationalization 
Once the accusation has been made, repeated, and denials are stopped, it is time for the 
interviewer to establish a morally acceptable rationalization that will allow the accused to 
square the misdeed with his conscience. It is not necessary that this theme be related to the 
underlying causes of the misconduct. It is common and acceptable for the accused to explain 
away the moral consequences of the action by seizing onto any plausible explanation other 
than being a “bad person.” 
 
If the accused does not seem to relate to one theme, the interviewer should go on to another 
until one seems to fit. Thereafter, that theme should be developed fully. Note that the theme 
development explains away the moral?but not the legal—consequences of the misdeed. 
The interviewer is cautioned not to make any statements that would lead the accused to 
believe he will be excused from legal liability by cooperating.  
 
The questions posed in the examples, rather than being confrontational, constantly seek 
agreement from the accused. The interviewer must strike a balance between being in control 
of the interview and still appearing compassionate and understanding. Again, no matter what 
conduct the accused has supposedly committed, the interviewer should not express shock, 
outrage, or condemnation. 
 
UNFAIR TREATMENT 
Probably the most common explanation for criminal activity in general, and internal fraud in 
particular, is unfair treatment and the accused’s attempt to achieve equity. Studies have 
shown that counter-productive employee behavior—including stealing—is motivated 
primarily by job dissatisfaction. Employees and others feel that “strik ing back” is important 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.256   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to their self-esteem. The sensitive interviewer can capitalize on these feelings by suggesting 
to the accused that he is a victim. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I feel like I know what makes you tick. And I know it isn’t like you to do something 
like this without a reason. You have worked hard here to get a good reputation. I don’t think 
the company has paid you what you’re really worth. And that’s the way you feel too, isn’t it?” 
OR 
“Linda, I’ve seen situations like this before. And I think the company brought this on 
themselves. If you had been fairly treated, this wouldn’t have happened, don’t you agree?” 
 
INADEQUATE RECOGNITION 
Some employees might feel that their efforts have gone completely without notice by the 
company. As with similar themes, the interviewer should be empathetic. 
 
 EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I have found out a few things about you. It looks to me that you have given a lot more 
to this company than they have re cognized. Isn’t that right, Linda?” 
 
FINANCIAL PROBLEMS 
Internal criminals, especially executives and upper management, frequently engage in fraud 
to conceal their true financial condition — either  personal or business. Here are examples of 
how to develop a theme involving financial problems as a motive. In the following example, 
E. J. is an executive of a company and is suspected of fraud.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ E. J., I was astonished to find out some of your investments have taken such a beating. I don’t 
know how you managed to keep everything afloat as  well as you did. You just did this to stay 
alive financially, didn’t you, E. J.?” 
OR 
“ E. J., I have found out what you’ve been paid around here and, frankly, I was surprised. I 
thought it might be a lot more. No wonder you had to get involved in this. You pretty much 
needed to do this to survive, didn’t you?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.257 
ABERRATION OF CONDUCT 
Many miscreants believe their conduct constitutes  an aberration in their lives and that it is 
not representative of their true character. The interviewer might establish this theme by 
applying the following examples. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know this is totally out of character for you. I know that this would never have 
happened if something wasn’t going on in your life. Isn’t that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“ E. J., you’ve worked hard all your life to get a good reputation. I feel you wouldn’t normally 
have done something like this; it  just doesn’t fit unless you felt like you were forced into it. You 
felt forced to do this, didn’t you, E. J.?” 
 
FAMILY PROBLEMS 
Some people commit fraud because of family problems — financial woes caused by divorce, 
an unfaithful spouse, or demanding children. Men especially — who have been socially 
conditioned to tie their masculinity to earning power — might hold the notion that wealth 
connotes family respect. For their part, women have been found to commit white-collar 
crime in the name of their responsibility to the needs of their husbands and children. The 
skillful interviewer can convert this motive to his advantage by applying one of the following 
approaches. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know you have had some family problems. I know your recent divorce has been 
difficult for you. And I know how it is when these problems occur. You never would have done 
this if it hadn’t been for family problems; isn’t that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., someone in your position and with your ethics just doesn’t do things like this without a 
reason. And I think that reason has to do with trying to make the best possible life for your 
family. I know it would be difficult for me to admit to my family that we’re not as well off as we 
were last year. And that’s why you did this, isn’t it, E. J.?” 
    
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.258   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ACCUSER’S ACTIONS 
Don’t disclose the accuser’s identity if it is not already known. But in cases where the 
accuser’s identity is known to the accused, it can be helpful to blame the accuser for the 
problem. The accuser can be a colleague, manager, auditor, fraud examiner, or any similar 
person. Alternatively, the problem can be blamed on the company. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, you know what these auditors are like. They are hired to turn over every stone. I 
wonder how they would look if we put them under  a microscope. Compared to other things that 
are going on, what you’ve done isn’t that bad. Right, Linda?” 
OR 
“ E. J., I really blame a large part of this on the company. If some of the things that went on 
around this company were known, it would make what you’ve done seem pretty small in 
comparison, wouldn’t it, E. J.?” 
 
STRESS, DRUGS, AND ALCOHOL 
Employees will sometimes turn to drugs or alcohol to reduce stress. In some instances, the 
stress itself will lead to aberrant behavior in a few individuals. A rationalization established 
by the interviewer could be similar to the following. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know what you’ve done isn’t really you. Inside, you have been in a lot of turmoil. A 
lot of people drink too much when they have problems. I have been through periods like that 
myself. And when things build up inside, it sometimes makes all of us do something we 
shouldn’t. That’s what happened here, isn’t it, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., you’re one of the most respected men in this company. I know you have been under 
tremendous pressure to succeed. Too much pressure, really. There is only so much any of us can 
take. That’s behind what has happened here, isn’t it, E. J.?” 
 
REVENGE 
Similar to other themes, revenge can be effectively developed as a motive. In this technique, 
the interviewer attempts to blame the offense on the accused’s feeling that he must “get 
back” at someone or something. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.259 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what has happened is out of character for you. I think you were trying to get back at 
your supervisor for the time he passed you over for a raise. I would probably feel the same. 
That’s what happened, isn’t it, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., everyone around here knows that the board has not supported you in your efforts to turn 
this company around. I would understand if you said to yourself, ‘I’ll show them.’ Is that what 
happened, E. J.?” 
 
DEPERSONALIZING THE VICTIM 
In cases involving employee theft, an effective technique is to depersonalize the victim. The 
accused is better able to cope with the moral dilemma of his actions if the victim is a faceless 
corporation or agency. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, it isn’t like you took something from a friend or neighbor. I can see how you could say, 
‘Well, this would be okay to do as long as it  was against the company,  and not my coworkers.’ 
Is that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., it’s not like what you’ve done has really  hurt one person. Maybe you thought of it this 
way: ‘At most, I’ve cost each shareholder a few cents.’ Is that the way it was, E. J.?” 
 
MINOR MORAL INFRACTION 
The interviewer in many cases can reduce the accused’s perception of the moral seriousness 
of the matter. This is not to be confused with the legal seriousness. Fraud examiners and 
interviewers should be careful to avoid making statements that could be construed as 
relieving legal responsibility. For example, the examiner should not state: “It is not a big deal, 
legally. It’s just a technical violation.” Instead, the interviewer should play down the moral side. 
One effective way is through comparisons, such as those illustrated below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, this problem we have doesn’t mean you’re Jack the Ripper. When you compare what 
you’ve done to things other people do, this situation seems pretty insignificant, doesn’t it?” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.260   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
OR 
“E. J., everything is relative. What you’ve done doesn’t even come close to some of the other 
things that have happened. You’re not Bernie Madoff, right E. J.?” 
OR 
“I could see myself in your place. I probably wo uld have done the same thing, wouldn’t I?” 
 
ALTRUISM 
In many cases, the moral seriousness of the matter can be reduced by claiming the action 
was for the benefit of others. This is especially true if the accused views himself as a  
caring person. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know you didn’t do this for yourself. I have looked into this matter carefully, and I 
think you did this to help your husband, didn’t you?” 
OR 
“E. J., you have a big responsibili ty in this company. A lot of people depend on you for their 
jobs. I just know you did this because you thought you were doing the right thing for the 
company, didn’t you?” 
 
GENUINE NEED 
In a very small number of cases, fraud is predicated by genuine need. For example, the 
accused might be paying for the medical care of sick parents or a child. Or some other 
financial disaster might have befallen the miscreant. In those cases, the following techniques 
might be effective. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I don’t know many people who have had so many bad things happen all at once. I can 
see where you thought this was pretty much a matter of life or death, right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., you’re like everyone else: you have to put food on the table. But in your position, it is 
very difficult to ask for help. You genuinely needed  to do this to survive, didn’t you, E. J.?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.261 
Diffuse Alibis 
Even if the accused is presented with an appropriate rationalization, it is likely that he will 
continue to want to deny culpability. When the interviewer is successful in stopping denials, 
the accused normally will then turn to various reasons why he could not have committed the 
act in question. The purpose of this stage is to convince the accused of the weight of the 
evidence against him. Miscreants usually have a keen interest in material that tends to 
implicate them. Alibis generally can be diffused using one of the methods listed below. 
 
DISPLAY PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
It is common for most guilty people to overestimate the amount of physical evidence. The 
interviewer wants to try and reinforce this notion in the way the evidence is laid out to the 
accused. The physical evidence — usually documents in fraud matters — generally should be 
displayed one piece at a time, in reverse order of importance. In this way, the full extent of 
the evidence is not immediately known by the accused. When the accused no longer denies 
culpability, the interviewer should stop displaying evidence.  
 
Each time a document or piece of evidence is laid out to the accused, its significance should 
be noted by the interviewer. During this phase, the accused is still trying to come to grips 
with being caught. The interviewer should, therefore, expect that the accused will attempt to 
lie his way out of the situation. Like denials, the interviewer should stop the alibis and other 
falsehoods before they are fully articulated.  
 
Once the alibis are diffused, the interviewer should return to the theme being developed. 
The following is an example of this technique used on Linda Reed Collins, who set up a 
fictitious company and embezzled money by approving payments from her employer to a 
shell corporation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t have done this. I am not responsible for paying invoices.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Here is one of the invoices in question [display document]. We never received the merchandise.” 
(Don’t mention whether you have talked to the accounts payable department or 
whether you have subjected the invoice to any document analysis.)  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.262   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“Look, Linda, it is useless for you to try to deny the truth. We have lots of evidence. Let’s just 
try to work this out, but you’ve got to help me, okay?” (Don’t accuse the person of 
lying — this just prolongs the process.) 
 
DISCUSS WITNESSES 
Another technique for diffusing alibis is to discuss the testimony of witnesses. The objective 
is to give enough information about what other people would say without providing too 
much. Ideally, the interviewer’s statement will create the impression in the mind of the 
accused that many people are in a position to contradict his story. 
 
The interviewer is again cautioned about furnishing enough information to the accused so 
that he can identify the witnesses. This might place the witness in a difficult position, and the 
accused could contact the witness in an effort to influence testimony. The accused could 
take reprisals against potential witnesses, though this is rare.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t possibly have done this. It would require the approval of a supervisor.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“In normal situations it would. The problem is that your statement doesn’t hold up. There are 
several people who will tell a completely different story. I can understand how you would want 
me to believe that. But you’re only worsening the situation by making these statements. If you 
will help me on this, you’ll also be helping yourself. Understand?” 
 
DISCUSS DECEPTIONS 
The final technique is to discuss the accused’s de ceptions. The purpose is to appeal to the 
accused’s logic, not to scold or degrade. This technique is sometimes the only one available 
if physical evidence is lacking. As with other interview situations, the word lying  should  
be avoided.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“There is no way I could have done this. I didn’t have the opportunity.” 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.263 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, here is the situation: you know what you’ ve done, and so do I. I can understand it is 
difficult for you to admit. But if all the facts have  to be presented, everyone will reach the same 
inescapable conclusion: you are responsible. If you continue to deny  what you’ve done, you’ll just 
make the situation worse. You understand that, don’t you?” 
 
Present an Alternative Question  
After the accused’s alibis have been diffused, he normally will become quiet and withdrawn. 
Some people in this situation might cry. If so, be comforting. Do not discourage the accused 
from showing emotion. In this stage, the accused is deciding whether to confess. The 
interviewer at this point should present an alternative question to the accused. The 
alternative question forces the accused to make one of two choices. One alternative allows 
the accused a morally acceptable reason for the misdeed; the other paints the accused in a 
negative light. Regardless of which answer the accused chooses, he is acknowledging guilt.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, did you plan this deliberately, or did it just happen?” 
OR 
“Linda, did you just want extra money, or did you do this because you had financial 
problems?” 
OR 
“Linda, did you just get greedy, or did you do this because of the way the company has treated 
you?” 
 
Obtain a Benchmark Admission 
Either way the accused answers the alternative question — either yes or no — he has made a 
culpable statement, or a benchmark  admission. Once the benchmark admission is made, the 
miscreant has made a subconscious decision to confess.  
 
The questions for the benchmark admission should be constructed as leading questions so 
they can be answered “yes” or “no;” they should not be constructed so that the answer 
requires some type of explanation. That will come later. The accused might also answer in 
the negative.  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.264   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I didn’t do it deliberately.” 
OR 
“I didn’t do it just beca use I wanted extra money.” 
OR 
“No, I’m not just greedy.” 
 
In the cases where the accused answers the alternative question in the negative, the 
interviewer should press further for a positive admission. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Then it just happened on the spur of the moment?” 
OR 
“Then you did it to take care of your financial problems?” 
OR 
“Then you did it because of the way you’ve been treated here?” 
 
Should the accused still not respond to the alternative question with the benchmark 
admission, the interviewer should repeat the questions or variations thereof until the 
benchmark admission is made. It is important for the interviewer to get a response that is 
tantamount to a commitment to confess.  
 
Reinforce Rationalization 
Once the benchmark admission is made, the interviewer should reinforce the confessor’s 
decision. Then the interviewer should make the transition into the verbal confession, where 
the details of the offense are obtained. Reinforcing the rationalization developed earlier will 
help the confessor feel comfortable, believing that the interviewer does not look down  
on him. 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.265 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I am glad to hear that you had a good  reason to do this. That reinforces what I 
thought all along — that you were caught up in extraordinary circumstances. When was the first 
time you did it?” 
 
Verbal Confession 
The transition to the verbal confession is made when the accused furnishes the first detailed 
information about the offense. Thereafter, it is the interviewer’s job to probe gently for 
additional details — preferably including those that would be known only to the miscreant. As 
with any interview, there are three general approaches to obtaining the verbal confession: 
chronologically, by transaction, or by event. The approach to be taken should be governed 
by the circumstances of the case.  
 
During the admission-seeking interview, it is best to first confirm the general details of the 
offense. For example, the interviewer will want the accused’s estimates of the amounts 
involved, other parties to the offense, and the location of physical evidence. After these basic 
facts are confirmed, the interviewer can then return to the specifics, in chronological order. 
It is imperative that the interviewer obtain an early admission that the accused knew the 
conduct in question was wrong. This confirms the essential element of intent.  
 
Because of the psychology of confessions, most confessors will lie about one or more 
aspects of the offense, even though confirming overall guilt. When this happens during the 
verbal confession, the interviewer should make a mental note of the discrepancy and 
proceed as if the falsehood had been accepted as truthful.  
 
Such discrepancies should be saved until all other relevant facts are provided by the accused. 
If the discrepancies are material to the offense, then the interviewer should either resolve 
them at the end of the verbal confession or wait and correct them in the written confession. 
If not material, such information can be omitted altogether from the written confession. The 
following items of information should be obtained during the verbal confession: 
 
THE ACCUSED KNEW THE CONDUCT WAS WRONG 
Intent (i.e., the state of mind with which something is done) is required in all matters 
involving fraud. Not only must the confessor have committed the act, he must have known 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.266   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the conduct was wrong and intended to commit it. This information can be developed as 
illustrated in the following example. 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, now that you have decided to help yourself, I can help you, too. I need to ask you some 
questions to get this cleared up. As I understand it, you did this, and you knew it was wrong, 
but you didn’t really mean to h urt the company, is that right?” 
 
(Note that the question is phrased so that the confessor acknowledges intent, but “didn’t 
mean to hurt” anyone. Make sure the question is not phrased so that the confessor 
falsely says that he “didn’t mean to do it.”) 
 
FACTS KNOWN ONLY TO CONFESSOR 
Once the intent question is solved, the questi oning turns to those facts known only to the 
confessor. These facts include—at a minimum— the accused’s estimates  of the number of 
instances of wrongful conduct as well as the total amount of money involved. The questions 
should not be phrased so that the confessor can answer “yes” or “no.” 
 
ESTIMATE OF NUMBER OF INSTANCES/AMOUNTS 
In fraud matters especially, it is common for the accused to underestimate the amount of 
funds involved as well as the number of instances. This is probably because of a natural 
tendency of the human mind to block out unpleasant matters. Take the figures with a grain 
of salt. If the accused’s response is “I don’t know,” start high with the amounts and 
gradually come down. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, how many times do you think this happened?” 
 
Respondent : 
“I don’t have any idea.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Was it as many as 100 times?” 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.267 
Respondent : 
“No way!” 
 
Interviewer: 
“How about 75 times?” 
 
Respondent : 
“That’s still too high. Probably not more than two or three times.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Are you pretty sure, Linda?” (If the accused’s estimates are too low, gently get her 
to acknowledge a higher figure. But do not challenge the accused by calling her a 
liar.) 
 
Respondent : 
“Maybe three times, but certainly not more than that.” 
 
MOTIVE FOR OFFENSE 
Motive  is the moving power that prompts a person to act. Motive, however, should not be 
confused with intent, which refers to the state of mind of the accused when performing the 
act. Motive, unlike intent, is not an essential element and criminal law generally treats a 
person’s motive as irrelevant. Even so, motive is relevant for other purposes: it will often 
guide the interviewer to the proper rationalization, it further incriminates the accused, and it 
is important for a successful prosecution. Therefore, it is best that the interviewer elicit the 
suspect’s motive when obtaining a verbal confession. The motive might be the same as the 
theme the interviewer developed earlier—or it  might not. The most common response is “I 
don’t know.” The interviewer should probe for additional information, but if it is not 
forthcoming, then attribute the motive to the theme developed earlier. The motive should be 
established along the lines below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, we have discussed what might have led you to do this. But I need to hear it in your 
words. Why do you think you did this?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.268   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHEN OFFENSE COMMENCED 
The interviewer will want to know the approximate date and time that the offense started. 
This is usually developed by a question similar to the following. 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I am sure you remember the first time this happened.” 
 
Respondent : 
“Yes.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Tell me about it.” 
 
Respondent : 
“Around the middle of January of last year.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I admire you for having the courage to talk about this. You’re doing the right thing. 
Tell me in detail about the first time.”  
 
WHEN/IF OFFENSE WAS TERMINATED 
In fraud matters, especially internal fraud, the offenses are usually continuous. That is, the 
miscreant seldom stops before he is discovered. If appropriate, the interviewer should seek 
the date the offense terminated. The question is typically phrased as follows. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, when was the last  time you did this?” 
 
OTHERS INVOLVED 
Most frauds are solo ventures—committed wit hout the aid of an accomplice. Rather than 
ask if anyone else was involved, phrase the question something like this. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, who else knew about this besides you?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.269 
By asking who else “knew,” the interviewer is  in effect not only asking for the names of 
possible conspirators, but also about others who might have known what was going on and 
failed to report it. This question should not be worded as, “did someone else know?” but rather 
“who else knew?”  
 
OBTAIN PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
Physical evidence — regardless of how limited it might be — should be obtained from the 
confessor. In many instances, illicit income from fraud is deposited directly in the bank 
accounts of the perpetrator. The interviewer will typically want to ask the confessor to 
surrender his banking records voluntarily for review. It is recommended that either (1) a 
separate written authorization be created, or (2) specific language be added to the  
confession noting the voluntary surrender of banking information. The first method is 
generally preferable. 
 
If there are other relevant records that can be obtained only with the confessor’s consent, 
permission to review those should be sought during the oral confession. In some instances, 
it might be advisable to delay this step until the written confession is obtained. The request 
for physical evidence from the confessor can be set up like this: 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, as a part of wrapping up the details, I will need your banking records (or other 
physical evidence). You understand that, don’t you?” 
 
Respondent : 
“No, I don’t.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, I just need to document the facts and clear up any remaining questions. You have 
decided to tell the complete story, including your side of it. I just want to make sure the facts are 
accurate and fair to you. We want to make sure you’re not blamed for something someone else 
did. And I want to report that you cooperated fully and wanted to do the right thing, 
okay? ”(Avoid the use of the word evidence or references to higher tribunals, such 
as courts or prosecutors.) 
 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.270   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Respondent : 
“Okay.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Where do you keep your bank accounts?” (If the interviewer knows of at least one 
bank where the confessor does business, the question should be phrased:  “Linda, 
where do you do business besides Florida Marine National Bank?”) 
 
Respondent : 
“Just Florida Marine.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I’ll need to get your okay to get them from the bank if we need them. Where do you keep the 
original records?” (Do not ask the accused’s permission to look at the records; 
rather, tell her the records are needed. Let the accused object if she has a 
problem with it.) 
 
DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS 
If it has not come out earlier, the interviewer should find out in general what happened to 
any illicit income derived from the misdeeds. It is typical for the money to have been used 
for frivolous or ostentatious purposes. It is important, however, that the confessor sees his 
actions in a more positive light; the interviewer should avoid comments or questions relating 
to “high living.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what happened to the money?” (Let the accused explain; do not suggest an 
answer unless the confessor does not respond.) 
 
LOCATION OF ASSETS 
In appropriate situations, the interviewer will want to find out if there are residual assets that 
the confessor can use to reduce losses. Rather than ask the accused “is there anything left?” the 
question should be phrased as “what’s left?” 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.271 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what do you have left from all of this?”  
 
Respondent : 
“Not much. I used most of the money to cover my husband’s bills and financial problems. A 
little money and a boat that is paid for is all I have.”  
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, whatever it is, this whole thing will look a lot better if you vol unteered to return what 
you could, don’t you agree?” (Remember do not specifically promise the confessor 
leniency; it will typically invalidate the confession.)  
 
SPECIFICS OF EACH OFFENSE 
Once the major hurdles are overcome, the intervie wer should return to the specifics of each 
offense. Generally, this should simply start with the first instance and work through 
chronologically in a logical fashion.  
 
Because these questions are information seeking, they should be openly phrased so that the 
answer is independent of the question. It is best to seek the independent recollections of the 
confessor first before displaying physical evidence. If the confessor cannot independently 
recall, documents can be used to refresh his recollection. It generally is best to resolve all 
issues on each instance before proceeding to the next. In determining the specifics of the 
offense, the interviewer should usually ask: 
• Who has knowledge of this transaction? 
• What does this document mean? 
• When did this transaction occur? 
• Where did the proceeds of the transaction go? 
• Why was the transaction done? 
• How was the transaction covered up? 
 
Interviewing is a difficult act, seldom mastered without considerable practice. The preceding 
techniques, when properly employed, can immeasurably aid in developing truthful, reliable, 
and legally valid information. 
 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.272   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


admissionseek question
the choic of when to conduct an admissionseek interview of a suspect is critic
normal the interview should ask accusatori or admissionseek question when there
is a reason probabl that the respond ha commit the act in question all other
reason investig step have been complet and as much inform as possibl ha
been develop from other sourc and the interview can reason control the place
time and subject matter of the interview an assess of culpabl might be base on
verbal and nonverb respons to interview question as well as document physic
evid and other interview
a transit theme is necessari when proceed from assessmentseek question to
admissionseek question part of the purpos of thi theme is to creat in the mind of
the miscreant that he ha been caught under the ideal circumst the interview will
leav the room for just a few minut sai thi is to check on someth if the
interview ha incrimin document copi can be place insid a file folder and
brought back to the interview if no document exist it might be appropri to fill a file
folder with blank paper
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3249
exampl
when the interview return to the room the file folder is place on the desk and the
interview ask is there someth that you would like to tell me about
or
is there ani reason why some on would sai that you
hand the document to the respond and ask for comment do not introduc the
evid or explain it in about 20 percent of the case the miscreant will admit to
incrimin conduct if not proce onc the interview is reason convinc of
guilt it might be appropri to confront the respond
purpos of question
admissionseek question have at least three purpos the first purpos is to distinguish
innoc peopl from guilti a culpabl individu will frequent confess dure the
admissionseek phase of an interview while an innoc person will not do so unless
threat or coercion ar us in some instanc the onli wai to differenti the culpabl
from the innoc is to seek an admiss of guilt
the second purpos is to obtain a valid confess confess under the law must be
voluntarili obtain the import of a valid and bind confess to wrongdo
cannot be overst the third purpos of admissionseek question is to convinc the
confessor to sign a written statement acknowledg the fact although oral confess ar
legal as bind as written on the written statement ha greater credibl it also
discourag miscreant from later attempt to recant
prepar
the interview should be schedul when the interview can control the situat it
normal should not be conduct on the accus turf and is best conduct by surpris
interview room
when prepar a room for an admissionseek interview it is import that the
interview consid the privaci afford by the room the locat should establish a sens
of privaci the door should be close but not lock there should be no physic barrier
prevent the target from leav and the suspect should be made awar that he is free to
leav thi is to avoid alleg of custodi interrog
interview theori and applic investig
3250 2011 fraud examin manual
distract should be kept to a minimum ideal there should be no photograph
window or other object in the room chair should be place about four to six feet apart
and the accus should not be permit to sit behind ani physic barrier such as chair
tabl or desk thi is to prohibit a psycholog barrier for the accus to hide behind
notetak
when conduct an admissionseek interview note take should be kept to a minimum
in some case take note should be altogeth avoid sinc the ultim goal of the
admissionseek interview is to obtain a sign statement in which the suspect admit guilt
it is not necessari to take extens note which can be distract to the suspect and can
reveal what point the examin believ to be import note if taken dure the
interview should be done in a wai that doe not reveal their signific
presenc of outsid
it is usual not necessari to inform the subject that he mai have counsel present of cours
thi right cannot be deni if the subject wish to have an attornei present if counsel is
present you should have an understand that he will be an observ onli attornei should
not ask question or object other than the subject and two examin no other observ
should be permit in the admissionseek interview if the accus is in a union a union
repres or a union attornei might have the right to attend howev thi might
present legal problem in broadcast the alleg to a third parti it is veri difficult to
obtain a confess with wit present the examin should therefor consid whether
the case can be proven without the admissionseek interview pleas refer to the law
section of the fraud examin manual for more inform
miranda warn
as a gener rule privat employe conduct an intern investig ar not requir to
give miranda warn howev there ar except to the rule see the chapter on
individu right in the law section of the fraud examin manual for more inform
theme develop
peopl rare confess voluntarili peopl will confess to matter when thei perceiv that the
benefit of confess outweigh the penalti a good interview through the applic of
sophist techniqu will be abl to convinc the respond that the confess is in hi
best interest
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3251
peopl gener will not confess if thei believ that there is doubt in the mind of the accus
regard their guilt the interview must convei absolut confid in the admissionseek
even if not fulli convinc the inter viewer must make the accus in the form
of a statement of fact accusatori question do not ask did you do it thei ask why did
you do it
an innoc person gener will not accept the question premis peopl confess need
adequ time to come to term with their guilt obtain admiss and confess take
patienc therefor admissionseek interview should be done onli when there is
suffici privaci and time is not a factor the interview must not express disgust outrag
or moral condemn about the confessor action to do so goe against the basic logic
of obtain confess which can be sum up as maxim sympathi and minim the
percept of moral wrongdo
the interview must offer a moral accept reason for the confessor behavior the
interview cannot convei to the accus that he is a bad person guilti peopl will
almost never confess under such condit to obtain a confess the interview must be
firm but must project compass understand and sympathi the interview must
attempt to keep the confessor from voic a denial onc the accus deni the act
overcom that posit will be veri difficult
the threat of a lawsuit is alwai present when alleg of wrongdo ar made against
certain employe it is therefor import that examin understand exactli what action
ar permit so that thei can avoid potenti liabil it is gener legal to accus innoc
peopl of misde thei did not commit as long as
the accus ha reason suspicion or predic to believ the accus ha
commit an offens
the accus is made under condit of privaci
the accus doe not take ani action like to make an innoc person confess
the accus is conduct under reason condit
step in the admissionseek interview
direct accus
the accus should not be made in the form of a question but as a statement emot
word such as steal fraud and crime should be avoid dure the accusatori process the
interview theori and applic investig
3252 2011 fraud examin manual
accus should be phrase as though the accus guilt ha alreadi been establish so
that the accus is psycholog trap with no wai out
exampl
wrong
we have reason to believ that you
or
we think suspect you might have
right
our investig ha clearli establish that you
made a fals entri avoid fraud
took compani asset without permiss avoid us theft embezzl or steal
accept monei from a vendor avoid bribe or kickback
have not told the complet truth avoid lie or fraud
or
we have been conduct an investig into and you ar the onli person we
have not been abl to elimin as be respons
observ reaction
when accus of wrongdo the typic guilti person will react with silenc if the accus
doe deni culpabl those denial will usual be weak in some case the accus will
almost mumbl the denial it is common for the culpabl individu to avoid outright denial
rather that person will give reason why he could not have commit the act in question
the innoc person will sometim react with genuin shock at be accus it is not at
all unusu for an innoc person wrongfulli accus to react with anger as oppos to
the guilti person the innoc person will strongli deni carri out the act or act
in question
repeat accus
if the accus doe not strenuous object after the accus is made the interview
should repeat the accus with the same degre of convict and strength
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3253
exampl
interview
as i said linda our examin ha conclud that you ar the respons person it is not
so much a question of what you did but why you did it
interrupt denial
both the truth and untruth person will normal object to and deni the accus
but when compar to an innoc person a culpabl person is more like to stop short of
an outright denial i didnt do it and is more apt to furnish the interview with
explan as to why he is not the respons parti an innoc person is unlik to
allow the interview to prevail in stop the denial
exampl
respond
i wasnt even there the dai that entri wa made
or
it could have been anybodi
or
i dont know what your talk about
both the innoc and the guilti person will make an outright denial if forc to do so
accordingli the interview should not solicit a denial at thi stage of the admissionseek
interview
exampl
wrong
interview
did you do thi
or
ar you the respons person
right
interview
why did you do thi
addition the interview must prevent the subject from make an outright denial
becaus it becom extrem difficult to chang a denial onc it is utter if the person
interview theori and applic investig
3254 2011 fraud examin manual
deni the accus and later admit it he is admit to ly and thi type of admiss
is hard to make therefor the interview job is to prevent the subject from make an
outright denial therebi make it easier for the subject to confess to the act
examin can us sever techniqu to stop or interrupt denial
delai
on of the most effect techniqu to stop or interrupt the denial is through a delai
tactic the interview should not argu with the accus but rather attempt to delai the
outright denial
exampl
interview
linda i hear what you ar sai but let me finish first then you can talk
the innoc person usual will not hold on or let the interview continu to develop
the theme
repeat interrupt
occasion it might be necessari to interrupt the accus attempt denial repeatedli
becaus thi stage is crucial the interview should be prepar to increas the tone of the
interrupt to the point when he is prepar to sai linda if you keep interrupt i am go
to have to termin thi convers the guilti individu will find thi threaten becaus she
want to know the extent of incrimin evid in the interview possess
reason
if the abov techniqu ar unsuccess the interview might attempt to reason with the
accus and emploi some of the tactic normal us for diffus alibi see below
under these tactic the accus is present with evid implic him the interview
howev normal should not disclos all the fact of the case but rather small portion here
and there
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3255
exampl
interview
i know what you sai linda but that doesnt squar with these invoic here in front of me
look at the invoic in the amount of 1021 36 the fact clearli show you ar respons
do not ask the accus to explain the evid at thi point
or
linda i have talk to mani pe opl befor i sat down here with you i am not ask you if
your respons i know you ar thi is your opportun to tell your side to someon who can
understand do not disclos the ident or number of the wit who have
been interview
establish ration
onc the accus ha been made repeat and denial ar stop it is time for the
interview to establish a moral accept ration that will allow the accus to
squar the misde with hi conscienc it is not necessari that thi theme be relat to the
underli caus of the misconduct it is common and accept for the accus to explain
awai the moral consequ of the action by seiz onto ani plausibl explan other
than be a bad person
if the accus doe not seem to relat to on theme the interview should go on to anoth
until on seem to fit thereaft that theme should be develop fulli note that the theme
develop explain awai the moralbut not the legalconsequ of the misde
the interview is caution not to make ani statement that would lead the accus to
believ he will be excus from legal liabil by cooper
the question pose in the exampl rather than be confront constantli seek
agreement from the accus the interview must strike a balanc between be in control
of the interview and still appear compassion and understand again no matter what
conduct the accus ha supposedli commit the interview should not express shock
outrag or condemn
unfair treatment
probabl the most common explan for crimin activ in gener and intern fraud in
particular is unfair treatment and the accus attempt to achiev equiti studi have
shown that counterproduct employe behaviorinclud stealingi motiv
primarili by job dissatisfact employe and other feel that strik ing back is import
interview theori and applic investig
3256 2011 fraud examin manual
to their selfesteem the sensit interview can capit on these feel by suggest
to the accus that he is a victim
exampl
interview
linda i feel like i know what make you tick and i know it isnt like you to do someth
like thi without a reason you have work hard here to get a good reput i dont think
the compani ha paid you what your realli worth and that the wai you feel too isnt it
or
linda iv seen situat like thi befor and i think the compani brought thi on
themselv if you had been fairli treat thi wouldnt have happen dont you agre
inadequ recognit
some employe might feel that their effort have gone complet without notic by the
compani as with similar theme the interview should be empathet
exampl
interview
linda i have found out a few thing about you it look to me that you have given a lot more
to thi compani than thei have re cogniz isnt that right linda
financi problem
intern crimin especi execut and upper manag frequent engag in fraud
to conceal their true financi condit either person or busi here ar exampl of
how to develop a theme involv financi problem as a motiv in the follow exampl
e j is an execut of a compani and is suspect of fraud
exampl
interview
e j i wa astonish to find out some of your invest have taken such a beat i dont
know how you manag to keep everyth afloat as well as you did you just did thi to stai
aliv financi didnt you e j
or
e j i have found out what youv been paid around here and frankli i wa surpris i
thought it might be a lot more no wonder you had to get involv in thi you pretti much
need to do thi to surviv didnt you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3257
aberr of conduct
mani miscreant believ their conduct constitut an aberr in their live and that it is
not repres of their true charact the interview might establish thi theme by
appli the follow exampl
exampl
interview
linda i know thi is total out of charact for you i know that thi would never have
happen if someth wasnt go on in your life isnt that right linda
or
e j youv work hard all your life to get a good reput i feel you wouldnt normal
have done someth like thi it just doesnt fit unless you felt like you were forc into it you
felt forc to do thi didnt you e j
famili problem
some peopl commit fraud becaus of famili problem financi woe caus by divorc
an unfaith spous or demand children men especi who have been social
condit to tie their masculin to earn power might hold the notion that wealth
connot famili respect for their part women have been found to commit whitecollar
crime in the name of their respons to the need of their husband and children the
skill interview can convert thi motiv to hi advantag by appli on of the follow
approach
exampl
interview
linda i know you have had some famili problem i know your recent divorc ha been
difficult for you and i know how it is when these problem occur you never would have done
thi if it hadnt been for famili problem isnt that right linda
or
e j someon in your posit and with your ethic just doesnt do thing like thi without a
reason and i think that reason ha to do with try to make the best possibl life for your
famili i know it would be difficult for me to admit to my famili that were not as well off as we
were last year and that why you did thi isnt it e j
interview theori and applic investig
3258 2011 fraud examin manual
accus action
dont disclos the accus ident if it is not alreadi known but in case where the
accus ident is known to the accus it can be help to blame the accus for the
problem the accus can be a colleagu manag auditor fraud examin or ani similar
person altern the problem can be blame on the compani
exampl
interview
linda you know what these auditor ar like thei ar hire to turn over everi stone i
wonder how thei would look if we put them under a microscop compar to other thing that
ar go on what youv done isnt that bad right linda
or
e j i realli blame a larg part of thi on the compani if some of the thing that went on
around thi compani were known it would make what youv done seem pretti small in
comparison wouldnt it e j
stress drug and alcohol
employe will sometim turn to drug or alcohol to reduc stress in some instanc the
stress itself will lead to aberr behavior in a few individu a ration establish
by the interview could be similar to the follow
exampl
interview
linda i know what youv done isnt realli you insid you have been in a lot of turmoil a
lot of peopl drink too much when thei have problem i have been through period like that
myself and when thing build up insid it sometim make all of us do someth we
shouldnt that what happen here isnt it linda
or
e j your on of the most respect men in thi compani i know you have been under
tremend pressur to succe too much pressur realli there is onli so much ani of us can
take that behind what ha happen here isnt it e j
reveng
similar to other theme reveng can be effect develop as a motiv in thi techniqu
the interview attempt to blame the offens on the accus feel that he must get
back at someon or someth
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3259
exampl
interview
linda what ha happen is out of charact for you i think you were try to get back at
your supervisor for the time he pass you over for a rais i would probabl feel the same
that what happen isnt it linda
or
e j everyon around here know that the board ha not support you in your effort to turn
thi compani around i would understand if you said to yourself ill show them is that what
happen e j
deperson the victim
in case involv employe theft an effect techniqu is to deperson the victim the
accus is better abl to cope with the moral dilemma of hi action if the victim is a faceless
corpor or agenc
exampl
interview
linda it isnt like you took someth from a friend or neighbor i can see how you could sai
well thi would be okai to do as long as it wa against the compani and not my cowork
is that right linda
or
e j it not like what youv done ha realli hurt on person mayb you thought of it thi
wai at most iv cost each sharehold a few cent is that the wai it wa e j
minor moral infract
the interview in mani case can reduc the accus percept of the moral serious
of the matter thi is not to be confus with the legal serious fraud examin and
interview should be care to avoid make statement that could be constru as
reliev legal respons for exampl the examin should not state it is not a big deal
legal it just a technic violat instead the interview should plai down the moral side
on effect wai is through comparison such as those illustr below
exampl
interview
linda thi problem we have doesnt mean your jack the ripper when you compar what
youv done to thing other peopl do thi situat seem pretti insignific doesnt it
interview theori and applic investig
3260 2011 fraud examin manual
or
e j everyth is rel what youv done doesnt even come close to some of the other
thing that have happen your not berni madoff right e j
or
i could see myself in your place i probabl wo uld have done the same thing wouldnt i
altruism
in mani case the moral serious of the matter can be reduc by claim the action
wa for the benefit of other thi is especi true if the accus view himself as a
care person
exampl
interview
linda i know you didnt do thi for yourself i have look into thi matter carefulli and i
think you did thi to help your husband didnt you
or
e j you have a big responsibili ty in thi compani a lot of peopl depend on you for their
job i just know you did thi becaus you thought you were do the right thing for the
compani didnt you
genuin need
in a veri small number of case fraud is predic by genuin need for exampl the
accus might be pai for the medic care of sick parent or a child or some other
financi disast might have befallen the miscreant in those case the follow techniqu
might be effect
exampl
interview
linda i dont know mani peopl who have had so mani bad thing happen all at onc i can
see where you thought thi wa pretti much a matter of life or death right linda
or
e j your like everyon els you have to put food on the tabl but in your posit it is
veri difficult to ask for help you genuin need to do thi to surviv didnt you e j
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3261
diffus alibi
even if the accus is present with an appropri ration it is like that he will
continu to want to deni culpabl when the interview is success in stop denial
the accus normal will then turn to variou reason why he could not have commit the
act in question the purpos of thi stage is to convinc the accus of the weight of the
evid against him miscreant usual have a keen interest in materi that tend to
implic them alibi gener can be diffus us on of the method list below
displai physic evid
it is common for most guilti peopl to overestim the amount of physic evid the
interview want to try and reinforc thi notion in the wai the evid is laid out to the
accus the physic evid usual document in fraud matter gener should be
displai on piec at a time in revers order of import in thi wai the full extent of
the evid is not immedi known by the accus when the accus no longer deni
culpabl the interview should stop displai evid
each time a document or piec of evid is laid out to the accus it signific should
be note by the interview dure thi phase the accus is still try to come to grip
with be caught the interview should therefor expect that the accus will attempt to
lie hi wai out of the situat like denial the interview should stop the alibi and other
falsehood befor thei ar fulli articul
onc the alibi ar diffus the interview should return to the theme be develop
the follow is an exampl of thi techniqu us on linda reed collin who set up a
fictiti compani and embezzl monei by approv payment from her employ to a
shell corpor
exampl
respond
i couldnt have done thi i am not respons for pai invoic
interview
here is on of the invoic in question displai document we never receiv the merchandis
dont mention whether you have talk to the account payabl depart or
whether you have subject the invoic to ani document analysi
interview theori and applic investig
3262 2011 fraud examin manual
look linda it is useless for you to try to deni the truth we have lot of evid let just
try to work thi out but youv got to help me okai dont accus the person of
ly thi just prolong the process
discuss wit
anoth techniqu for diffus alibi is to discuss the testimoni of wit the object
is to give enough inform about what other peopl would sai without provid too
much ideal the interview statement will creat the impress in the mind of the
accus that mani peopl ar in a posit to contradict hi stori
the interview is again caution about furnish enough inform to the accus so
that he can identifi the wit thi might place the wit in a difficult posit and the
accus could contact the wit in an effort to influenc testimoni the accus could
take repris against potenti wit though thi is rare
exampl
respond
i couldnt possibl have done thi it would requir the approv of a supervisor
interview
in normal situat it would the problem is that your statement doesnt hold up there ar
sever peopl who will tell a complet differ stori i can understand how you would want
me to believ that but your onli worsen the situat by make these statement if you
will help me on thi youll also be help yourself understand
discuss decept
the final techniqu is to discuss the accus de ception the purpos is to appeal to the
accus logic not to scold or degrad thi techniqu is sometim the onli on avail
if physic evid is lack as with other interview situat the word ly should
be avoid
exampl
respond
there is no wai i could have done thi i didnt have the opportun
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3263
interview
linda here is the situat you know what you ve done and so do i i can understand it is
difficult for you to admit but if all the fact have to be present everyon will reach the same
inescap conclus you ar respons if you continu to deni what youv done youll just
make the situat wors you understand that dont you
present an altern question
after the accus alibi have been diffus he normal will becom quiet and withdrawn
some peopl in thi situat might cry if so be comfort do not discourag the accus
from show emot in thi stage the accus is decid whether to confess the
interview at thi point should present an altern question to the accus the
altern question forc the accus to make on of two choic on altern allow
the accus a moral accept reason for the misde the other paint the accus in a
neg light regardless of which answer the accus choos he is acknowledg guilt
exampl
interview
linda did you plan thi deliber or did it just happen
or
linda did you just want extra monei or did you do thi becaus you had financi
problem
or
linda did you just get greedi or did you do thi becaus of the wai the compani ha treat
you
obtain a benchmark admiss
either wai the accus answer the altern question either ye or no he ha made a
culpabl statement or a benchmark admiss onc the benchmark admiss is made the
miscreant ha made a subconsci decis to confess
the question for the benchmark admiss should be construct as lead question so
thei can be answer ye or no thei should not be construct so that the answer
requir some type of explan that will come later the accus might also answer in
the neg
interview theori and applic investig
3264 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
respond
i didnt do it deliber
or
i didnt do it just beca us i want extra monei
or
no im not just greedi
in the case where the accus answer the altern question in the neg the
interview should press further for a posit admiss
exampl
interview
then it just happen on the spur of the moment
or
then you did it to take care of your financi problem
or
then you did it becaus of the wai youv been treat here
should the accus still not respond to the altern question with the benchmark
admiss the interview should repeat the question or variat thereof until the
benchmark admiss is made it is import for the interview to get a respons that is
tantamount to a commit to confess
reinforc ration
onc the benchmark admiss is made the interview should reinforc the confessor
decis then the interview should make the transit into the verbal confess where
the detail of the offens ar obtain reinforc the ration develop earlier will
help the confessor feel comfort believ that the interview doe not look down
on him
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3265
exampl
interview
linda i am glad to hear that you had a good reason to do thi that reinforc what i
thought all along that you were caught up in extraordinari circumst when wa the first
time you did it
verbal confess
the transit to the verbal confess is made when the accus furnish the first detail
inform about the offens thereaft it is the interview job to probe gentli for
addit detail prefer includ those that would be known onli to the miscreant as
with ani interview there ar three gener approach to obtain the verbal confess
chronolog by transact or by event the approach to be taken should be govern
by the circumst of the case
dure the admissionseek interview it is best to first confirm the gener detail of the
offens for exampl the interview will want the accus estim of the amount
involv other parti to the offens and the locat of physic evid after these basic
fact ar confirm the interview can then return to the specif in chronolog order
it is imper that the interview obtain an earli admiss that the accus knew the
conduct in question wa wrong thi confirm the essenti element of intent
becaus of the psycholog of confess most confessor will lie about on or more
aspect of the offens even though confirm overal guilt when thi happen dure the
verbal confess the interview should make a mental note of the discrep and
proce as if the falsehood had been accept as truth
such discrep should be save until all other relev fact ar provid by the accus
if the discrep ar materi to the offens then the interview should either resolv
them at the end of the verbal confess or wait and correct them in the written confess
if not materi such inform can be omit altogeth from the written confess the
follow item of inform should be obtain dure the verbal confess
the accus knew the conduct wa wrong
intent ie the state of mind with which someth is done is requir in all matter
involv fraud not onli must the confessor have commit the act he must have known
interview theori and applic investig
3266 2011 fraud examin manual
the conduct wa wrong and intend to commit it thi inform can be develop as
illustr in the follow exampl
exampl
interview
linda now that you have decid to help yourself i can help you too i need to ask you some
question to get thi clear up as i understand it you did thi and you knew it wa wrong
but you didnt realli mean to h urt the compani is that right
note that the question is phrase so that the confessor acknowledg intent but didnt
mean to hurt anyon make sure the question is not phrase so that the confessor
fals sai that he didnt mean to do it
fact known onli to confessor
onc the intent question is solv the questi on turn to those fact known onli to the
confessor these fact includeat a minimum the accus estim of the number of
instanc of wrong conduct as well as the total amount of monei involv the question
should not be phrase so that the confessor can answer ye or no
estim of number of instancesamount
in fraud matter especi it is common for the accus to underestim the amount of
fund involv as well as the number of instanc thi is probabl becaus of a natur
tendenc of the human mind to block out unpleas matter take the figur with a grain
of salt if the accus respons is i dont know start high with the amount and
gradual come down
exampl
interview
linda how mani time do you think thi happen
respond
i dont have ani idea
interview
wa it as mani as 100 time
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3267
respond
no wai
interview
how about 75 time
respond
that still too high probabl not more than two or three time
interview
ar you pretti sure linda if the accus estim ar too low gentli get her
to acknowledg a higher figur but do not challeng the accus by call her a
liar
respond
mayb three time but certainli not more than that
motiv for offens
motiv is the move power that prompt a person to act motiv howev should not be
confus with intent which refer to the state of mind of the accus when perform the
act motiv unlik intent is not an essenti element and crimin law gener treat a
person motiv as irrelev even so motiv is relev for other purpos it will often
guid the interview to the proper ration it further incrimin the accus and it
is import for a success prosecut therefor it is best that the interview elicit the
suspect motiv when obtain a verbal confess the motiv might be the same as the
theme the interview develop earlieror it might not the most common respons is i
dont know the interview should probe for addit inform but if it is not
forthcom then attribut the motiv to the theme develop earlier the motiv should be
establish along the line below
exampl
interview
linda we have discuss what might have led you to do thi but i need to hear it in your
word why do you think you did thi
interview theori and applic investig
3268 2011 fraud examin manual
when offens commenc
the interview will want to know the approxim date and time that the offens start
thi is usual develop by a question similar to the follow
exampl
interview
linda i am sure you rememb the first time thi happen
respond
ye
interview
tell me about it
respond
around the middl of januari of last year
interview
linda i admir you for have the courag to talk about thi your do the right thing
tell me in detail about the first time
whenif offens wa termin
in fraud matter especi intern fraud the offens ar usual continu that is the
miscreant seldom stop befor he is discov if appropri the interview should seek
the date the offens termin the question is typic phrase as follow
exampl
interview
linda when wa the last time you did thi
other involv
most fraud ar solo venturescommit wit hout the aid of an accomplic rather than
ask if anyon els wa involv phrase the question someth like thi
exampl
interview
linda who els knew about thi besid you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3269
by ask who els knew the interview is in effect not onli ask for the name of
possibl conspir but also about other who might have known what wa go on and
fail to report it thi question should not be word as did someon els know but rather
who els knew
obtain physic evid
physic evid regardless of how limit it might be should be obtain from the
confessor in mani instanc illicit incom from fraud is deposit directli in the bank
account of the perpetr the interview will typic want to ask the confessor to
surrend hi bank record voluntarili for review it is recommend that either 1 a
separ written author be creat or 2 specif languag be ad to the
confess note the voluntari surrend of bank inform the first method is
gener prefer
if there ar other relev record that can be obtain onli with the confessor consent
permiss to review those should be sought dure the oral confess in some instanc
it might be advis to delai thi step until the written confess is obtain the request
for physic evid from the confessor can be set up like thi
exampl
interview
linda as a part of wrap up the detail i will need your bank record or other
physic evid you understand that dont you
respond
no i dont
interview
well i just need to document the fact and clear up ani remain question you have
decid to tell the complet stori includ your side of it i just want to make sure the fact ar
accur and fair to you we want to make sure your not blame for someth someon els
did and i want to report that you cooper fulli and want to do the right thing
okai avoid the us of the word evid or refer to higher tribun such
as court or prosecutor
interview theori and applic investig
3270 2011 fraud examin manual
respond
okai
interview
where do you keep your bank account if the interview know of at least on
bank where the confessor doe busi the question should be phrase linda
where do you do busi besid florida marin nation bank
respond
just florida marin
interview
ill need to get your okai to get them from the bank if we need them where do you keep the
origin record do not ask the accus permiss to look at the record
rather tell her the record ar need let the accus object if she ha a
problem with it
disposit of proce
if it ha not come out earlier the interview should find out in gener what happen to
ani illicit incom deriv from the misde it is typic for the monei to have been us
for frivol or ostentati purpos it is import howev that the confessor see hi
action in a more posit light the interview should avoid comment or question relat
to high live
exampl
interview
linda what happen to the monei let the accus explain do not suggest an
answer unless the confessor doe not respond
locat of asset
in appropri situat the interview will want to find out if there ar residu asset that
the confessor can us to reduc loss rather than ask the accus is there anyth left the
question should be phrase as what left
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3271
exampl
interview
linda what do you have left from all of thi
respond
not much i us most of the monei to cover my husband bill and financi problem a
littl monei and a boat that is paid for is all i have
interview
well whatev it is thi whole thing will look a lot better if you vol unteer to return what
you could dont you agre rememb do not specif promis the confessor
lenienc it will typic invalid the confess
specif of each offens
onc the major hurdl ar overcom the intervi wer should return to the specif of each
offens gener thi should simpli start with the first instanc and work through
chronolog in a logic fashion
becaus these question ar inform seek thei should be openli phrase so that the
answer is independ of the question it is best to seek the independ recollect of the
confessor first befor displai physic evid if the confessor cannot independ
recal document can be us to refresh hi recollect it gener is best to resolv all
issu on each instanc befor proceed to the next in determin the specif of the
offens the interview should usual ask
who ha knowledg of thi transact
what doe thi document mean
when did thi transact occur
where did the proce of the transact go
why wa the transact done
how wa the transact cover up
interview is a difficult act seldom master without consider practic the preced
techniqu when properli emploi can immeasur aid in develop truth reliabl
and legal valid inform
interview theori and applic investig
3272 2011 fraud examin manual
