2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Interrupt Denials


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Interrupt Denials 
Both the truthful and untruthful person will normally object to and deny the accusations. 
But when compared to an innocent person, a culpable person is more likely to stop short of 
an outright denial ( “I didn’t do it. ”) and is more apt to furnish the interviewer with 
explanations as to why he is not the responsible party. An innocent person is unlikely to 
allow the interviewer to prevail in stopping the denial.  
 
 EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I wasn’t even there the day  that entry was made.” 
OR 
“It could have been anybody.” 
OR 
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.” 
 
Both the innocent and the guilty person will make an outright denial if forced to do so. 
Accordingly, the interviewer should not solicit a denial at this stage of the admission-seeking 
interview. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer:  
“Did you do this?” 
OR 
“Are you the responsible person?” 
RIGHT 
Interviewer:  
“Why did you do this?” 
 
Additionally, the interviewer must prevent the subject from making an outright denial 
because it becomes extremely difficult to change a denial once it is uttered. If the person 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.254   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
denies the accusation and later admits it, he is admitting to lying, and this type of admission 
is hard to make. Therefore, the interviewer’s job is to prevent the subject from making an 
outright denial, thereby making it easier for the subject to confess to the act.  
 
Examiners can use several techniques to stop or interrupt denials.  
 
DELAYS 
One of the most effective techniques to stop or interrupt the denial is through a delaying 
tactic. The interviewer should not argue with the accused, but rather attempt to delay the 
outright denial. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I hear what you are saying, but let me finish first. Then you can talk.” 
 
The innocent person usually will not “hold on” or let the interviewer continue to develop 
the theme. 
 
REPEAT INTERRUPTIONS 
Occasionally, it might be necessary to interrupt  the accused’s attempted denial repeatedly. 
Because this stage is crucial, the interviewer should be prepared to increase the tone of the 
interruptions to the point when he is prepared to say: “Linda, if you keep interrupting, I am going 
to have to terminate this conversation.” The guilty individual will find this threatening, because she 
wants to know the extent of incriminating evidence in the interviewer’s possession.  
 
REASONING 
If the above techniques are unsuccessful, the interviewer might attempt to reason with the 
accused, and employ some of the tactics normally used for diffusing alibis (see below). 
Under these tactics, the accused is presented with evidence implicating him. The interviewer, 
however, normally should not disclose all the facts of the case, but rather small portions here 
and there. 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.255 
 EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I know what you say, Linda, but that doesn’t square with these invoices here in front of me. 
Look at the invoice in the amount of $102,1 36. The facts clearly show you are responsible.” 
(Do not ask the accused to explain the evidence at this point.)  
OR 
“Linda, I have talked to many pe ople before I sat down here with  you. I am not asking you if 
you’re responsible; I know you are. This is your opportunity to tell your side to someone who can 
understand.” (Do not disclose the identity or number of the witnesses who have 
been interviewed.) 
 



:


interrupt denial
both the truth and untruth person will normal object to and deni the accus
but when compar to an innoc person a culpabl person is more like to stop short of
an outright denial i didnt do it and is more apt to furnish the interview with
explan as to why he is not the respons parti an innoc person is unlik to
allow the interview to prevail in stop the denial
exampl
respond
i wasnt even there the dai that entri wa made
or
it could have been anybodi
or
i dont know what your talk about
both the innoc and the guilti person will make an outright denial if forc to do so
accordingli the interview should not solicit a denial at thi stage of the admissionseek
interview
exampl
wrong
interview
did you do thi
or
ar you the respons person
right
interview
why did you do thi
addition the interview must prevent the subject from make an outright denial
becaus it becom extrem difficult to chang a denial onc it is utter if the person
interview theori and applic investig
3254 2011 fraud examin manual
deni the accus and later admit it he is admit to ly and thi type of admiss
is hard to make therefor the interview job is to prevent the subject from make an
outright denial therebi make it easier for the subject to confess to the act
examin can us sever techniqu to stop or interrupt denial
delai
on of the most effect techniqu to stop or interrupt the denial is through a delai
tactic the interview should not argu with the accus but rather attempt to delai the
outright denial
exampl
interview
linda i hear what you ar sai but let me finish first then you can talk
the innoc person usual will not hold on or let the interview continu to develop
the theme
repeat interrupt
occasion it might be necessari to interrupt the accus attempt denial repeatedli
becaus thi stage is crucial the interview should be prepar to increas the tone of the
interrupt to the point when he is prepar to sai linda if you keep interrupt i am go
to have to termin thi convers the guilti individu will find thi threaten becaus she
want to know the extent of incrimin evid in the interview possess
reason
if the abov techniqu ar unsuccess the interview might attempt to reason with the
accus and emploi some of the tactic normal us for diffus alibi see below
under these tactic the accus is present with evid implic him the interview
howev normal should not disclos all the fact of the case but rather small portion here
and there
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3255
exampl
interview
i know what you sai linda but that doesnt squar with these invoic here in front of me
look at the invoic in the amount of 1021 36 the fact clearli show you ar respons
do not ask the accus to explain the evid at thi point
or
linda i have talk to mani pe opl befor i sat down here with you i am not ask you if
your respons i know you ar thi is your opportun to tell your side to someon who can
understand do not disclos the ident or number of the wit who have
been interview
