2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Establish Rationalization/UNFAIR TREATMENT


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


UNFAIR TREATMENT 
Probably the most common explanation for criminal activity in general, and internal fraud in 
particular, is unfair treatment and the accused’s attempt to achieve equity. Studies have 
shown that counter-productive employee behavior—including stealing—is motivated 
primarily by job dissatisfaction. Employees and others feel that “strik ing back” is important 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.256   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to their self-esteem. The sensitive interviewer can capitalize on these feelings by suggesting 
to the accused that he is a victim. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I feel like I know what makes you tick. And I know it isn’t like you to do something 
like this without a reason. You have worked hard here to get a good reputation. I don’t think 
the company has paid you what you’re really worth. And that’s the way you feel too, isn’t it?” 
OR 
“Linda, I’ve seen situations like this before. And I think the company brought this on 
themselves. If you had been fairly treated, this wouldn’t have happened, don’t you agree?” 
 



:


unfair treatment
probabl the most common explan for crimin activ in gener and intern fraud in
particular is unfair treatment and the accus attempt to achiev equiti studi have
shown that counterproduct employe behaviorinclud stealingi motiv
primarili by job dissatisfact employe and other feel that strik ing back is import
interview theori and applic investig
3256 2011 fraud examin manual
to their selfesteem the sensit interview can capit on these feel by suggest
to the accus that he is a victim
exampl
interview
linda i feel like i know what make you tick and i know it isnt like you to do someth
like thi without a reason you have work hard here to get a good reput i dont think
the compani ha paid you what your realli worth and that the wai you feel too isnt it
or
linda iv seen situat like thi befor and i think the compani brought thi on
themselv if you had been fairli treat thi wouldnt have happen dont you agre
