2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Diffuse Alibis


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Diffuse Alibis 
Even if the accused is presented with an appropriate rationalization, it is likely that he will 
continue to want to deny culpability. When the interviewer is successful in stopping denials, 
the accused normally will then turn to various reasons why he could not have committed the 
act in question. The purpose of this stage is to convince the accused of the weight of the 
evidence against him. Miscreants usually have a keen interest in material that tends to 
implicate them. Alibis generally can be diffused using one of the methods listed below. 
 
DISPLAY PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
It is common for most guilty people to overestimate the amount of physical evidence. The 
interviewer wants to try and reinforce this notion in the way the evidence is laid out to the 
accused. The physical evidence — usually documents in fraud matters — generally should be 
displayed one piece at a time, in reverse order of importance. In this way, the full extent of 
the evidence is not immediately known by the accused. When the accused no longer denies 
culpability, the interviewer should stop displaying evidence.  
 
Each time a document or piece of evidence is laid out to the accused, its significance should 
be noted by the interviewer. During this phase, the accused is still trying to come to grips 
with being caught. The interviewer should, therefore, expect that the accused will attempt to 
lie his way out of the situation. Like denials, the interviewer should stop the alibis and other 
falsehoods before they are fully articulated.  
 
Once the alibis are diffused, the interviewer should return to the theme being developed. 
The following is an example of this technique used on Linda Reed Collins, who set up a 
fictitious company and embezzled money by approving payments from her employer to a 
shell corporation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t have done this. I am not responsible for paying invoices.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Here is one of the invoices in question [display document]. We never received the merchandise.” 
(Don’t mention whether you have talked to the accounts payable department or 
whether you have subjected the invoice to any document analysis.)  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.262   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“Look, Linda, it is useless for you to try to deny the truth. We have lots of evidence. Let’s just 
try to work this out, but you’ve got to help me, okay?” (Don’t accuse the person of 
lying — this just prolongs the process.) 
 
DISCUSS WITNESSES 
Another technique for diffusing alibis is to discuss the testimony of witnesses. The objective 
is to give enough information about what other people would say without providing too 
much. Ideally, the interviewer’s statement will create the impression in the mind of the 
accused that many people are in a position to contradict his story. 
 
The interviewer is again cautioned about furnishing enough information to the accused so 
that he can identify the witnesses. This might place the witness in a difficult position, and the 
accused could contact the witness in an effort to influence testimony. The accused could 
take reprisals against potential witnesses, though this is rare.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t possibly have done this. It would require the approval of a supervisor.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“In normal situations it would. The problem is that your statement doesn’t hold up. There are 
several people who will tell a completely different story. I can understand how you would want 
me to believe that. But you’re only worsening the situation by making these statements. If you 
will help me on this, you’ll also be helping yourself. Understand?” 
 
DISCUSS DECEPTIONS 
The final technique is to discuss the accused’s de ceptions. The purpose is to appeal to the 
accused’s logic, not to scold or degrade. This technique is sometimes the only one available 
if physical evidence is lacking. As with other interview situations, the word lying  should  
be avoided.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“There is no way I could have done this. I didn’t have the opportunity.” 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.263 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, here is the situation: you know what you’ ve done, and so do I. I can understand it is 
difficult for you to admit. But if all the facts have  to be presented, everyone will reach the same 
inescapable conclusion: you are responsible. If you continue to deny  what you’ve done, you’ll just 
make the situation worse. You understand that, don’t you?” 
 



:


diffus alibi
even if the accus is present with an appropri ration it is like that he will
continu to want to deni culpabl when the interview is success in stop denial
the accus normal will then turn to variou reason why he could not have commit the
act in question the purpos of thi stage is to convinc the accus of the weight of the
evid against him miscreant usual have a keen interest in materi that tend to
implic them alibi gener can be diffus us on of the method list below
displai physic evid
it is common for most guilti peopl to overestim the amount of physic evid the
interview want to try and reinforc thi notion in the wai the evid is laid out to the
accus the physic evid usual document in fraud matter gener should be
displai on piec at a time in revers order of import in thi wai the full extent of
the evid is not immedi known by the accus when the accus no longer deni
culpabl the interview should stop displai evid
each time a document or piec of evid is laid out to the accus it signific should
be note by the interview dure thi phase the accus is still try to come to grip
with be caught the interview should therefor expect that the accus will attempt to
lie hi wai out of the situat like denial the interview should stop the alibi and other
falsehood befor thei ar fulli articul
onc the alibi ar diffus the interview should return to the theme be develop
the follow is an exampl of thi techniqu us on linda reed collin who set up a
fictiti compani and embezzl monei by approv payment from her employ to a
shell corpor
exampl
respond
i couldnt have done thi i am not respons for pai invoic
interview
here is on of the invoic in question displai document we never receiv the merchandis
dont mention whether you have talk to the account payabl depart or
whether you have subject the invoic to ani document analysi
interview theori and applic investig
3262 2011 fraud examin manual
look linda it is useless for you to try to deni the truth we have lot of evid let just
try to work thi out but youv got to help me okai dont accus the person of
ly thi just prolong the process
discuss wit
anoth techniqu for diffus alibi is to discuss the testimoni of wit the object
is to give enough inform about what other peopl would sai without provid too
much ideal the interview statement will creat the impress in the mind of the
accus that mani peopl ar in a posit to contradict hi stori
the interview is again caution about furnish enough inform to the accus so
that he can identifi the wit thi might place the wit in a difficult posit and the
accus could contact the wit in an effort to influenc testimoni the accus could
take repris against potenti wit though thi is rare
exampl
respond
i couldnt possibl have done thi it would requir the approv of a supervisor
interview
in normal situat it would the problem is that your statement doesnt hold up there ar
sever peopl who will tell a complet differ stori i can understand how you would want
me to believ that but your onli worsen the situat by make these statement if you
will help me on thi youll also be help yourself understand
discuss decept
the final techniqu is to discuss the accus de ception the purpos is to appeal to the
accus logic not to scold or degrad thi techniqu is sometim the onli on avail
if physic evid is lack as with other interview situat the word ly should
be avoid
exampl
respond
there is no wai i could have done thi i didnt have the opportun
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3263
interview
linda here is the situat you know what you ve done and so do i i can understand it is
difficult for you to admit but if all the fact have to be present everyon will reach the same
inescap conclus you ar respons if you continu to deni what youv done youll just
make the situat wors you understand that dont you
