2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Verbal Confession


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Verbal Confession 
The transition to the verbal confession is made when the accused furnishes the first detailed 
information about the offense. Thereafter, it is the interviewer’s job to probe gently for 
additional details — preferably including those that would be known only to the miscreant. As 
with any interview, there are three general approaches to obtaining the verbal confession: 
chronologically, by transaction, or by event. The approach to be taken should be governed 
by the circumstances of the case.  
 
During the admission-seeking interview, it is best to first confirm the general details of the 
offense. For example, the interviewer will want the accused’s estimates of the amounts 
involved, other parties to the offense, and the location of physical evidence. After these basic 
facts are confirmed, the interviewer can then return to the specifics, in chronological order. 
It is imperative that the interviewer obtain an early admission that the accused knew the 
conduct in question was wrong. This confirms the essential element of intent.  
 
Because of the psychology of confessions, most confessors will lie about one or more 
aspects of the offense, even though confirming overall guilt. When this happens during the 
verbal confession, the interviewer should make a mental note of the discrepancy and 
proceed as if the falsehood had been accepted as truthful.  
 
Such discrepancies should be saved until all other relevant facts are provided by the accused. 
If the discrepancies are material to the offense, then the interviewer should either resolve 
them at the end of the verbal confession or wait and correct them in the written confession. 
If not material, such information can be omitted altogether from the written confession. The 
following items of information should be obtained during the verbal confession: 
 
THE ACCUSED KNEW THE CONDUCT WAS WRONG 
Intent (i.e., the state of mind with which something is done) is required in all matters 
involving fraud. Not only must the confessor have committed the act, he must have known 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.266   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the conduct was wrong and intended to commit it. This information can be developed as 
illustrated in the following example. 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, now that you have decided to help yourself, I can help you, too. I need to ask you some 
questions to get this cleared up. As I understand it, you did this, and you knew it was wrong, 
but you didn’t really mean to h urt the company, is that right?” 
 
(Note that the question is phrased so that the confessor acknowledges intent, but “didn’t 
mean to hurt” anyone. Make sure the question is not phrased so that the confessor 
falsely says that he “didn’t mean to do it.”) 
 
FACTS KNOWN ONLY TO CONFESSOR 
Once the intent question is solved, the questi oning turns to those facts known only to the 
confessor. These facts include—at a minimum— the accused’s estimates  of the number of 
instances of wrongful conduct as well as the total amount of money involved. The questions 
should not be phrased so that the confessor can answer “yes” or “no.” 
 
ESTIMATE OF NUMBER OF INSTANCES/AMOUNTS 
In fraud matters especially, it is common for the accused to underestimate the amount of 
funds involved as well as the number of instances. This is probably because of a natural 
tendency of the human mind to block out unpleasant matters. Take the figures with a grain 
of salt. If the accused’s response is “I don’t know,” start high with the amounts and 
gradually come down. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, how many times do you think this happened?” 
 
Respondent : 
“I don’t have any idea.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Was it as many as 100 times?” 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.267 
Respondent : 
“No way!” 
 
Interviewer: 
“How about 75 times?” 
 
Respondent : 
“That’s still too high. Probably not more than two or three times.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Are you pretty sure, Linda?” (If the accused’s estimates are too low, gently get her 
to acknowledge a higher figure. But do not challenge the accused by calling her a 
liar.) 
 
Respondent : 
“Maybe three times, but certainly not more than that.” 
 
MOTIVE FOR OFFENSE 
Motive  is the moving power that prompts a person to act. Motive, however, should not be 
confused with intent, which refers to the state of mind of the accused when performing the 
act. Motive, unlike intent, is not an essential element and criminal law generally treats a 
person’s motive as irrelevant. Even so, motive is relevant for other purposes: it will often 
guide the interviewer to the proper rationalization, it further incriminates the accused, and it 
is important for a successful prosecution. Therefore, it is best that the interviewer elicit the 
suspect’s motive when obtaining a verbal confession. The motive might be the same as the 
theme the interviewer developed earlier—or it  might not. The most common response is “I 
don’t know.” The interviewer should probe for additional information, but if it is not 
forthcoming, then attribute the motive to the theme developed earlier. The motive should be 
established along the lines below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, we have discussed what might have led you to do this. But I need to hear it in your 
words. Why do you think you did this?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.268   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHEN OFFENSE COMMENCED 
The interviewer will want to know the approximate date and time that the offense started. 
This is usually developed by a question similar to the following. 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I am sure you remember the first time this happened.” 
 
Respondent : 
“Yes.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Tell me about it.” 
 
Respondent : 
“Around the middle of January of last year.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I admire you for having the courage to talk about this. You’re doing the right thing. 
Tell me in detail about the first time.”  
 
WHEN/IF OFFENSE WAS TERMINATED 
In fraud matters, especially internal fraud, the offenses are usually continuous. That is, the 
miscreant seldom stops before he is discovered. If appropriate, the interviewer should seek 
the date the offense terminated. The question is typically phrased as follows. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, when was the last  time you did this?” 
 
OTHERS INVOLVED 
Most frauds are solo ventures—committed wit hout the aid of an accomplice. Rather than 
ask if anyone else was involved, phrase the question something like this. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, who else knew about this besides you?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.269 
By asking who else “knew,” the interviewer is  in effect not only asking for the names of 
possible conspirators, but also about others who might have known what was going on and 
failed to report it. This question should not be worded as, “did someone else know?” but rather 
“who else knew?”  
 
OBTAIN PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
Physical evidence — regardless of how limited it might be — should be obtained from the 
confessor. In many instances, illicit income from fraud is deposited directly in the bank 
accounts of the perpetrator. The interviewer will typically want to ask the confessor to 
surrender his banking records voluntarily for review. It is recommended that either (1) a 
separate written authorization be created, or (2) specific language be added to the  
confession noting the voluntary surrender of banking information. The first method is 
generally preferable. 
 
If there are other relevant records that can be obtained only with the confessor’s consent, 
permission to review those should be sought during the oral confession. In some instances, 
it might be advisable to delay this step until the written confession is obtained. The request 
for physical evidence from the confessor can be set up like this: 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, as a part of wrapping up the details, I will need your banking records (or other 
physical evidence). You understand that, don’t you?” 
 
Respondent : 
“No, I don’t.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, I just need to document the facts and clear up any remaining questions. You have 
decided to tell the complete story, including your side of it. I just want to make sure the facts are 
accurate and fair to you. We want to make sure you’re not blamed for something someone else 
did. And I want to report that you cooperated fully and wanted to do the right thing, 
okay? ”(Avoid the use of the word evidence or references to higher tribunals, such 
as courts or prosecutors.) 
 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.270   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Respondent : 
“Okay.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Where do you keep your bank accounts?” (If the interviewer knows of at least one 
bank where the confessor does business, the question should be phrased:  “Linda, 
where do you do business besides Florida Marine National Bank?”) 
 
Respondent : 
“Just Florida Marine.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I’ll need to get your okay to get them from the bank if we need them. Where do you keep the 
original records?” (Do not ask the accused’s permission to look at the records; 
rather, tell her the records are needed. Let the accused object if she has a 
problem with it.) 
 
DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS 
If it has not come out earlier, the interviewer should find out in general what happened to 
any illicit income derived from the misdeeds. It is typical for the money to have been used 
for frivolous or ostentatious purposes. It is important, however, that the confessor sees his 
actions in a more positive light; the interviewer should avoid comments or questions relating 
to “high living.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what happened to the money?” (Let the accused explain; do not suggest an 
answer unless the confessor does not respond.) 
 
LOCATION OF ASSETS 
In appropriate situations, the interviewer will want to find out if there are residual assets that 
the confessor can use to reduce losses. Rather than ask the accused “is there anything left?” the 
question should be phrased as “what’s left?” 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.271 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what do you have left from all of this?”  
 
Respondent : 
“Not much. I used most of the money to cover my husband’s bills and financial problems. A 
little money and a boat that is paid for is all I have.”  
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, whatever it is, this whole thing will look a lot better if you vol unteered to return what 
you could, don’t you agree?” (Remember do not specifically promise the confessor 
leniency; it will typically invalidate the confession.)  
 
SPECIFICS OF EACH OFFENSE 
Once the major hurdles are overcome, the intervie wer should return to the specifics of each 
offense. Generally, this should simply start with the first instance and work through 
chronologically in a logical fashion.  
 
Because these questions are information seeking, they should be openly phrased so that the 
answer is independent of the question. It is best to seek the independent recollections of the 
confessor first before displaying physical evidence. If the confessor cannot independently 
recall, documents can be used to refresh his recollection. It generally is best to resolve all 
issues on each instance before proceeding to the next. In determining the specifics of the 
offense, the interviewer should usually ask: 
• Who has knowledge of this transaction? 
• What does this document mean? 
• When did this transaction occur? 
• Where did the proceeds of the transaction go? 
• Why was the transaction done? 
• How was the transaction covered up? 
 
Interviewing is a difficult act, seldom mastered without considerable practice. The preceding 
techniques, when properly employed, can immeasurably aid in developing truthful, reliable, 
and legally valid information. 
 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.272   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


verbal confess
the transit to the verbal confess is made when the accus furnish the first detail
inform about the offens thereaft it is the interview job to probe gentli for
addit detail prefer includ those that would be known onli to the miscreant as
with ani interview there ar three gener approach to obtain the verbal confess
chronolog by transact or by event the approach to be taken should be govern
by the circumst of the case
dure the admissionseek interview it is best to first confirm the gener detail of the
offens for exampl the interview will want the accus estim of the amount
involv other parti to the offens and the locat of physic evid after these basic
fact ar confirm the interview can then return to the specif in chronolog order
it is imper that the interview obtain an earli admiss that the accus knew the
conduct in question wa wrong thi confirm the essenti element of intent
becaus of the psycholog of confess most confessor will lie about on or more
aspect of the offens even though confirm overal guilt when thi happen dure the
verbal confess the interview should make a mental note of the discrep and
proce as if the falsehood had been accept as truth
such discrep should be save until all other relev fact ar provid by the accus
if the discrep ar materi to the offens then the interview should either resolv
them at the end of the verbal confess or wait and correct them in the written confess
if not materi such inform can be omit altogeth from the written confess the
follow item of inform should be obtain dure the verbal confess
the accus knew the conduct wa wrong
intent ie the state of mind with which someth is done is requir in all matter
involv fraud not onli must the confessor have commit the act he must have known
interview theori and applic investig
3266 2011 fraud examin manual
the conduct wa wrong and intend to commit it thi inform can be develop as
illustr in the follow exampl
exampl
interview
linda now that you have decid to help yourself i can help you too i need to ask you some
question to get thi clear up as i understand it you did thi and you knew it wa wrong
but you didnt realli mean to h urt the compani is that right
note that the question is phrase so that the confessor acknowledg intent but didnt
mean to hurt anyon make sure the question is not phrase so that the confessor
fals sai that he didnt mean to do it
fact known onli to confessor
onc the intent question is solv the questi on turn to those fact known onli to the
confessor these fact includeat a minimum the accus estim of the number of
instanc of wrong conduct as well as the total amount of monei involv the question
should not be phrase so that the confessor can answer ye or no
estim of number of instancesamount
in fraud matter especi it is common for the accus to underestim the amount of
fund involv as well as the number of instanc thi is probabl becaus of a natur
tendenc of the human mind to block out unpleas matter take the figur with a grain
of salt if the accus respons is i dont know start high with the amount and
gradual come down
exampl
interview
linda how mani time do you think thi happen
respond
i dont have ani idea
interview
wa it as mani as 100 time
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3267
respond
no wai
interview
how about 75 time
respond
that still too high probabl not more than two or three time
interview
ar you pretti sure linda if the accus estim ar too low gentli get her
to acknowledg a higher figur but do not challeng the accus by call her a
liar
respond
mayb three time but certainli not more than that
motiv for offens
motiv is the move power that prompt a person to act motiv howev should not be
confus with intent which refer to the state of mind of the accus when perform the
act motiv unlik intent is not an essenti element and crimin law gener treat a
person motiv as irrelev even so motiv is relev for other purpos it will often
guid the interview to the proper ration it further incrimin the accus and it
is import for a success prosecut therefor it is best that the interview elicit the
suspect motiv when obtain a verbal confess the motiv might be the same as the
theme the interview develop earlieror it might not the most common respons is i
dont know the interview should probe for addit inform but if it is not
forthcom then attribut the motiv to the theme develop earlier the motiv should be
establish along the line below
exampl
interview
linda we have discuss what might have led you to do thi but i need to hear it in your
word why do you think you did thi
interview theori and applic investig
3268 2011 fraud examin manual
when offens commenc
the interview will want to know the approxim date and time that the offens start
thi is usual develop by a question similar to the follow
exampl
interview
linda i am sure you rememb the first time thi happen
respond
ye
interview
tell me about it
respond
around the middl of januari of last year
interview
linda i admir you for have the courag to talk about thi your do the right thing
tell me in detail about the first time
whenif offens wa termin
in fraud matter especi intern fraud the offens ar usual continu that is the
miscreant seldom stop befor he is discov if appropri the interview should seek
the date the offens termin the question is typic phrase as follow
exampl
interview
linda when wa the last time you did thi
other involv
most fraud ar solo venturescommit wit hout the aid of an accomplic rather than
ask if anyon els wa involv phrase the question someth like thi
exampl
interview
linda who els knew about thi besid you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3269
by ask who els knew the interview is in effect not onli ask for the name of
possibl conspir but also about other who might have known what wa go on and
fail to report it thi question should not be word as did someon els know but rather
who els knew
obtain physic evid
physic evid regardless of how limit it might be should be obtain from the
confessor in mani instanc illicit incom from fraud is deposit directli in the bank
account of the perpetr the interview will typic want to ask the confessor to
surrend hi bank record voluntarili for review it is recommend that either 1 a
separ written author be creat or 2 specif languag be ad to the
confess note the voluntari surrend of bank inform the first method is
gener prefer
if there ar other relev record that can be obtain onli with the confessor consent
permiss to review those should be sought dure the oral confess in some instanc
it might be advis to delai thi step until the written confess is obtain the request
for physic evid from the confessor can be set up like thi
exampl
interview
linda as a part of wrap up the detail i will need your bank record or other
physic evid you understand that dont you
respond
no i dont
interview
well i just need to document the fact and clear up ani remain question you have
decid to tell the complet stori includ your side of it i just want to make sure the fact ar
accur and fair to you we want to make sure your not blame for someth someon els
did and i want to report that you cooper fulli and want to do the right thing
okai avoid the us of the word evid or refer to higher tribun such
as court or prosecutor
interview theori and applic investig
3270 2011 fraud examin manual
respond
okai
interview
where do you keep your bank account if the interview know of at least on
bank where the confessor doe busi the question should be phrase linda
where do you do busi besid florida marin nation bank
respond
just florida marin
interview
ill need to get your okai to get them from the bank if we need them where do you keep the
origin record do not ask the accus permiss to look at the record
rather tell her the record ar need let the accus object if she ha a
problem with it
disposit of proce
if it ha not come out earlier the interview should find out in gener what happen to
ani illicit incom deriv from the misde it is typic for the monei to have been us
for frivol or ostentati purpos it is import howev that the confessor see hi
action in a more posit light the interview should avoid comment or question relat
to high live
exampl
interview
linda what happen to the monei let the accus explain do not suggest an
answer unless the confessor doe not respond
locat of asset
in appropri situat the interview will want to find out if there ar residu asset that
the confessor can us to reduc loss rather than ask the accus is there anyth left the
question should be phrase as what left
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3271
exampl
interview
linda what do you have left from all of thi
respond
not much i us most of the monei to cover my husband bill and financi problem a
littl monei and a boat that is paid for is all i have
interview
well whatev it is thi whole thing will look a lot better if you vol unteer to return what
you could dont you agre rememb do not specif promis the confessor
lenienc it will typic invalid the confess
specif of each offens
onc the major hurdl ar overcom the intervi wer should return to the specif of each
offens gener thi should simpli start with the first instanc and work through
chronolog in a logic fashion
becaus these question ar inform seek thei should be openli phrase so that the
answer is independ of the question it is best to seek the independ recollect of the
confessor first befor displai physic evid if the confessor cannot independ
recal document can be us to refresh hi recollect it gener is best to resolv all
issu on each instanc befor proceed to the next in determin the specif of the
offens the interview should usual ask
who ha knowledg of thi transact
what doe thi document mean
when did thi transact occur
where did the proce of the transact go
why wa the transact done
how wa the transact cover up
interview is a difficult act seldom master without consider practic the preced
techniqu when properli emploi can immeasur aid in develop truth reliabl
and legal valid inform
interview theori and applic investig
3272 2011 fraud examin manual
