2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Kinesic Interview and Interrogation


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Kinesic Interview and Interrogation 
The kinesic interview or interrogation is a method that has become more popular among the 
law enforcement community in recent years. This type of interview is different than 
traditional interview methods because the interviewer is not necessarily looking for a 
confession from the interview subject. Instead of searching for information from the 
subject, the interviewer is attempting to assess whether the subject is telling the truth by 
reading his body language and other physical manifestations of deception. 
 
In the book The Kinesic Interview Technique, authors Frederick C. Link and D. Glen Foster 
define the kinesic interview technique as: 
 
“[An interview technique] used for gaining information from an individual who is not willingly or 
intentionally disclosing it.” 
 
Link and Foster believe that the kinesic inter view technique is based entirely on the concept 
of stress — an event or circumstance that forces an individual’s mind or body out of 
psychological equilibrium. When stress occurs, humans, like any other living creature, have 
an emotional reaction. Link and Foster refer to this as the “fight or flight syndrome,” in 
which we either run from a stressful situation or brace to face it. Either way, they 
hypothesize, our animalistic tendencies dictate that we must react to stress. When this 
concept is applied to the interview situation, the kinesic interview technique is applied to 
attempt to read the interview subject’s reaction to stress.  
 
This method relies, in a broad sense, on the interviewer’s ability to observe the interview 
subject for signs or symptoms of deceit. The kinesic interview is conducted not just to 
observe what the subject says, but also how the subject says it; the subject’s gestures, 
posturing, facial expressions, and voice inflection are just a few of the traits that an 
investigator looks at. This style of interviewing assumes that when most human beings lie or 
are deceitful to others, they will reveal this deceit through their body language. 
 
These reactions are generally subconscious; in most cases, the interviewee does not even 
realize that he is acting noticeably different. The actions or signs that an interviewer is 
looking for are called meaningful behavior — activities that may suggest that an interviewee is 
under stress. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.273 
Link and Foster identify three distinct categories into which meaningful behavior can  
be divided: 
• Self-initiated verbal statements that the interviewee initiates without prompting 
• Prompted verbal responses or statements made by the interviewee in response to 
structured questions asked by the interviewer 
• Nonverbal behavior or body language, which includes body positioning movements, lack 
of movement, and observable physiological changes 
 
Self-Initiated Verbal Statements 
These responses from interviewees are made without any prompting by the interviewer. 
Examples of these statements include changes in speech pattern, overly respectful or friendly 
words directed at the interviewer, or indirect answers and statements. The subject’s speech 
speed will tend to increase, or the subject will hesitate or stammer frequently before giving 
any responses. These verbal clues are a subconscious attempt by the interviewee to dodge 
the line of questioning or suppress the guilty feelings he feels. 
 
Generally, a dishonest person is much more likely to give more self-initiated verbal signs 
than a person who is telling the truth.  
 
Prompted Verbal Responses 
Prompted verbal responses can help an interrogator to differentiate an honest person from a 
deceitful one. By utilizing a series of structured questions, we can generally get a good 
indication of how truthful the subject is. These should be woven into a casual conversation 
so that the subject is not aware of the significance of the questions. The structured questions 
must not appear to be interrogational in manner.  
 
Structured Questions 
The fraud examiner has several types of loaded question to use in the kinesic interview to 
shed light on the guilt or innocence of the interviewee.  
• Punishment question: The interviewer will casually discuss the punishment of the crime’s 
perpetrator with the subject, asking, for example, “What do you think should happen to the 
criminal?” When posed with this sort of question, generally the innocent person, having 
nothing invested in the crime, will answer that the criminal should be severely punished, 
saying something like, “Lock him up and throw away the key.” However, the interview 
subject, if guilty of the crime, will generally answer that the criminal should be treated 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.274   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
fairly, saying for example, “The person who stole that money is very sick and probably needs mental 
help.” In essence, the guilty person is more likely to answer “Don’t hurt me.”  
• Physical evidence question: This type of quest ion is meant to jar the suspect into making 
a mistake. The interviewer will suggest that there is a piece of evidence that might link 
the interviewee to a crime, asking, “Is there any reason that your fingerprints might have been 
found near the crime scene?” This question does not assert that there is any evidence. The 
innocent person, knowing that he had nothing to do with the crime, will simply answer 
“No,” unconcerned about the possible evid ence. The guilty party will often become 
concerned with this possible evidence and attempt to cover for it with another lie. 
• Crime existence question: A variation on this question would be “Do you think that this 
crime was even committed?” The guilty party will see this as a possible way out, and answer 
“no,” while the innocent person will likely answer “yes.” 
 
Nonverbal Behavior/Body Language 
The evaluation of an interview subject’s body lang uage can provide the fraud examiner with 
numerous insights into the subject’s true intentions. Quite often, while an interviewee says 
one thing, his body language tells an entirely different story. The first step in this process is 
to evaluate the “normal” body language of the subject. While we will discuss some general 
tendencies that suggest that a subject is being less than truthful, the interviewer must first 
evaluate the subject’s natural tendencies. Many  people use their hands often when they 
speak, while others do not.  
 
For most people, the head is the most expressive portion of the body. Several facial traits or 
expressions can be read by the interviewer, among them:  
• Eyes: The single most important nonverbal sign that an interviewer must look for and 
recognize are breaks in eye contact by the subject. The subject might close his eyes, 
cover his eyes, or turn or lower his head. Any of these breaks in eye contact during the 
interview can suggest a subject’s deceit. 
• Eyebrow movement: When a subject display’s disb elief or concern during an interview, it 
is often a false or deceptive reaction to the interviewer’s questioning. 
• Touching the face: Many subjects, when under stress, resort to repeatedly touching the 
tip of the nose or rubbing the chin. This is often a nervous reaction to a threatening 
situation. 
• Blushing: A person whose face or cheeks become red is generally experiencing increased 
blood pressure, indicating pressure or stress. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.275 
• Adam’s apple: The subject’s larynx will quite often move up and down when he is 
concerned or nervous. 
• Carotid arteries: Often the veins in a pe rson’s neck will become exposed when he 
becomes nervous. 
 
In addition, many interviewees will attempt to cover or defend themselves through body 
language by crossing their arms or their legs. This is generally a defensive posture.  
Several factors should be considered when applying kinesic techniques: 
• No single behavior, by itself, proves anything. 
• Behaviors must be relatively consistent when the stimuli are repeated. 
• The interviewer must establish what is normal or baseline behavior for each subject and 
then look for changes from the baseline. These observed changes in the subject’s 
baseline behavior are diagnosed in clusters, not individually. 
• Behaviors must be timely. 
• Observing behavior and interpreting it are hard work. 
• The subjects are watching us while we are watching them. 
• Kinesic interviewing is not as reliable with so me groups as with the general population. 
 
 



:


kines interview and interrog
the kines interview or interrog is a method that ha becom more popular among the
law enforc commun in recent year thi type of interview is differ than
tradit interview method becaus the interview is not necessarili look for a
confess from the interview subject instead of search for inform from the
subject the interview is attempt to assess whether the subject is tell the truth by
read hi bodi languag and other physic manifest of decept
in the book the kines interview techniqu author frederick c link and d glen foster
defin the kines interview techniqu as
an interview techniqu us for gain inform from an individu who is not willingli or
intention disclos it
link and foster believ that the kines inter view techniqu is base entir on the concept
of stress an event or circumst that forc an individu mind or bodi out of
psycholog equilibrium when stress occur human like ani other live creatur have
an emot reaction link and foster refer to thi as the fight or flight syndrom in
which we either run from a stress situat or brace to face it either wai thei
hypothes our animalist tendenc dictat that we must react to stress when thi
concept is appli to the interview situat the kines interview techniqu is appli to
attempt to read the interview subject reaction to stress
thi method reli in a broad sens on the interview abil to observ the interview
subject for sign or symptom of deceit the kines interview is conduct not just to
observ what the subject sai but also how the subject sai it the subject gestur
postur facial express and voic inflect ar just a few of the trait that an
investig look at thi style of interview assum that when most human be lie or
ar deceit to other thei will reveal thi deceit through their bodi languag
these reaction ar gener subconsci in most case the interviewe doe not even
realiz that he is act notic differ the action or sign that an interview is
look for ar call meaning behavior activ that mai suggest that an interviewe is
under stress
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3273
link and foster identifi three distinct categori into which meaning behavior can
be divid
selfiniti verbal statement that the interviewe initi without prompt
prompt verbal respons or statement made by the interviewe in respons to
structur question ask by the interview
nonverb behavior or bodi languag which includ bodi posit movement lack
of movement and observ physiolog chang
selfiniti verbal statement
these respons from interviewe ar made without ani prompt by the interview
exampl of these statement includ chang in speech pattern overli respect or friendli
word direct at the interview or indirect answer and statement the subject speech
speed will tend to increas or the subject will hesit or stammer frequent befor give
ani respons these verbal clue ar a subconsci attempt by the interviewe to dodg
the line of question or suppress the guilti feel he feel
gener a dishonest person is much more like to give more selfiniti verbal sign
than a person who is tell the truth
prompt verbal respons
prompt verbal respons can help an interrog to differenti an honest person from a
deceit on by util a seri of structur question we can gener get a good
indic of how truth the subject is these should be woven into a casual convers
so that the subject is not awar of the signific of the question the structur question
must not appear to be interrog in manner
structur question
the fraud examin ha sever type of load question to us in the kines interview to
shed light on the guilt or innoc of the interviewe
punish question the interview will casual discuss the punish of the crime
perpetr with the subject ask for exampl what do you think should happen to the
crimin when pose with thi sort of question gener the innoc person have
noth invest in the crime will answer that the crimin should be sever punish
sai someth like lock him up and throw awai the kei howev the interview
subject if guilti of the crime will gener answer that the crimin should be treat
interview theori and applic investig
3274 2011 fraud examin manual
fairli sai for exampl the person who stole that monei is veri sick and probabl need mental
help in essenc the guilti person is more like to answer dont hurt me
physic evid question thi type of quest ion is meant to jar the suspect into make
a mistak the interview will suggest that there is a piec of evid that might link
the interviewe to a crime ask is there ani reason that your fingerprint might have been
found near the crime scene thi question doe not assert that there is ani evid the
innoc person know that he had noth to do with the crime will simpli answer
no unconcern about the possibl evid enc the guilti parti will often becom
concern with thi possibl evid and attempt to cover for it with anoth lie
crime exist question a variat on thi question would be do you think that thi
crime wa even commit the guilti parti will see thi as a possibl wai out and answer
no while the innoc person will like answer ye
nonverb behaviorbodi languag
the evalu of an interview subject bodi lang uag can provid the fraud examin with
numer insight into the subject true intent quit often while an interviewe sai
on thing hi bodi languag tell an entir differ stori the first step in thi process is
to evalu the normal bodi languag of the subject while we will discuss some gener
tendenc that suggest that a subject is be less than truth the interview must first
evalu the subject natur tendenc mani peopl us their hand often when thei
speak while other do not
for most peopl the head is the most express portion of the bodi sever facial trait or
express can be read by the interview among them
ey the singl most import nonverb sign that an interview must look for and
recogn ar break in ey contact by the subject the subject might close hi ey
cover hi ey or turn or lower hi head ani of these break in ey contact dure the
interview can suggest a subject deceit
eyebrow movement when a subject displai disb elief or concern dure an interview it
is often a fals or decept reaction to the interview question
touch the face mani subject when under stress resort to repeatedli touch the
tip of the nose or rub the chin thi is often a nervou reaction to a threaten
situat
blush a person whose face or cheek becom red is gener experienc increas
blood pressur indic pressur or stress
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3275
adam appl the subject larynx will quit often move up and down when he is
concern or nervou
carotid arteri often the vein in a pe rson neck will becom expos when he
becom nervou
in addit mani interviewe will attempt to cover or defend themselv through bodi
languag by cross their arm or their leg thi is gener a defens postur
sever factor should be consid when appli kines techniqu
no singl behavior by itself prove anyth
behavior must be rel consist when the stimuli ar repeat
the interview must establish what is normal or baselin behavior for each subject and
then look for chang from the baselin these observ chang in the subject
baselin behavior ar diagnos in cluster not individu
behavior must be time
observ behavior and interpret it ar hard work
the subject ar watch us while we ar watch them
kines interview is not as reliabl with so me group as with the gener popul
