2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Kinesic Interview and Interrogation/Nonverbal Behavior/Body Language


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Nonverbal Behavior/Body Language 
The evaluation of an interview subject’s body lang uage can provide the fraud examiner with 
numerous insights into the subject’s true intentions. Quite often, while an interviewee says 
one thing, his body language tells an entirely different story. The first step in this process is 
to evaluate the “normal” body language of the subject. While we will discuss some general 
tendencies that suggest that a subject is being less than truthful, the interviewer must first 
evaluate the subject’s natural tendencies. Many  people use their hands often when they 
speak, while others do not.  
 
For most people, the head is the most expressive portion of the body. Several facial traits or 
expressions can be read by the interviewer, among them:  
• Eyes: The single most important nonverbal sign that an interviewer must look for and 
recognize are breaks in eye contact by the subject. The subject might close his eyes, 
cover his eyes, or turn or lower his head. Any of these breaks in eye contact during the 
interview can suggest a subject’s deceit. 
• Eyebrow movement: When a subject display’s disb elief or concern during an interview, it 
is often a false or deceptive reaction to the interviewer’s questioning. 
• Touching the face: Many subjects, when under stress, resort to repeatedly touching the 
tip of the nose or rubbing the chin. This is often a nervous reaction to a threatening 
situation. 
• Blushing: A person whose face or cheeks become red is generally experiencing increased 
blood pressure, indicating pressure or stress. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.275 
• Adam’s apple: The subject’s larynx will quite often move up and down when he is 
concerned or nervous. 
• Carotid arteries: Often the veins in a pe rson’s neck will become exposed when he 
becomes nervous. 
 
In addition, many interviewees will attempt to cover or defend themselves through body 
language by crossing their arms or their legs. This is generally a defensive posture.  
Several factors should be considered when applying kinesic techniques: 
• No single behavior, by itself, proves anything. 
• Behaviors must be relatively consistent when the stimuli are repeated. 
• The interviewer must establish what is normal or baseline behavior for each subject and 
then look for changes from the baseline. These observed changes in the subject’s 
baseline behavior are diagnosed in clusters, not individually. 
• Behaviors must be timely. 
• Observing behavior and interpreting it are hard work. 
• The subjects are watching us while we are watching them. 
• Kinesic interviewing is not as reliable with so me groups as with the general population. 
 
 



:


nonverb behaviorbodi languag
the evalu of an interview subject bodi lang uag can provid the fraud examin with
numer insight into the subject true intent quit often while an interviewe sai
on thing hi bodi languag tell an entir differ stori the first step in thi process is
to evalu the normal bodi languag of the subject while we will discuss some gener
tendenc that suggest that a subject is be less than truth the interview must first
evalu the subject natur tendenc mani peopl us their hand often when thei
speak while other do not
for most peopl the head is the most express portion of the bodi sever facial trait or
express can be read by the interview among them
ey the singl most import nonverb sign that an interview must look for and
recogn ar break in ey contact by the subject the subject might close hi ey
cover hi ey or turn or lower hi head ani of these break in ey contact dure the
interview can suggest a subject deceit
eyebrow movement when a subject displai disb elief or concern dure an interview it
is often a fals or decept reaction to the interview question
touch the face mani subject when under stress resort to repeatedli touch the
tip of the nose or rub the chin thi is often a nervou reaction to a threaten
situat
blush a person whose face or cheek becom red is gener experienc increas
blood pressur indic pressur or stress
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3275
adam appl the subject larynx will quit often move up and down when he is
concern or nervou
carotid arteri often the vein in a pe rson neck will becom expos when he
becom nervou
in addit mani interviewe will attempt to cover or defend themselv through bodi
languag by cross their arm or their leg thi is gener a defens postur
sever factor should be consid when appli kines techniqu
no singl behavior by itself prove anyth
behavior must be rel consist when the stimuli ar repeat
the interview must establish what is normal or baselin behavior for each subject and
then look for chang from the baselin these observ chang in the subject
baselin behavior ar diagnos in cluster not individu
behavior must be time
observ behavior and interpret it ar hard work
the subject ar watch us while we ar watch them
kines interview is not as reliabl with so me group as with the gener popul
