2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Criteria-Based Statement Analysis


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Criteria-Based Statement Analysis 
When collecting witness accounts or interviews concerning a particular fraud case, fraud 
examiners must continually assess how honest the interviewee has been. Criteria-based 
statement analysis can be utilized as a tool to uncover just how truthful a subject has been 
after the interview is complete. This technique is different than a kinesic interview in that the 
fraud examiner is not analyzing the body language or nonverbal clues a subject has given, but 
instead the language used by the subject.  
 
Statement analysis is based on the notion that when humans speak, whether intentionally or 
unconsciously, we specifically select the language we use. In general, the verbal clues that a 
subject offers while speaking are just as prominent as any nonverbal tip-offs. The tense that 
an interviewee uses is often the indication that the interviewee knows more than he is  
letting on.  
 
For instance, in the well-publicized case of Susan Smith in 1995, Smith claimed that a 
carjacker forced her out of her car and drove away with her two children in the back seat. 
When the children’s father spoke of the missing toddlers, he spoke of them in present tense; 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.276   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
when Smith mentioned them, investigators noticed that she continually referred to the boys 
in the past tense, indicating that she knew them to be deceased. Upon interrogation, Smith 
confessed to driving the car into a lake, killing her children. 
 
Parts of Speech 
The main items of interest to the fraud examiner during a statement analysis are the 
particular words used by the subject. Breaking down the subject’s sentences carefully may 
reveal many undetected tendencies of the subject’s speech. 
 
Pronouns 
When describing an incident or situation, a truthful subject will most likely use the pronoun 
“I.” If the subject is guilty of an offense or involved in some fashion, that person will 
attempt to distance himself from the situation by removing the “I” from his statement. 
Often, the “I” will be replaced by “we,” as though the subject had little involvement in or 
was not responsible for the situation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“I went to the grocery store with my girlfriend, but I didn’t steal any of the items.” 
 
“We went to the grocery store, but we didn’t steal anything.”  
 
The subject’s reasoning, subconsciously, is to re move himself from the situation as much as 
possible. By swapping “we” for “I” in the sentences, the perpetrator hopes to deflect 
attention or blame. 
 
In a situation in which the subject uses “we” constantly, the subject is indicating to the 
interviewer that the subject has some sort of relationship with another party in the situation. 
If, for example, the subject continually uses impersonal pronouns, such as “my girlfriend and 
I” rather than “we,” this indicates a lack of  personal involvement with the girlfriend. Fraud 
examiners can utilize this pronoun use to determine whether the interviewee is involved in a 
fraudulent situation with other employees. 
  
Possessive Pronouns 
When an interviewee is giving bogus testimony concerning an event, he will often drop the 
possessive pronoun to shift the blame to an exterior force.  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.277 
EXAMPLE 
“I got on my register at 10:30. I was working at my register when I was called away by my 
supervisor. When I returned to the register, the register was open and the cash was gone.” 
 
In this statement, the subject referred to the register as “my register” up until the 
controversial act took place. At that point, “my register” becomes “the register,” indicating 
that the subject no longer wants to be associated with a corrupted register. This pronoun 
switch indicates that the subject is being less than truthful. 
 
Verbs 
Verbs are very important pieces of the statement analysis puzzle; the tense that is used by the 
interviewee will shed light on whether the incident has been recalled or improvised. Because 
the subject should be recalling events from the past, the verb tense used to recount the story 
should be past also.  
 
EXAMPLE 
“My wife and I left the house at 7:00, went to dinner, and then saw a movie. We returned to 
the house after the movie was over.” 
 
However, the deceptive interviewee will often change the verb tense at precisely the moment 
at which he is no longer recalling, but rather improvising the event. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“My wife and I left the house at 7:00, went to dinner, and then saw a movie. We return to the 
house and as we pull up to it, we see shattered glass on the driveway.” 
 
Verb tense is also crucial concerning the whereabouts of another person, such as in cases of 
possible kidnapping. If the person interviewed continually refers to the missing person in the 
past tense, there is a good chance that the missing person has been harmed. Again, the Susan 
Smith case is a textbook example of how verb tense usage can lead to a confession. 
 
Balance of the Statement 
When most interview subjects recount an event, their version will be naturally balanced. The 
subject will spend a fairly equal amount of time telling what happened before the event, what 
took place during the event, and what happened during the aftermath. Fraud examiners 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.278   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
should look at the sheer amount of time or number of sentences a subject spends on each 
topic to get a rough estimate of how balanced the account is. If any of the portions of the 
account are exceptionally short, the subject is almost certainly lying. By performing this type 
of analysis, the fraud examiner can also determine what elements are absent from the story 
in a short amount of time. 
 
In the book Criteria-Based Statement Analysis, German psychologists Max Stellar and Guenter 
Koehnken identify a number of separate criteria that the fraud examiner can take into 
consideration when attempting to analyze a just-completed interview. 
 
General Characteristics 
• Logical structure: The fraud examiner first examines the statement for “plot holes,” 
checking to ensure that the recounting of events is chronologically correct and does not 
contain contradictions. 
• Unstructured production: The fraud examiner should examine this criterion at the 
beginning of the interview by allowing the subject to recount the event without influence 
or questioning. Generally, an honest person will not tell an interviewer exactly what has 
taken place in complete chronological order, from start to finish. It is much more likely 
that the initial recounting of events will be told in a scattershot fashion, but that these 
facts and details will eventually mesh into a complete version. When an interview subject 
is able to sit down and initially describe the events that have taken place in complete 
detail, from beginning to end, it is likely that the story has been rehearsed. 
• Quantity of details: An honest subject is more  likely to be able to recall many details 
within an interview than a dishonest subject. When most subjects fabricate a story, they 
are unable to bolster the story with very many details. 
 
Specific Content 
• Contextual embedding: This criterion suggests that a truthful subject’s statement will be 
tightly woven with incidental details, such as the subject’s daily routine, habits, or family 
relationships. A deceptive subject is much less likely to associate an event with seemingly 
insignificant details such as these, choosing to focus only on covering up the major event 
that is being discussed. 
• Descriptions of interaction: The truthful subject is likely to have some description of the 
actions and emotions involved with the described incident or people involved in the 
incident. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.279 
• Reproduction of conversation: Often, the witness will become animated when repeating 
any conversation related to the incident. When this occurs, the subject is generally telling 
the truth, as it is difficult for a fraudster to create cohesive dialogue on the spot. 
• Unexpected complications during the incident: Descriptions of incidents that disrupt the 
event, such as a sudden halt or interruption of the event, indicate that the subject is 
speaking truthfully. 
 
Peculiarities of Content 
• Unusual details: The appearance of quirky but believable details lends credibility to the 
subject. Fabricated statements rarely contain these types of descriptions. 
• Superfluous details: A subject who provides details that are not essential or even related 
to the recalled event are most often speaking truthfully. A deceitful subject is so 
preoccupied with not telling the truth that he will excise this type of information from 
the story. 
• Accurately reported details misunderstood: When a witness describes details that he does 
not understand or comprehend, but that make sense to the interviewer, the witness is 
most often telling the truth. 
• Related external associations: In this criterion, the interviewer looks for points at which 
the interview subject relates the particular experience with some personal or external 
experiences. When the subject makes a relationship between the event and something 
that has previously occurred in his life, he is very likely being honest. 
• Accounts of subjective mental state: The subject who fills the interview with descriptions 
of feelings and emotions is very likely being truthful. When a subject cannot provide 
such feelings during the interview, this suggests that the subject has not thought through 
his deceptive story very thoroughly. 
• Attribution of perpetrator’s mental state:  The honest subject will often recount the 
perceived mental state of the perpetrator, suggesting what they believe the perpetrator 
was thinking or feeling at the time of the event. 
• Spontaneous corrections: An interview subj ect may often correct himself during the 
course of the interview, making alterations to earlier details or events. When a subject 
does this, he is most often giving truthful testimony. The deceptive subject wants to 
project as honest a façade as possible and do es not want to correct himself, because in 
his mind this gives the appearance of deceit. 
• Admitting lack of memory: This criterion works closely with the previous one, in that an 
honest interviewee will often admit to not remembering certain details. When the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.280   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
interviewee is lying to the interviewer, he wants to be as complete as possible in covering 
the fraudulent tracks. 
• Raising doubts about one’s own testimony: A deceitful interviewee will almost never 
raise any concerns about whether the testimony given is absolutely correct. If the subject 
raises concerns that he is correct, he is probably telling the truth. 
• Self-deprecation: The mention of any self-incriminating or personally unflattering details 
during the interview suggests that the interviewee is credible. A person who attempts to 
fabricate a story will not want to paint an unsavory picture of himself. 
• Pardoning the perpetrator: Should the intervi ewee attempt to excuse the perpetrator or 
avoid “bashing” the fraudster, the interviewee is likely being honest. 
 
 



:


criteriabas statement analysi
when collect wit account or interview concern a particular fraud case fraud
examin must continu assess how honest the interviewe ha been criteriabas
statement analysi can be util as a tool to uncov just how truth a subject ha been
after the interview is complet thi techniqu is differ than a kines interview in that the
fraud examin is not analyz the bodi languag or nonverb clue a subject ha given but
instead the languag us by the subject
statement analysi is base on the notion that when human speak whether intention or
unconsci we specif select the languag we us in gener the verbal clue that a
subject offer while speak ar just as promin as ani nonverb tipoff the tens that
an interviewe us is often the indic that the interviewe know more than he is
let on
for instanc in the wellpublic case of susan smith in 1995 smith claim that a
carjack forc her out of her car and drove awai with her two children in the back seat
when the children father spoke of the miss toddler he spoke of them in present tens
interview theori and applic investig
3276 2011 fraud examin manual
when smith mention them investig notic that she continu refer to the boi
in the past tens indic that she knew them to be deceas upon interrog smith
confess to drive the car into a lake kill her children
part of speech
the main item of interest to the fraud examin dure a statement analysi ar the
particular word us by the subject break down the subject sentenc carefulli mai
reveal mani undetect tendenc of the subject speech
pronoun
when describ an incid or situat a truth subject will most like us the pronoun
i if the subject is guilti of an offens or involv in some fashion that person will
attempt to distanc himself from the situat by remov the i from hi statement
often the i will be replac by we as though the subject had littl involv in or
wa not respons for the situat
exampl
i went to the groceri store with my girlfriend but i didnt steal ani of the item
we went to the groceri store but we didnt steal anyth
the subject reason subconsci is to re move himself from the situat as much as
possibl by swap we for i in the sentenc the perpetr hope to deflect
attent or blame
in a situat in which the subject us we constantli the subject is indic to the
interview that the subject ha some sort of relationship with anoth parti in the situat
if for exampl the subject continu us imperson pronoun such as my girlfriend and
i rather than we thi indic a lack of person involv with the girlfriend fraud
examin can util thi pronoun us to determin whether the interviewe is involv in a
fraudul situat with other employe
possess pronoun
when an interviewe is give bogu testimoni concern an event he will often drop the
possess pronoun to shift the blame to an exterior forc
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3277
exampl
i got on my regist at 1030 i wa work at my regist when i wa call awai by my
supervisor when i return to the regist the regist wa open and the cash wa gone
in thi statement the subject refer to the regist as my regist up until the
controversi act took place at that point my regist becom the regist indic
that the subject no longer want to be associ with a corrupt regist thi pronoun
switch indic that the subject is be less than truth
verb
verb ar veri import piec of the statement analysi puzzl the tens that is us by the
interviewe will shed light on whether the incid ha been recal or improvis becaus
the subject should be recal event from the past the verb tens us to recount the stori
should be past also
exampl
my wife and i left the hous at 700 went to dinner and then saw a movi we return to
the hous after the movi wa over
howev the decept interviewe will often chang the verb tens at precis the moment
at which he is no longer recal but rather improvis the event
exampl
my wife and i left the hous at 700 went to dinner and then saw a movi we return to the
hous and as we pull up to it we see shatter glass on the drivewai
verb tens is also crucial concern the whereabout of anoth person such as in case of
possibl kidnap if the person interview continu refer to the miss person in the
past tens there is a good chanc that the miss person ha been harm again the susan
smith case is a textbook exampl of how verb tens usag can lead to a confess
balanc of the statement
when most interview subject recount an event their version will be natur balanc the
subject will spend a fairli equal amount of time tell what happen befor the event what
took place dure the event and what happen dure the aftermath fraud examin
interview theori and applic investig
3278 2011 fraud examin manual
should look at the sheer amount of time or number of sentenc a subject spend on each
topic to get a rough estim of how balanc the account is if ani of the portion of the
account ar exception short the subject is almost certainli ly by perform thi type
of analysi the fraud examin can also determin what element ar absent from the stori
in a short amount of time
in the book criteriabas statement analysi german psychologist max stellar and guenter
koehnken identifi a number of separ criteria that the fraud examin can take into
consider when attempt to analyz a justcomplet interview
gener characterist
logic structur the fraud examin first examin the statement for plot hole
check to ensur that the recount of event is chronolog correct and doe not
contain contradict
unstructur product the fraud examin should examin thi criterion at the
begin of the interview by allow the subject to recount the event without influenc
or question gener an honest person will not tell an interview exactli what ha
taken place in complet chronolog order from start to finish it is much more like
that the initi recount of event will be told in a scattershot fashion but that these
fact and detail will eventu mesh into a complet version when an interview subject
is abl to sit down and initi describ the event that have taken place in complet
detail from begin to end it is like that the stori ha been rehears
quantiti of detail an honest subject is more like to be abl to recal mani detail
within an interview than a dishonest subject when most subject fabric a stori thei
ar unabl to bolster the stori with veri mani detail
specif content
contextu embed thi criterion suggest that a truth subject statement will be
tightli woven with incident detail such as the subject daili routin habit or famili
relationship a decept subject is much less like to associ an event with seemingli
insignific detail such as these choos to focu onli on cover up the major event
that is be discuss
descript of interact the truth subject is like to have some descript of the
action and emot involv with the describ incid or peopl involv in the
incid
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3279
reproduct of convers often the wit will becom anim when repeat
ani convers relat to the incid when thi occur the subject is gener tell
the truth as it is difficult for a fraudster to creat cohes dialogu on the spot
unexpect complic dure the incid descript of incid that disrupt the
event such as a sudden halt or interrupt of the event indic that the subject is
speak truthfulli
peculiar of content
unusu detail the appear of quirki but believ detail lend credibl to the
subject fabric statement rare contain these type of descript
superflu detail a subject who provid detail that ar not essenti or even relat
to the recal event ar most often speak truthfulli a deceit subject is so
preoccupi with not tell the truth that he will excis thi type of inform from
the stori
accur report detail misunderstood when a wit describ detail that he doe
not understand or comprehend but that make sens to the interview the wit is
most often tell the truth
relat extern associ in thi criterion the interview look for point at which
the interview subject relat the particular experi with some person or extern
experi when the subject make a relationship between the event and someth
that ha previous occur in hi life he is veri like be honest
account of subject mental state the subject who fill the interview with descript
of feel and emot is veri like be truth when a subject cannot provid
such feel dure the interview thi suggest that the subject ha not thought through
hi decept stori veri thoroughli
attribut of perpetr mental state the honest subject will often recount the
perceiv mental state of the perpetr suggest what thei believ the perpetr
wa think or feel at the time of the event
spontan correct an interview subj ect mai often correct himself dure the
cours of the interview make alter to earlier detail or event when a subject
doe thi he is most often give truth testimoni the decept subject want to
project as honest a faad as possibl and do es not want to correct himself becaus in
hi mind thi give the appear of deceit
admit lack of memori thi criterion work close with the previou on in that an
honest interviewe will often admit to not rememb certain detail when the
interview theori and applic investig
3280 2011 fraud examin manual
interviewe is ly to the interview he want to be as complet as possibl in cover
the fraudul track
rais doubt about on own testimoni a deceit interviewe will almost never
rais ani concern about whether the testimoni given is absolut correct if the subject
rais concern that he is correct he is probabl tell the truth
selfdeprec the mention of ani selfincrimin or person unflatt detail
dure the interview suggest that the interviewe is credibl a person who attempt to
fabric a stori will not want to paint an unsavori pictur of himself
pardon the perpetr should the intervi ewe attempt to excus the perpetr or
avoid bash the fraudster the interviewe is like be honest
