2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/The Cognitive Interview Technique


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


The Cognitive Interview Technique 
Police and fraud investigators must often rely on the testimony of witnesses to bring the 
facts of a case together. The testimony of an important witness can determine the entire 
outcome of a fraud case, so it is essential that witnesses’ words be as reliable and detailed  
as possible. 
 
Unfortunately, witnesses are human, and humans are prone to make errors. Fraud 
investigators must understand that in a time of crisis, or even in a situation in which the 
witness was simply not paying close attention, the eyewitness can easily miss acute details. 
Often witnesses have trouble recalling large portions of events simply because they didn’t 
know at the time that they needed to be looking for specific details. Dr. R. Edward 
Geiselman and Dr. Ronald P. Fisher write in the National Institute of Justice article  
Interviewing Victims and Witnesses of Crime  that “most victims and eyewitnesses ... are so 
occupied with the event that they do not have the time to try to learn or memorize details 
about a suspect at the time of the crime.”  
 
Because of these problems, different techniques for filling out the witnesses’ testimony have 
been developed to assist the investigator. One of the first techniques developed was the use 
of hypnosis on witnesses. The notion behind this approach was that an investigator could 
open the mind of a witness and pick into his subconscious for specific details. The merits of 
this technique are highly debatable and have been hotly contested in courts of law. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.281 
But more recently, the cognitive interview technique was developed to serve much the same 
purpose. This approach has proven far more effective than questionable hypnosis techniques 
and has been deemed a reliable method in the court of law.  
 
The cognitive interview technique was established, researched, and fine-tuned by Dr. 
Geiselman, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and other colleagues in 
the psychiatric profession. Geiselman and others have written numerous articles and 
governmental documents detailing the extensive research dealing with the interviewing  
of witnesses.  
 
Geiselman believes that the cognitive interview should be split into two distinct phases: the 
narrative phase and the specific-detail phase. When these phases are used in succession 
during an interview, it is likely that an investigator will come away from an interview with an 
excellent witness account of an event. The narrative phase deals more with “what happened” 
during the event; the specific-detail phase works more to track down who was involved and 
obtain specific details about the suspect. 
 
The Narrative Phase 
The first portion of the cognitive interview is the narrative phase, in which the witness tells 
the “whole story.” The investigator should first allow the witness to recount the situation, 
using several steps to guide the narrative portion. There are four primary steps in the 
narrative phase of the cognitive interview: 
• Reconstruct the circumstances of the event. 
• Instruct the eyewitness to report everything and be complete. 
• Recall the events in different orders. 
• Change perspectives. 
 
Reconstruct the Circumstances of the Event 
In this first, important step, the interviewer should ask the eyewitness to describe the context 
in which the incident occurred. The interviewer should ask the witness to describe 
everything, including the weather, time of day, and look and feel of the environment in 
which the incident took place. What did the people and/or objects in the surroundings  
look like?  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.282   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The objective of this step is to mentally return the witness to the scene so that he will vividly 
recall the unfolding events. Asking the witness to describe the emotional state he was in at 
the time of the occurrence often helps accomplish this first step. 
 
Instruct the Eyewitness to Report Everything and Be Complete 
In this stage, the interviewer should ask the eyewitness to recount every last detail as 
completely as possible. Geiselman says that a witness will often withhold information that he 
thinks may be relevant to the investigation. Therefore, the investigator should instruct the 
witness not to omit anything when giving testimony, no matter how trivial the information 
might seem. The small details that the witness remembers during the interview may not be 
directly beneficial to the investigation, but they will be important to helping the witness 
remember the events descriptively and thoroughly. 
 
Recall the Events in Different Orders 
Constructing the event in a different order will give the witness the freedom to completely 
recreate the event. When recounting the event in sequential order, the witness may very well 
forget minute details in an effort to describe what happened next. If the witness constructs 
the event from the single moment or thing that left the greatest impression on him, the 
interviewer may gain a foothold on the witness’s perspective. 
 
Change Perspective 
The final step of the cognitive interview process is to get the witness to alter his perspective 
of the event. The investigator should ask him to reconstruct the scenario and assume a 
different position within the situation. For instance, ask the witness to pretend to be a 
different person within the event, and recount the event from that perspective. What was the 
other person thinking or feeling? This technique may seem a bit odd, but it may allow the 
witness to consider various elements of the event that he previously had not.  
 
Specific Details 
Once the narrative portion of the interview is comp leted, it is likely that the investigator will 
have questions about specific details. Geiselman and his contemporaries have developed five 
techniques to cultivate specific details and items of information from the witness. The five 
categories are: 
• Physical appearance 
• Names 
• Numbers 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.283 
• Speech characteristics 
• Conversation 
 
Physical Appearance 
The investigator can often elicit additional information about the event by asking the witness 
to describe the suspect. A particularly effective technique is to ask the witness whether the 
suspect reminded the witness of anyone he knows. Often, physical descriptions, such as the 
type of clothing a suspect was wearing or the particular way a suspect walked or looked, will 
not be presented during the narrative phase of the interview. This additional information, 
however, can be key to linking a suspect with a specific crime. 
 
Names 
Often, the name of the suspect or another person will be spoken during an event, but many 
times the event proves too traumatic or happens too quickly for a witness to recall. If a 
witness cannot remember any names spoken during the event ask him to attempt to recall 
the first letter of the suspect’s name (or any other names spoken) by going through the 
alphabet one letter at a time.  
 
Number 
Once the witness has possibly established the first letter of the suspect’s name, the 
investigator should ask the witness how many syllables or letters were in the name. 
Establishing whether the name was long or short may effectively jar the witness’s memory.  
 
Speech Characteristics 
The investigator can also ask the witness what types of speech characteristics the suspect 
has. Geiselman again suggests asking the witness whether the suspect’s speech reminds the 
witness of anyone else. The interviewer should also determine whether the suspect had any 
specific accent, an awkward or unusual voice, or used any words repeatedly during the event. 
 
Conversation 
The witness should be asked whether anything that the suspect or anyone else said during 
the event elicited an unusual response. Did the suspect or any other witnesses react in a 
strange manner to anything that was said?  
 
The extensive research that Geiselman and his colleagues have done on the cognitive 
interview technique has shown that the technique improves the recall performance of 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.284   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witnesses when compared to the standard interview techniques. The emphasis is on the 
witness’s recollection of details to give investigators a more complete picture of what actually 
happened during a specific event. 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.301 



:


the cognit interview techniqu
polic and fraud investig must often reli on the testimoni of wit to bring the
fact of a case togeth the testimoni of an import wit can determin the entir
outcom of a fraud case so it is essenti that wit word be as reliabl and detail
as possibl
unfortun wit ar human and human ar prone to make error fraud
investig must understand that in a time of crisi or even in a situat in which the
wit wa simpli not pai close attent the eyewit can easili miss acut detail
often wit have troubl recal larg portion of event simpli becaus thei didnt
know at the time that thei need to be look for specif detail dr r edward
geiselman and dr ronald p fisher write in the nation institut of justic articl
interview victim and wit of crime that most victim and eyewit ar so
occupi with the event that thei do not have the time to try to learn or memor detail
about a suspect at the time of the crime
becaus of these problem differ techniqu for fill out the wit testimoni have
been develop to assist the investig on of the first techniqu develop wa the us
of hypnosi on wit the notion behind thi approach wa that an investig could
open the mind of a wit and pick into hi subconsci for specif detail the merit of
thi techniqu ar highli debat and have been hotli contest in court of law
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3281
but more recent the cognit interview techniqu wa develop to serv much the same
purpos thi approach ha proven far more effect than question hypnosi techniqu
and ha been deem a reliabl method in the court of law
the cognit interview techniqu wa establish research and finetun by dr
geiselman a professor at the univers of california lo angel and other colleagu in
the psychiatr profess geiselman and other have written numer articl and
government document detail the extens research deal with the interview
of wit
geiselman believ that the cognit interview should be split into two distinct phase the
narr phase and the specificdetail phase when these phase ar us in success
dure an interview it is like that an investig will come awai from an interview with an
excel wit account of an event the narr phase deal more with what happen
dure the event the specificdetail phase work more to track down who wa involv and
obtain specif detail about the suspect
the narr phase
the first portion of the cognit interview is the narr phase in which the wit tell
the whole stori the investig should first allow the wit to recount the situat
us sever step to guid the narr portion there ar four primari step in the
narr phase of the cognit interview
reconstruct the circumst of the event
instruct the eyewit to report everyth and be complet
recal the event in differ order
chang perspect
reconstruct the circumst of the event
in thi first import step the interview should ask the eyewit to describ the context
in which the incid occur the interview should ask the wit to describ
everyth includ the weather time of dai and look and feel of the environ in
which the incid took place what did the peopl andor object in the surround
look like
interview theori and applic investig
3282 2011 fraud examin manual
the object of thi step is to mental return the wit to the scene so that he will vividli
recal the unfold event ask the wit to describ the emot state he wa in at
the time of the occurr often help accomplish thi first step
instruct the eyewit to report everyth and be complet
in thi stage the interview should ask the eyewit to recount everi last detail as
complet as possibl geiselman sai that a wit will often withhold inform that he
think mai be relev to the investig therefor the investig should instruct the
wit not to omit anyth when give testimoni no matter how trivial the inform
might seem the small detail that the wit rememb dure the interview mai not be
directli benefici to the investig but thei will be import to help the wit
rememb the event descript and thoroughli
recal the event in differ order
construct the event in a differ order will give the wit the freedom to complet
recreat the event when recount the event in sequenti order the wit mai veri well
forget minut detail in an effort to describ what happen next if the wit construct
the event from the singl moment or thing that left the greatest impress on him the
interview mai gain a foothold on the witnesss perspect
chang perspect
the final step of the cognit interview process is to get the wit to alter hi perspect
of the event the investig should ask him to reconstruct the scenario and assum a
differ posit within the situat for instanc ask the wit to pretend to be a
differ person within the event and recount the event from that perspect what wa the
other person think or feel thi techniqu mai seem a bit odd but it mai allow the
wit to consid variou element of the event that he previous had not
specif detail
onc the narr portion of the interview is comp lete it is like that the investig will
have question about specif detail geiselman and hi contemporari have develop five
techniqu to cultiv specif detail and item of inform from the wit the five
categori ar
physic appear
name
number
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3283
speech characterist
convers
physic appear
the investig can often elicit addit inform about the event by ask the wit
to describ the suspect a particularli effect techniqu is to ask the wit whether the
suspect remind the wit of anyon he know often physic descript such as the
type of cloth a suspect wa wear or the particular wai a suspect walk or look will
not be present dure the narr phase of the interview thi addit inform
howev can be kei to link a suspect with a specif crime
name
often the name of the suspect or anoth person will be spoken dure an event but mani
time the event prove too traumat or happen too quickli for a wit to recal if a
wit cannot rememb ani name spoken dure the event ask him to attempt to recal
the first letter of the suspect name or ani other name spoken by go through the
alphabet on letter at a time
number
onc the wit ha possibl establish the first letter of the suspect name the
investig should ask the wit how mani syllabl or letter were in the name
establish whether the name wa long or short mai effect jar the witnesss memori
speech characterist
the investig can also ask the wit what type of speech characterist the suspect
ha geiselman again suggest ask the wit whether the suspect speech remind the
wit of anyon els the interview should also determin whether the suspect had ani
specif accent an awkward or unusu voic or us ani word repeatedli dure the event
convers
the wit should be ask whether anyth that the suspect or anyon els said dure
the event elicit an unusu respons did the suspect or ani other wit react in a
strang manner to anyth that wa said
the extens research that geiselman and hi colleagu have done on the cognit
interview techniqu ha shown that the techniqu improv the recal perform of
interview theori and applic investig
3284 2011 fraud examin manual
wit when compar to the standard interview techniqu the emphasi is on the
witnesss recollect of detail to give investig a more complet pictur of what actual
happen dure a specif event
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3301
