2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Bribery
Generally, bribery and corruption are off-book frauds that occur in the form of kickbacks, 
gifts, or gratuities to government employees from contractors or to private business 
employees from vendors. For a detailed discussion of the legal elements of bribery and 
corruption, please see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
At its heart, a bribe is a business transaction, albeit an illegal or unethical one. A person 
“buys” something with the bribes he pays. What he buys is the influence of the recipient. 
Bribery schemes can be difficult and expensive. Though they are not nearly as common as 
other forms of occupational fraud such as asset misappropriations, bribery schemes tend to 
be much more costly.  
 
Bribery may be defined as the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting anything of value to 
influence an official act. The term official act means that traditional bribery statutes only 
proscribe payments made to influence the decisions of government agents or employees.  
 
Many occupational fraud schemes, however, involve commercial bribery, which is similar to the 
traditional definition of bribery except that something of value is offered to influence a 
business decision rather than an official act of government. Commercial bribery may or may 
not be a criminal offense. For example, in the United States there is no general federal law 
prohibiting commercial bribery in all instances. However, there are statutes prohibiting 
bribery of employees of financial institutions to influence a loan. Therefore, the law of your 
particular jurisdiction and the facts of the case will determine whether bribery in the private 
sector may be prosecuted criminally. Commercial bribery can often be pursued in the civil 
courts as breach of fiduciary duty or conflict of interest. See the Legal section for  
more information. 
 
According to Ernst & Young’s 11th global fraud survey, Driving Ethical Growth—New Markets, 
New Challenges, corruption is still a significant problem for businesses and executives, 
particularly due to the drive for company growth. Despite the multitude of anti-corruption 
legislation and increased enforcement efforts around the world, corruption is still prevalent.  
 
Bribery schemes generally fall into two broad categories: kickbacks  and bid-rigging schemes. 
Kickbacks are undisclosed payments made by vendors to employees of purchasing 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.702                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
companies. The purpose of a kickback is usually to enlist the corrupt employee in an 
overbilling scheme. Sometimes vendors pay kickbacks simply to get extra business from the 
purchasing company. Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a 
vendor in winning a contract through the competitive bidding process.  
 



:


briberi
gener briberi and corrupt ar offbook fraud that occur in the form of kickback
gift or gratuiti to govern employe from contractor or to privat busi
employe from vendor for a detail discuss of the legal element of briberi and
corrupt pleas see the law section of the fraud examin manual
at it heart a bribe is a busi transact albeit an illeg or uneth on a person
bui someth with the bribe he pai what he bui is the influenc of the recipi
briberi scheme can be difficult and expens though thei ar not nearli as common as
other form of occup fraud such as asset misappropri briberi scheme tend to
be much more costli
briberi mai be defin as the offer give receiv or solicit anyth of valu to
influenc an offici act the term offici act mean that tradit briberi statut onli
proscrib payment made to influenc the decis of govern agent or employe
mani occup fraud scheme howev involv commerci briberi which is similar to the
tradit definit of briberi except that someth of valu is offer to influenc a
busi decis rather than an offici act of govern commerci briberi mai or mai
not be a crimin offens for exampl in the unit state there is no gener feder law
prohibit commerci briberi in all instanc howev there ar statut prohibit
briberi of employe of financi institut to influenc a loan therefor the law of your
particular jurisdict and the fact of the case will determin whether briberi in the privat
sector mai be prosecut crimin commerci briberi can often be pursu in the civil
court as breach of fiduciari duti or conflict of interest see the legal section for
more inform
accord to ernst young 11th global fraud survei drive ethic growthnew market
new challeng corrupt is still a signific problem for busi and execut
particularli due to the drive for compani growth despit the multitud of anticorrupt
legisl and increas enforc effort around the world corrupt is still preval
briberi scheme gener fall into two broad categori kickback and bidrig scheme
kickback ar undisclos payment made by vendor to employe of purchas
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1702 2011 fraud examin manual
compani the purpos of a kickback is usual to enlist the corrupt employe in an
overbil scheme sometim vendor pai kickback simpli to get extra busi from the
purchas compani bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a
vendor in win a contract through the competit bid process
