2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Overbilling Schemes/EMPLOYEES WITH APPROVAL AUTHORITY


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


EMPLOYEES WITH APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
In most instances, kickback schemes begin as overbilling schemes in which a vendor submits 
inflated invoices to the victim organization. The false invoices either overstate the cost of 
actual goods and services, or reflect fictitious sales. The vendor in a kickback scheme 
generally seeks to enlist the help of an employee with the authority to approve payment of 
the fraudulent invoices. This authority ensures payment of the false billings without  
undue hassles.  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.705 
EXAMPLE 
A manager was authorized to purchase fixed assets for his company as part of a leasehold 
improvement. The materials he or dered were of a cheaper quality and lower price than what 
was specified, but the contract he negotiated did not reflect this. Therefore, the victim 
company paid for high-quality materials, but received low-quality materials. The difference 
in price between the true cost of the low-quality materials and what the company paid was 
diverted back to the manager as a kickback.  
  
The ability of the employee to authorize purchases (and thus to authorize fraudulent  
purchases) is usually a key to kickback schemes. If the fraudster can authorize payments 
himself, he does not have to submit purchase requisitions to an honest superior who might 
question the validity of the transaction. 
 



:


employe with approv author
in most instanc kickback scheme begin as overbil scheme in which a vendor submit
inflat invoic to the victim organ the fals invoic either overst the cost of
actual good and servic or reflect fictiti sale the vendor in a kickback scheme
gener seek to enlist the help of an employe with the author to approv payment of
the fraudul invoic thi author ensur payment of the fals bill without
undu hassl
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1705
exampl
a manag wa author to purchas fix asset for hi compani as part of a leasehold
improv the materi he or dere were of a cheaper qualiti and lower price than what
wa specifi but the contract he negoti did not reflect thi therefor the victim
compani paid for highqual materi but receiv lowqual materi the differ
in price between the true cost of the lowqual materi and what the compani paid wa
divert back to the manag as a kickback
the abil of the employe to author purchas and thu to author fraudul
purchas is usual a kei to kickback scheme if the fraudster can author payment
himself he doe not have to submit purchas requisit to an honest superior who might
question the valid of the transact
