2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Kickback Payments


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Kickback Payments 
It should also be noted that every bribe is a two-sided transaction. In every case where a 
vendor bribes a purchaser, there is someone on the vendor’s side of the transaction who is 
making  an illicit payment. It is therefore just as likely that your employees are paying bribes as 
accepting them.  
 
In order to obtain the funds to make these payments, employees usually divert company 
money into a slush fund, a noncompany account from whic h bribes can be made. Assuming 
that bribes are not authorized by the briber’s company, he must find a way to generate the 
funds necessary to illegally influence someone in another organization. Therefore, the key to 
the crime from the briber’s perspective is the di version of money into the slush fund. This is 
a fraudulent disbursement of company funds, which is usually accomplished by the writing 
of company checks to a fictitious entity or the submitting of false invoices in the name of a 
false entity. Payments to a slush fund are commonly coded as “fees” for consulting or other 
services.  
 
It is common to charge fraudulent disbursements to nebulous accounts like “consulting 
fees.” The purchase of goods can be verified by a check of inventory, but there is no 
inventory for these kinds of services. It is therefore more difficult to prove that the 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.707 
payments are fraudulent. The discussion of exactly how fraudulent disbursements are made 
can be found in the sections on Check Tampering and Invoices.  
 



:


kickback payment
it should also be note that everi bribe is a twosid transact in everi case where a
vendor bribe a purchas there is someon on the vendor side of the transact who is
make an illicit payment it is therefor just as like that your employe ar pai bribe as
accept them
in order to obtain the fund to make these payment employe usual divert compani
monei into a slush fund a noncompani account from whic h bribe can be made assum
that bribe ar not author by the briber compani he must find a wai to gener the
fund necessari to illeg influenc someon in anoth organ therefor the kei to
the crime from the briber perspect is the di version of monei into the slush fund thi is
a fraudul disburs of compani fund which is usual accomplish by the write
of compani check to a fictiti entiti or the submit of fals invoic in the name of a
fals entiti payment to a slush fund ar commonli code as fee for consult or other
servic
it is common to charg fraudul disburs to nebul account like consult
fee the purchas of good can be verifi by a check of inventori but there is no
inventori for these kind of servic it is therefor more difficult to prove that the
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1707
payment ar fraudul the discuss of exactli how fraudul disburs ar made
can be found in the section on check tamper and invoic
