2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/The Business Profile — Analysis/WHAT IS THE MONEY FLOW PATTERN INVOLVED IN THE SUSPECT TRANSACTION?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


WHAT IS THE MONEY FLOW PATTERN INVOLVED IN THE SUSPECT TRANSACTION? 
Tracing the flow of funds in the suspect transactions is important. Where does the money 
come from and where does it go? Information about the source of funds can provide leads 
as to whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being employed, and the location of  
off-book accounts. Expenditures related to the suspect transactions might cover  
on-book payments. 
 
Determine all sources of funds with the following questions: 
• What goods or services does the business provide? 
• Who are its customers or clients? 
• What mode of payment is used: cash or check? 
• What other sources of funds are available, such as rebates from suppliers and shippers, 
or proceeds of insurance claims, liquidation sales, sale of assets, and loans? 
 
Identify all expenditures associated with the suspect transactions with the following: 
• What disbursements are made to third parties, such as commissioned sales agents, 
consultants, subcontractors, suppliers, and shippers? 
• Did the business have any extraordinary expenses during the suspect time period, such 
as extra commissions, advertising allowances (payments made by a manufacturer to the 
retail customer to assist the customer in meeting its advertising expenses), or inventory 
losses? 
• How are the expenses and disbursements paid: by cash, or by check? From which 
accounts? 
• Does the business maintain an account or fund used to pay miscellaneous expenses? If 
so, where is it located, who keeps the records, and who signs the checks or authorizes 
payments? 
• How are travel and entertainment expenses reimbursed? From which account? 
• What is the company’s policy toward business gifts? What gifts were given to the suspect 
and/or recipients? How were they paid for? Which records are maintained regarding 
them? 
 



:


what is the monei flow pattern involv in the suspect transact
trace the flow of fund in the suspect transact is import where doe the monei
come from and where doe it go inform about the sourc of fund can provid lead
as to whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be emploi and the locat of
offbook account expenditur relat to the suspect transact might cover
onbook payment
determin all sourc of fund with the follow question
what good or servic doe the busi provid
who ar it custom or client
what mode of payment is us cash or check
what other sourc of fund ar avail such as rebat from supplier and shipper
or proce of insur claim liquid sale sale of asset and loan
identifi all expenditur associ with the suspect transact with the follow
what disburs ar made to third parti such as commiss sale agent
consult subcontractor supplier and shipper
did the busi have ani extraordinari expens dure the suspect time period such
as extra commiss advertis allow payment made by a manufactur to the
retail custom to assist the custom in meet it advertis expens or inventori
loss
how ar the expens and disburs paid by cash or by check from which
account
doe the busi maintain an account or fund us to pai miscellan expens if
so where is it locat who keep the record and who sign the check or author
payment
how ar travel and entertain expens reimburs from which account
what is the compani polici toward busi gift what gift were given to the suspect
andor recipi how were thei paid for which record ar maintain regard
them
