2011 Fraud Examiners Manual


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


2011 Fraud Examiners Manual


:


2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   P-1  

PREFACE 
More than two decades ago, the First Edition of the Fraud Examiners Manual postulated that 
“…fraud will be the crime of choice for the 21st century.” 
 
The truth of that prophetic prediction has been borne out in the events of the last decade. 
According to estimates by the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, occupational fraud 
and abuse in the United States alone may exceed nine hundred billion dollars annually. If we 
add together the various confidence schemes, check and credit card frauds and securities 
swindles, the total may run as much as ten percent of global economic output — trillions of 
dollars world-wide. Enron, WorldCom, Adelphia, Bernie Madoff, and the rest of a rogue’s 
gallery — as devastating as these frauds were — are only a microcosm of the problem.    
 
One difficult aspect of fraud and white-collar crime is that it is hidden — we only know about 
the ones that surface. Whatever the true cost of this problem, it is a staggering social and 
economic sum. But there is hope. 
 
When the First Edition of the Fraud Examiners Manual was released, there were less than a 
thousand Certified Fraud Examiners. The ACFE now has more than 50,000 members in 
more than 140 countries. These members bring true hope to understanding and eventually 
controlling the problem of white-collar crime. It will not be easy, nor will it be accomplished 
quickly.  
 
The Fraud Examiners Manual is but one weapon to fight fraud. Like all weapons, it means 
nothing except in the hands of someone trained to use it. You, the individual fraud 
examiner, are the real key. Study the enclosed information carefully, then add this knowledge 
to your arsenal. It represents the common body of knowledge in the fraud examination field. 
But auditors, forensic accountants, attorneys, law enforcement personnel, regulatory 
examiners, investigators, and other anti-fraud professionals will find much useful 
information too.  
 
The Fraud Examiners Manual is organized into four sections. The first section is Financial 
Transactions and Fraud Schemes. It describes thousands of fraud schemes, as well as 
provides information about basic accounting concepts and managers’ and auditors’ 
responsibilities to detect fraud. The section is divided into two subsections: occupational 
fraud and other fraud. Occupational fraud schemes include asset misappropriations, 
corruption, and fraudulent financial statements. These chapters follow a standard taxonomy 
originally developed for the book Occupational Fraud and Abuse. The section also details a 

PREFACE 
P-2     2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    
number of other fraud schemes ranging from financial institution fraud to government 
fraud.  
 
The Investigation Section provides the basic tools and techniques necessary to develop 
information and evidence when conducting a fraud examination and identifying the 
perpetrators. It describes how to gather evidence through the examination of documents and 
through interview techniques. It also contains information about using data analysis 
techniques, computer forensics, public records, and the Internet to locate evidence and other 
resources. 
 
The Law Section focuses on the statutes and common law principles involved in prosecuting 
fraudsters through both the criminal and civil systems, as well as the legal pitfalls you may 
encounter in conducting an investigation. It also contains information about how to succeed 
as an expert witness. 
 
The Fraud Prevention and Deterrence Section (previously named Criminology and Ethics) 
reflects a practical approach to preventing and deterring fraud. It not only discusses why 
people commit crime, but also contains practical advice about how to use that knowledge to 
prevent and detect fraud through proactive policies, fraud risk assessments, and corporate 
compliance programs. It also includes a number of meaningful statistics about fraud and 
more discussion about the types and impact of organizational and occupational crime. This 
section concludes with a discussion of the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics and its 
meaning for fraud examiners. 
 
We would like to acknowledge the assistance of the following experts in contributing 
material to this edition: Bob Bauman, Neil Bebbington, Charlotte J. Bell, Tasha Bollinger, 
Dick Brodfuehrer, Chris Campos, Larry Cook, Dave Cotton, Tom Creelman, Don Dame, 
Joe Dervaes, Ron Durkin, Dennis Dycus, Bryan Farrell, John Francolla, Mason 
Haynesworth, Jim Healy, Steve Hendrix, Dick Hollinger, Frank Howatt, Bethmara Kessler, 
Mike Kline, Mike Lawrence, Frank Leggio, Jim Lile, Bob Lindquist, Kathleen Lower, Tony 
Maceo, Judge Frank Maloney, Walt Manning, John McLaren, Bob Miller, Frank Nasuti, Dick 
Nossen, Joan Norvelle, Brett Holloway-Reeves, Ric Rowe, William N. Rudman, Mike 
Ryman, Ken Sibley, Craig Starr, Bill Thornhill, Don Wall, and John Fisher Weber. 
 
PREFACE 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   P-3  
Final thanks go to the staff of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. We are 
especially appreciative of the efforts of John Warren, Andi McNeal, Mark Scott, Dawn 
Taylor, Amy Adler, Laura Hymes, Amy Wald, Emily Hurt, and Jeanette LeVie.  
 
The following pages will provide you with detailed references. But remember, no procedure 
can replace good judgement. The detection and deterrence of fraud is difficult. But if you 
learn the information in this book, your task will be immeasurably easier.  
 
Authors: 
Joseph T. Wells, CFE, CPA 
Nancy S. Bradford, CFE, CPA, CIA 
Gilbert Geis, Ph.D. 
John D. Gill, J.D., CFE 
W. Michael Kramer, J.D., CFE 
James D. Ratley, CFE 
Jack Robertson, Ph.D., CFE, CPA 
 
 
Austin, Texas 
September 2010 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-1  




:


2011 fraud examin manual
2011 fraud examin manual p1
prefac
more than two decad ago the first edit of the fraud examin manual postul that
fraud will be the crime of choic for the 21st centuri
the truth of that prophet predict ha been born out in the event of the last decad
accord to estim by the associ of certifi fraud examin occup fraud
and abus in the unit state alon mai exce nine hundr billion dollar annual if we
add togeth the variou confid scheme check and credit card fraud and secur
swindl the total mai run as much as ten percent of global econom output trillion of
dollar worldwid enron worldcom adelphia berni madoff and the rest of a rogu
galleri as devast as these fraud were ar onli a microcosm of the problem
on difficult aspect of fraud and whitecollar crime is that it is hidden we onli know about
the on that surfac whatev the true cost of thi problem it is a stagger social and
econom sum but there is hope
when the first edit of the fraud examin manual wa releas there were less than a
thousand certifi fraud examin the acf now ha more than 50000 member in
more than 140 countri these member bring true hope to understand and eventu
control the problem of whitecollar crime it will not be easi nor will it be accomplish
quickli
the fraud examin manual is but on weapon to fight fraud like all weapon it mean
noth except in the hand of someon train to us it you the individu fraud
examin ar the real kei studi the enclos inform carefulli then add thi knowledg
to your arsen it repres the common bodi of knowledg in the fraud examin field
but auditor forens account attornei law enforc personnel regulatori
examin investig and other antifraud profession will find much us
inform too
the fraud examin manual is organ into four section the first section is financi
transact and fraud scheme it describ thousand of fraud scheme as well as
provid inform about basic account concept and manag and auditor
respons to detect fraud the section is divid into two subsect occup
fraud and other fraud occup fraud scheme includ asset misappropri
corrupt and fraudul financi statement these chapter follow a standard taxonomi
origin develop for the book occup fraud and abus the section also detail a
prefac
p2 2011 fraud examin manual
number of other fraud scheme rang from financi institut fraud to govern
fraud
the investig section provid the basic tool and techniqu necessari to develop
inform and evid when conduct a fraud examin and identifi the
perpetr it describ how to gather evid through the examin of document and
through interview techniqu it also contain inform about us data analysi
techniqu comput forens public record and the internet to locat evid and other
resourc
the law section focus on the statut and common law principl involv in prosecut
fraudster through both the crimin and civil system as well as the legal pitfal you mai
encount in conduct an investig it also contain inform about how to succe
as an expert wit
the fraud prevent and deterr section previous name criminolog and ethic
reflect a practic approach to prevent and deter fraud it not onli discuss why
peopl commit crime but also contain practic advic about how to us that knowledg to
prevent and detect fraud through proactiv polici fraud risk assess and corpor
complianc program it also includ a number of meaning statist about fraud and
more discuss about the type and impact of organiz and occup crime thi
section conclud with a discuss of the acf code of profession ethic and it
mean for fraud examin
we would like to acknowledg the assist of the follow expert in contribut
materi to thi edit bob bauman neil bebbington charlott j bell tasha bolling
dick brodfuehr chri campo larri cook dave cotton tom creelman don dame
joe derva ron durkin denni dycu bryan farrel john francolla mason
haynesworth jim heali steve hendrix dick holling frank howatt bethmara kessler
mike kline mike lawrenc frank leggio jim lile bob lindquist kathleen lower toni
maceo judg frank malonei walt man john mclaren bob miller frank nasuti dick
nossen joan norvel brett hollowayreev ric row william n rudman mike
ryman ken siblei craig starr bill thornhil don wall and john fisher weber
prefac
2011 fraud examin manual p3
final thank go to the staff of the associ of certifi fraud examin we ar
especi appreci of the effort of john warren andi mcneal mark scott dawn
taylor ami adler laura hyme ami wald emili hurt and jeanett levi
the follow page will provid you with detail refer but rememb no procedur
can replac good judgement the detect and deterr of fraud is difficult but if you
learn the inform in thi book your task will be immeasur easier
author
joseph t well cfe cpa
nanci s bradford cfe cpa cia
gilbert gei phd
john d gill jd cfe
w michael kramer jd cfe
jame d ratlei cfe
jack robertson phd cfe cpa
austin texa
septemb 2010
2011 fraud examin manual i1
