2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/The Court System/Jurisdiction and Venue


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Jurisdiction and Venue 
Courts are defined by their jurisdiction and venue. To hear and decide a case, a court must 
have jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter involved and proper venue.  
 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.104  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and decide a given case; it refers to the subject 
matter or persons over which lawful authority may be exercised by a court. A probate court, 
for instance, only has jurisdiction to hear cases related to wills and other probate matters. 
Lower trial courts (such as a justice of the peace court) may only have jurisdiction to hear 
matters under a certain dollar amount, e.g., cases with less than $5,000 in controversy.  
 
Venue refers to the geographical area covered by the court; it is the physical location where 
the lawsuit is to be tried. A trial court in Dallas County, Texas, for example, can only hear 
cases that have some connection with either parties or events that occurred in that county. 
Venue is technically an element of the court’s jurisdiction. This issue may be important in 
deciding where to file charges or claims.  
 
Determining the proper court requires a three-part test. (1) Does the court hear cases of the 
type in question? Claiming $500,000 in damages, the plaintiff needs a court that hears civil 
complaints of that magnitude. (2) Does the court have the authority to exercise its power 
over a particular defendant or piece of property? You can sue a Nebraska company in a 
Nebraska state court because courts have personal jurisdiction over all businesses that do 
business in that state. (3) Does the claim arise within the court’s venue? If the claim for 
damages is against the Missouri office of a company headquartered in Nebraska, determining 
the proper venue is essential. If you file the claim in North Dakota, the court will have no 
jurisdiction to hear the case.  
 



:


jurisdict and venu
court ar defin by their jurisdict and venu to hear and decid a case a court must
have jurisdict over the parti and subject matter involv and proper venu
overview of the unit state legal system law
2104 2011 fraud examin manual
jurisdict is the power of a court to hear and decid a given case it refer to the subject
matter or person over which law author mai be exercis by a court a probat court
for instanc onli ha jurisdict to hear case relat to will and other probat matter
lower trial court such as a justic of the peac court mai onli have jurisdict to hear
matter under a certain dollar amount eg case with less than 5000 in controversi
venu refer to the geograph area cover by the court it is the physic locat where
the lawsuit is to be tri a trial court in dalla counti texa for exampl can onli hear
case that have some connect with either parti or event that occur in that counti
venu is technic an element of the court jurisdict thi issu mai be import in
decid where to file charg or claim
determin the proper court requir a threepart test 1 doe the court hear case of the
type in question claim 500000 in damag the plaintiff need a court that hear civil
complaint of that magnitud 2 doe the court have the author to exercis it power
over a particular defend or piec of properti you can sue a nebraska compani in a
nebraska state court becaus court have person jurisdict over all busi that do
busi in that state 3 doe the claim aris within the court venu if the claim for
damag is against the missouri offic of a compani headquart in nebraska determin
the proper venu is essenti if you file the claim in north dakota the court will have no
jurisdict to hear the case
