2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/The Court System/State and Federal Court Systems


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


State and Federal Court Systems  
The U.S. justice system uses separate but interlocking organizations of courts. State courts 
can decide nearly every type of case, limited only by the U.S. Constitution, their own state 
constitutions, and state law. Citizens will have most of their legal dealings with the state and 
local courts situated throughout the country. Most fraud cases will be tried at this level. 
Probate cases, marital disputes, and real estate suits are heard by state courts. 
 
Federal courts are principally located in larger cities and hold limited jurisdictions. They hear 
only those cases over which the Constitution or federal law gives them authority. Federal 
courts have jurisdiction in only two kinds of cases: (1) federal question cases, and (2) diversity 
jurisdiction cases.  
 
A court has federal question jurisdiction over cases based on (arising under) any federal law.  
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.105 
In diversity cases, a federal court can hear a state action that involves more than $75,000 and 
is between parties who are citizens of different states. Diversity of citizenship must be 
complete—all of the plaintiffs must be citize ns of a different state(s) from all of the 
defendants. For purposes of determining diversity jurisdiction, a party is a citizen of the state 
where he is domiciled (i.e., where he is present and intends to make his permanent home). A 
corporation is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorporated and the state in which it 
has its principal place of business. 
 



:


state and feder court system
the us justic system us separ but interlock organ of court state court
can decid nearli everi type of case limit onli by the us constitut their own state
constitut and state law citizen will have most of their legal deal with the state and
local court situat throughout the countri most fraud case will be tri at thi level
probat case marit disput and real estat suit ar heard by state court
feder court ar princip locat in larger citi and hold limit jurisdict thei hear
onli those case over which the constitut or feder law give them author feder
court have jurisdict in onli two kind of case 1 feder question case and 2 divers
jurisdict case
a court ha feder question jurisdict over case base on aris under ani feder law
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2105
in divers case a feder court can hear a state action that involv more than 75000 and
is between parti who ar citizen of differ state divers of citizenship must be
completeal of the plaintiff must be citiz ns of a differ state from all of the
defend for purpos of determin divers jurisdict a parti is a citizen of the state
where he is domicil ie where he is present and intend to make hi perman home a
corpor is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorpor and the state in which it
ha it princip place of busi
