2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


SECURITIES FRAUD 
 
Introduction 
In order to effectively conduct investigations or examinations of fraudulent securities 
transactions, fraud examiners and investigators need a general understanding of both federal 
and state laws and the philosophy behind regulation. Many financial products and 
opportunities can be deemed to be securities, but that is often far from obvious to an 
untrained observer. This section helps provide fraud examiners with the tools necessary to 
recognize securities fraud and conduct a successful investigation.  
 
The primary purpose of securities regulation is to balance the legitimate needs of business to 
raise capital against the need to protect investors. The worth of a security comes from the 
value of the interest it represents—it has no inherent value. Securities are not a commodity 
to be consumed, but more resemble a currency being traded. 
 
Although there is some commonality between federal and state laws regarding the regulation 
of the securities industry, there exists a complex web of laws from 50 states in addition to 
federal regulation. Each state has its own securities laws and even where the law is similar, 
interpretation and rules may differ markedly. Regulation of securities transactions covers not 
only their sale, but also the offer of securities to the public.  
 
 
Federal Regulation 
 
Securities Act of 1933 
Concern over the 1929 stock market crash and over the manipulation of the securities 
markets precipitated the need for federal intervention. In 1933, the Securities Act was 
enacted to regulate the public offering of securities and protect investors. The 1933 Act, 
sometimes known as the “Truth in Securiti es Act,” defines securities to include: 
 
 “…any note, stock, treasury stock, bond, debenture, … investment contract, fractional 
undivided interest in any oil, gas or other mineral rights, any put, call, straddle, option … 
any interest or instrument commonly known as a security…” [Title 15, U.S.C., § 
77b(a)(1)].  
 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1502                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Of course, both federal and state laws provide for exemptions. Exemptions basically fall 
under two categories, exempt securities and exempt transactions. For example, certain obligations 
issued or guaranteed by the United States government or by state or local governments are 
exempted securities.  
 
This Act also requires that investors be given full and fair disclosure of material information 
concerning their investment or prospective investment. In this way the sale of securities 
differs from many other commercial transactions where caveat emptor is the rule. Here, the 
investor is entitled to all information necessary for an informed investment decision to  
be made. 
 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 
Unlike the 1933 Act, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 mainly deals with post-issuance 
trading. This Act, which gave birth to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
requires the registration of securities brokers and dealers. Simply put the 1933 Act can be 
thought of as regulating the issuance of the securities themselves, while the 1934 Act covers 
subsequent trading. This secondary market trading represents by far the greatest volume of 
securities transactions. Trading generally takes place on markets with actual trading floors, 
called “exchanges,” or on so-called “over-the-counter” markets such as NASDAQ. 
 
The 1934 Act contains section 10(b), a comprehensive anti-fraud provision, which permits 
the SEC to set forth rules and regulations that prohibit manipulative or deceptive devices or 
contrivances via the mails or other means of interstate commerce. For example, under 
section 10(b), the SEC promulgated Rule 10b-5, which prohibits false statements and other 
fraudulent activity in connection with securities transactions. Specifically, Rule 10b-5 states 
that:  
 
“It shall be unlawful for any person, directly or indirectly, by the use of any means or 
instrumentality of interstate commerce, or of the mails, or of any facility of any national 
securities exchange, 
 
(1)  to employ any device, scheme or artifice to defraud, 
 
(2)  to make any untrue statement of a material fact or to omit to state a material fact 
necessary in order to make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under 
which they were made, not misleading, or 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1503 
(3)  to engage in any act, practice, or course of business which operates or would operate as 
a fraud or deceit upon any person, in connection with the purchase or sale of any 
security.” 
 
Investment Advisor Act of 1940 
Registered securities dealers are required to adhere to the Rules of Fair Practice issued by the 
National Association of Securities Dealers and the Investment Advisers Act of 1940. This 
Act mandates registration and regulation of investment advisers. It applies to anyone who 
advises others as part of a regular business and for compensation on the investment, 
purchase, or sale of securities. This does not apply to those who do not receive 
compensation or who publish financial advice in a newspaper or magazine. 
 
Investment Company Act of 1940 
Under the Investment Company Act of 1940, investment companies are required to register 
with the SEC, which also regulates their activities. This Act dictates qualifications for officers 
and directors, requires that certain matters are submitted for stockholder approval, and 
mandates SEC permission for certain transactions such as those between insiders and 
affiliates. It divides investment companies into three categories: 
• Face-amount certificate companies — Any comp any engaged in issuing fixed income 
debenture type securities. 
• Unit investment trusts—Companies organized under a trust indenture, contract of 
agency, or those similar in nature, which do not have a board of directors and issue only 
redeemable securities. 
• Management companies — Firms that do not fit the criteria of the first two categories fall 
into this one. This includes open and closed-end companies, whether listed on securities 
exchanges or not. “Open-end” companies are commonly referred to as mutual funds 
and the net asset value of a share is calculated based on the market value of the fund’s 
portfolio divided by the number of shares outstanding. The shares of “closed-end” 
companies trade in a similar manner to regular stocks, i.e., the value is determined by the 
market forces of supply and demand.  
 
Although there are criminal penalties attached to violations of the federal securities laws, the 
Securities and Exchange Commission does not have the power to take criminal action. SEC 
investigations that disclose potentially criminal violations are usually referred to the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation.  
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1504                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Less serious violations may be addressed using  the Commission’s administrative powers. The 
SEC has the power to issue “cease and desist” orders, levy fines, and order disgorgement  
of profits. 
 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is one of the most significant changes in the securities field 
since the 1934 Act was passed. It was designed to restore investor confidence in capital 
markets and help eliminate financial statement fraud in publicly traded companies while at 
the same time significantly increasing the penalties for corporate accounting fraud.  
 
The most significant changes brought on by the Act include:  
• The creation of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. 
• Requirements for senior financial officers to certify SEC filings. 
• Standards for audit committee independence. 
• Standards for auditor independence. 
• Enhanced financial disclosure requirements. 
• Protections for corporate whistleblowers. 
• Enhanced penalties for white-collar crime. 
 
The Act is discussed in detail in the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law section of 
the Fraud Examiners Manual. However, some of the more important provisions as they relate 
to corporate governance are reproduced here. 
 
Certification Obligations for CEOs and CFOs 
One of the most significant changes effected by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is the requirement 
that the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer of public companies 
personally certify annual and quarterly SEC filings. These certifications essentially require 
CEOs and CFOs to take responsibility for their companies’ financial statements and prevent 
them from delegating this responsibility to their subordinates and then claiming ignorance 
when fraud is uncovered in the financial statements.  
 
There are two types of officer certifications mandated by Sarbanes-Oxley: criminal 
certifications, which are set forth in section 906 of the Act and codified at 18, U.S.C., § 1350, 
and civil certifications, which are set forth in section 302. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1505 
CRIMINAL CERTIFICATIONS (§ 906) 
Periodic filings with the SEC must now be accompanied by a statement, signed by the CEO 
and CFO, which certifies that the report fully complies with the SEC’s periodic reporting 
requirements and that the information in the report fairly presents, in all material respects, 
the financial condition and results of operation of the company. 
These certifications are known as “criminal certifications” because the Act imposes criminal 
penalties on officers who violate the certification requirements.  
• Corporate officers who knowingly  violate the certification requirements are subject to 
fines of up to $1,000,000 and up to 10 years imprisonment, or both.  
• Corporate officers who willfully violate the certification requirements are subject to fines 
of up to $5,000,000 and up to 20 years imprisonment, or both.  
 
CIVIL CERTIFICATIONS (§ 302) 
Section 302 of the Act requires the CEO and CFO to personally certify the following in 
their reports:  
• They have personally reviewed the report;  
• Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the financials misleading;  
• Based on their knowledge the financial information in the report fairly presents in all 
material respects the financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow of the 
company;  
• They are responsible for designing, maintaining, and evaluating the company’s internal 
controls, they have evaluated the controls within 90 days prior to the report, and they 
have presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of those controls in the report; 
• They have disclosed to the auditors and the audit committee any material weaknesses in 
the controls and any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other 
employees who have a significant role in the company’s internal controls; and 
• They have indicated in their report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls since the filing of the last report. 
 
Note that in items 2 and 3 the CEO and CFO are not required to certify that the financials 
are accurate or that there is no misstatement. They are simply required to certify that to their 
knowledge  the financials are accurate and not misleading. However, this does not mean that 
senior financial officers can simply plead ignorance about their companies’ SEC filings in 
order to avoid liability. The term “fairly presents” in item 3 is a broader standard than what 
is required by GAAP. In certifying that their SEC filings meet this standard, the CEO and 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1506                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CFO essentially must certify that the comp any (1) has selected appropriate accounting 
policies to ensure the material accuracy of the reports; (2) has properly applied those 
accounting standards; and (3) has disclosed financial information that reflects the underlying 
transactions and events of the company. Furthermore, the other certification rules (see 1, 
and 4–6 above) mandate that CEOs and CFOs take an active role in their companies’ public 
reporting, and in the design and maintenance of internal controls. 
 
It is significant that in item 4, the CEO and CFO not only have to certify that they are 
responsible for their companies’ internal controls, but also that they have evaluated the 
controls within 90 days prior to their quarterly or annual report.  Essentially, this certification 
requirement mandates that companies actively and continually re-evaluate their control 
structures to prevent fraud. 
 
In conjunction with the § 302 certification requirements on the responsibility of the CEO 
and CFO for internal controls, § 404 of the Act requires all annual reports to contain an 
internal control report that (1) states management’s responsibility for establishing and 
maintaining an adequate internal control structure and procedures for financial reporting; 
and (2) contains an assessment of the effectiveness of the internal control structure and 
procedures of the company for financial reporting.  
 
Item 5 requires the CEO and CFO to certify that they have disclosed to their auditors and 
their audit committee any material weaknesses in the company’s internal controls, and also 
any fraud, whether material or not,  that involves management or other key employees. 
Obviously, this is a very broad reporting standard that goes beyond the “material” standard 
generally used in financial statement audits. The CEO and CFO now must report to their 
auditors and audit committee any fraud  committed by a manager. This places a greater burden 
on the CEO and CFO to take part in anti-fraud efforts and to be aware of fraudulent activity 
within their companies in order to meet this certification requirement.  
 
Item 6 is significant because periodic SEC filings must now include statements detailing 
significant changes to the internal controls of publicly traded companies. 
 
Standards for Audit Committee Independence 
AUDIT COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES  
Section 301 of the Act requires that the audit committee for each publicly traded company 
shall be directly responsible for appointing, compensating, and overseeing the work of the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1507 
company’s outside auditors. The Act also mandates that the auditors must report directly to 
the audit committee ? not management ? and makes it the responsibility of the audit 
committee to resolve disputes between management and the auditors. Section 301 also 
requires that the audit committee must have the authority and funding to hire independent 
counsel and any other advisors it deems necessary to carry out its duties.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that each member of a company’s audit committee must 
be a member of its board of directors, and must otherwise be “independent.” The term 
“independent” means that the audit committee member can only receive compensation from 
the company for his service on the board of directors, the audit committee, or another 
committee of the board of directors. They cannot be paid by the company for any other 
consulting or advisory work.  
 
FINANCIAL EXPERT  
Section 407 of the Act requires every public company to disclose in its periodic reports to 
the SEC whether or not the audit committee has at least one member who is a “financial 
expert,” and if not to explain the reasons why. The Act defines a “financial expert” as a 
person who, through education and experience as a public accountant or auditor, or a CFO, 
comptroller, chief financial officer or a similar position (1) has an understanding of generally 
accepted accounting principles and financial statements; (2) has experience in preparing or 
auditing financial statements of comparable companies and the application of such principles 
in accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves; (3) has experience with internal controls; 
and (4) has an understanding of audit committee functions.  
 
ESTABLISHING A WHISTLEBLOWING STRUCTURE 
The Act makes it the responsibility of the audit committee to establish procedures (e.g., a 
hotline) for receiving and dealing with complaints and anonymous employee tips regarding 
irregularities in the company’s accounting met hods, internal controls, or auditing matters.  
 
Enhanced Financial Disclosure Requirements 
OFF-BALANCE SHEET  TRANSACTIONS 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act directed the SEC to issue  rules that require the disclosure of all 
material off-balance sheet transactions by publicly traded companies. The rules require 
disclosure of “all material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations 
(including contingent obligations), and other relationships the company may have with 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1508                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
unconsolidated entities or persons that may have a material current or future effect on the 
company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, liquidity, capital expenditures, 
capital resources, or significant components of revenues or expenses.” These disclosures are 
required in all annual and quarterly SEC reports. 
 
PRO FORMA FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
Section 401 also directed the SEC to issue rules on pro forma financial statements. These 
rules require that pro forma financials must not contain any untrue statements or omissions 
that would make them misleading and require that the pro forma financials be reconciled to 
GAAP. These rules apply to all pro forma financial statements that are filed with the SEC or 
that are included in any public disclosure or press release.  
 
PROHIBITIONS ON PERSONAL LOANS TO EXECUTIVES 
Section 402 makes it illegal for public companies to make personal loans or otherwise extend 
credit, either directly or indirectly, to or for any director or executive officer. There is an 
exception that applies to consumer lenders if the loans are consumer loans of the type the 
company normally makes to the public, and on the same terms. 
 
RESTRICTIONS ON INSIDER TRADING 
Section 403 establishes disclosure requirements for stock transactions by directors and 
officers of public companies, or by persons who own more than 10 percent of a publicly 
traded company’s stock. Reports of changes in  beneficial ownership by these persons must 
now be filed with the SEC by the end of the second business day following the transaction. 
 
Under § 306, directors and officers are also prohibited from trading in the company’s 
securities during any pension fund blackout periods. This restriction only applies to 
securities that were acquired as a result of their employment or service to the company. A 
blackout period is defined as any period of more than three consecutive business days in 
which at least 50 percent of the participants in the company’s retirement plan are restricted 
from trading in the company’s securities. If directors or officers violate this provision, they 
can be forced to disgorge to the company all profits received from the sale of securities 
during the blackout period. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1509 
CODES OF ETHICS FOR SENIOR FINANCIAL OFFICERS  
Pursuant to § 406 of the Act, the SEC must establish rules that require public companies to 
disclose whether they have adopted a code of ethics for their senior financial officers, and if 
not, to explain the reasons why. The rules require immediate public disclosure any  
time there is a change of the code of ethics or a waiver of the code of ethics for a senior 
financial officer.  
 
ENHANCED REVIEW OF PERIODIC FILINGS 
Section 408 of the Act now requires the SEC to make regular and systematic reviews of 
disclosures made by public companies in their periodic reports to the SEC. Reviews of a 
company’s disclosures, including its financial statements, must be made at least once every 
three years. Prior to this enactment, reviews were typically minimal and tended to coincide 
with registered offerings. 
 
REAL TIME DISCLOSURES  
Under § 409, public companies must publicly disclose information concerning material 
changes in their financial condition or operations. These disclosures must be “in plain 
English” and must be made “on a rapid and current basis.”  
 
Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act establishes broad protections for corporate whistleblowers. There 
are two sections of the Act that address whistleblower protections: Section 806 deals with 
civil protections and section 1107 establishes criminal liability for those who retaliate against 
whistleblowers.  
 
CIVIL LIABILITY WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 
Section 806 of the Act, which is codified at Title 18, U.S.C., § 1514A, creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it  only protects employees of publicly traded 
companies. Section 806 makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. In order to trigger § 806 protections, the employee must 
report the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a 
member of Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also 
protected against retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1510                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceeding filed or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or  
SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections cover retaliatory acts not only by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
If a public company is found to have violated § 806, the Act provides for an award of 
compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties include 
reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages including 
litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
CRIMINAL SANCTION WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION  
Section 1107 of Sarbanes-Oxley ? codified at Title 18, U.S.C., § 1513 ? makes it a crime to 
knowingly, with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for providing 
truthful information relating to the commission or possible commission of any Federal 
offense. This protection is only triggered when information is provided to a law enforcement 
officer, it does not apply to reports made to supervisors or to members of Congress, as is 
the case under § 806.  
 
Additionally, the Act codified three criminal offenses to Title 18 of the Code. First, it is a 
criminal offense to alter, destroy, mutilate, conceal, cover-up, or falsify any record or 
document “with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence” a federal investigation or 
bankruptcy proceeding, carrying a maximum sentence of 20 years imprisonment. (18, U.S.C., 
§ 1519). Secondly, all auditing accountants of securities issuers must “maintain all audit or 
review workpapers for a period of 5 years.” Where  there is a knowing and willful violation of 
this offense, a sentence of up to 10 years may be imposed. (18, U.S.C., § 1520). Finally, the 
Act made codified an additional securities fraud offence that can carry a maximum sentence 
of 25 years’ imprisonment. (18, U.S.C., § 1348). 
 
In general, the coverage of § 1107 is much  broader than the civil liability whistleblower 
protections of § 806. While the § 806 protections apply only to employees of publicly traded 
companies, § 1107’s criminal whistleblower protections cover all individuals (and 
organizations) regardless of where they work. Also, § 806 only applies to violations of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1511 
securities laws or SEC rules and regulations. Section 1107, on the other hand, protects 
individuals who provide truthful information about the commission or possible commission 
of any Federal offense.  
 
Violations of § 1107 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and up to 10 years in prison 
for individuals. Corporations that violate the Act can be fined up to $500,000.  
 
Other Criminal Penalties  
SECURITIES FRAUD  
Section 807 of the Act makes securities fraud a crime under 18, U.S.C., § 1348, providing for 
fines up to $250,000 and up to 25 years in prison.  
 
SECURITIES FRAUD (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, § 1348) 
Whoever knowingly executes, or attempts  to execute, a scheme or artifice — 
 
(1) to defraud any person in connection with any security of an issuer with a class of 
securities registered under section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15, U.S.C., 
78l) or that is required to file reports under section 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act 
of 1934 (15, U.S.C., 78o(d)); or 
 
(2) to obtain, by means of false or fraudulent  pretenses, representat ions, or promises, any 
money or property in connection with the purchase or sale of any security of an issuer with a 
class of securities registered under section 12 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15, 
U.S.C., 78l) or that is required to file reports under section 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 (15, U.S.C., 78o(d)); 
 
shall be fined under this title, or imprisoned not more than 25 years, or both. 
 
DOCUMENT DESTRUCTION  
Section 802 of the Act makes destroying evidence to obstruct an investigation or any other 
matter within the jurisdiction of any U.S. department illegal and punishable by a fine of up to 
$250,000 and up to 20 years in prison.  
 
The final rules adopted by the SEC under section 802 specifically require that accountants 
who perform audits on publicly traded companies must maintain all audit or review work 
papers for a period of seven years. Although the original provisions of section 802 only 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1512                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
required a retention period of five years, the SEC extended the requirement to be consistent 
with the seven-year retention period required under the Auditing Standards promulgated by 
the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) per section 103 of the Act. 
Violations of the final SEC rules may be punished by fines up to $250,000 and up to 10 
years in jail for individuals, or fines up to $500,000 for corporations.  
 
Section 1102 of the Act amends § 1512 of the U.S. Code to make it a criminal offense to 
corruptly alter, destroy, mutilate or conceal a record or document with the intent to impair 
its integrity or use in an official proceeding, or to otherwise obstruct, influence, or impede 
any official proceeding or attempt to do so. Violations of this section are punishable by fines 
up to $250,000 and imprisonment for up to 20 years.  
 
FREEZING OF ASSETS 
During an investigation of possible securities violations by a publicly traded company or any 
of its officers, directors, partners, agents, controlling persons, or employees, the SEC can 
petition a federal court to issue a 45-day freeze on “extraordinary payments” to any of the 
foregoing persons. If granted, the payments will be placed in an interest-bearing escrow 
account while the investigation commences. This provision was enacted to prevent 
corporate assets from being improperly distributed while an investigation is underway.  
 
BANKRUPTCY LOOPHOLES 
Section 803 amends the bankruptcy code so that judgments, settlements, damages, fines, 
penalties, restitution payments, disgorgement payments, etc., resulting from violations of 
Federal securities laws are non-dischargeable. This was intended to prevent corporate 
wrongdoers from sheltering their assets under bankruptcy protection.  
 
DISGORGEMENT OF BONUSES 
One of the most unique aspects of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is § 304, which states that if a 
publicly traded company is required to prepare an accounting restatement due to the 
company’s material noncompliance, as a result of “misconduct,” with any financial reporting 
requirement under securities laws, then the CEO and CFO must reimburse the company for: 
• Any bonus or other incentive-based or equity-based compensation received during the 
12 months after the initial filing of the report that requires restating; and  
• Any profits realized from the sale of the company’s securities during the same 12- 
month period. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1513 
While the Act requires the CEO and CFO to disgorge their bonuses if the company’s 
financial statements have to be restated because of “misconduct,” it makes no mention of 
whose misconduct triggers this provision. There is certainly nothing in the text of § 304 that 
limits the disgorgement provision to instances of misconduct by the CEO and CFO. 
Presumably, then, the CEO and CFO could be required to disgorge their bonuses and 
profits from the sale of company stock even if they had no knowledge of and took no part in 
the misconduct that made the restatement necessary.  
 
 
Self-Regulatory Organizations 
SEC delegates significant regulatory authority to “self-regulatory organizations” (SROs). 
SROs oversee the markets they operate and police the member firms participating in those 
markets. SROs create and enforce rules dealing with such areas as securities listings, 
exchange and settlement procedures, and member qualifications. 
 
The Maloney Act of 1938 amended the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to allow the 
National Association of Securities Dealers (NASD) to regulate the business of members 
subject to Securities and Exchange Commission oversight.  
 
In 2007, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) was created through the 
consolidation of NASD and the member regulation, enforcement, and arbitration functions 
of the New York Stock Exchange. FINRA is dedicated to investor protection and market 
integrity through effective and efficient regulation and complementary compliance and 
technology-based services.  
 
FINRA touches virtually every aspect of the securities business—from registering and 
educating industry participants to examining securities firms; writing rules; enforcing those 
rules and the federal securities laws; informing and educating the investing public; providing 
trade reporting and other industry utilities; and administering the largest dispute resolution 
forum for investors and registered firms. It also performs market regulation under contract 
for the NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Exchange, the International Securities 
Exchange, and the Chicago Climate Exchange. All told, FINRA oversees more than 5,000 
brokerage firms, about 172,000 branch offices, and more than 676,000 registered securities 
representatives.  
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1514                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Securities broker-dealers must register with the SEC and in those states where they plan to 
do business. If they plan to do business with the public they must also become FINRA 
members. Typical registration requirements include business, financial, disciplinary 
information, and disclosure of criminal convictions. 
 
 
State Regulation 
The first state securities laws of any substance were enacted in Kansas around 1911. State 
securities laws are often referred to as “blue sky laws.” The term “blue sky” came into use in 
1917 after a judge issued an opinion describing the purpose of these laws as preventing 
“speculative schemes, which have no more basis than so many feet of blue sky.”  
 
The initial steps taken in Kansas to regulate the securities industry and protect consumers 
were quickly imitated by other states. In 1956, the National Conference of Commissioners 
on Uniform State Laws and the American Bar Association promulgated the Uniform 
Securities Act. More than 30 states have adop ted most or all of the Uniform Securities Act, 
which was revised in 1985 and amended in 1988.  
 
The revised Uniform Act has four parts: 
• Regulation of broker-dealers — Most states require broker-dealers to register with the 
state securities regulator. “Broker-dealer” means “a person engaged in the business of 
effecting transactions in securities for the account of others or for the person’s own 
account” and does not include an issuer selling his own securities.  
• Registration of securities—Most states require that an issuer proposing to offer securities 
for sale file some type of registration application.  
• Anti-fraud provisions — Fraud is usually defined in language similar to Rule 10b of the 
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. Criminal, civil, and administrative penalties are 
usually attached to violations of state anti-fraud provisions. 
• Definitions, exemptions, administrative provisions — The definition of “security” is 
basically the same as that under the Securities Act of 1933. Provides powers for state 
regulators to examine books and records and take disciplinary action.  
 
To simplify to a general rule of thumb, unless certain exemptions apply, before a security is 
sold or offered for sale: 
• There must be a registration in place to cover the security. 
• The broker-dealer must be registered. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1515 
• There must be full and fair disclosure of all material information. 
 
As long as there is no conflict with federal laws, each state can supplement or duplicate 
federal requirements. However, in 1996, Congress passed the National Securities Markets 
Improvement Act preempting state regulation in several significant areas. 
 
National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996  
The most significant federal legislative development in securities regulation in recent years is 
the National Securities Markets Improvement Act of 1996. Often referred to as NSMIA 
(pronounced “nismia”), it is an attempt to standardize securities regulation in the United 
States and use federal law to preempt some of the state requirements. Essentially, the 
authority of a state to require registration of certain securities or control certain transactions 
has been removed. 
 
Three main changes that are of particular importance: 
• So called “covered securities” are no longer regulated by the states. A state cannot 
require registration of securities that are deemed covered. Essentially these are securities 
listed on the major exchanges, mutual funds, and certain private placements.  
• Previously all individuals and companies offering investment advice came under state 
jurisdiction. Now only those with assets of less than $25 million fall under state 
regulation. 
• Although NSMIA significantly reduces the enforcement powers of states in several areas, 
a state can still take action in cases involving fraud. 
 
 
What Constitutes a Security? 
The definition of securities in both state and federal law includes instruments that can easily 
be identified as securities. These more traditional securities are usually easy to spot.  
 
Traditional Securities 
Types of investments most commonly recognized as securities include: 
 
Stocks 
A stock is an equity that represents a right of ownership in a corporation. There are many 
different classes including common, preferred, non-voting, and restricted. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1516                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bonds 
A bond is a debt instrument. Examples include treasury bills, corporate bonds, municipal 
bonds, and junk bonds. Although the term junk bonds has a very negative connotation, they 
are simply high-risk, below-investment-grade, commercial bonds. 
 
Certificates of Deposit 
A certificate of deposit (CD) is acknowledgement by a bank of the receipt of money with a 
promise to repay it with interest. 
 
Less obvious, but still clearly securities are: 
 
Futures 
A future is a contract agreeing to buy or sell a specified quantity of something (such as foreign 
currency or commodities) at some future time at a price agreed upon now. In futures 
contracts, the delivery or sale of the product is assumed, and the investor has an obligation 
to fulfill the contract. Note that in reality, few futures contracts actually result in delivery. 
Usually, the investor will enter into offsetting futures contracts prior to the delivery date. As 
futures contracts are freely transferable, the two transactions can offset each other. 
 
Options 
An investor can purchase an option to buy (known as a “call”) or sell (known as a “put”) an 
asset (such as stocks, bonds, commodities, or real estate) on or before a future date at a price 
agreed upon now. With an option, the investor buys the right, but not the obligation, to 
perform the contract. The price paid for the option is known as the option premium. The 
price at which the option may be exercised is known as the strike price. Of course, once an 
option has expired it ceases to have any value whatsoever. 
 
Futures and options are essentially methods of managing price risk, often called “hedging.” 
They can be used, for example, by farmers or international manufacturing companies as a 
form of insurance against adverse price or currency exchange rate changes. They are 
examples of derivatives. Many esoteric types of  investment vehicles have been created, often 
using complex mathematical models. These derivative products allow trading to take place in 
various indices (for example the Dow Jones Industrial Index or the Standard and Poor’s 500) 
and also in securities known as strips, collateralized mortgage obligations, and leaps. 
 
Futures and options are discussed in more detail below. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1517 
Investment Contracts 
Other transactions are less obviously securities, but fall under the catch-all category of an 
“investment contract.” Unfortunately, the term “investment contract” is not usually defined 
by statute, and it is, therefore, necessary to look to case law to determine whether a particular 
transaction may constitute an investment contract. Many fraudulent schemes involving 
exotic investments can be argued to constitute the offer or sale of investment contracts. 
 
The Howey Test 
In the case SEC v. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293, 299 (1946), a company was selling subdivided 
sections of a Florida orange orchard that were to be managed by a subsidiary company. In its 
opinion in the case, the U.S. Supreme Court outlined a four-element test to determine if an 
investment contract was present. In essence, the Supreme Court stated that there must be: 
• An investment  of money or other asset.  
• A common enterprise.  In very general terms, the common enterprise requirement means the 
success of the investor is dependent on the efforts and success of those seeking the 
investment of third parties (typically the promoter). The third party, who provides the 
entrepreneurial skill, shares in the profits (or losses) with the investor. Usually, the 
common enterprise requirement will be met where “the fortunes of the investor are 
interwoven with and dependent upon the efforts and success of those seeking the 
investment or a third-party.” See SEC v. Glenn W. Turn er Enterprises, Inc.,  474 F.2nd 476, 
482 n.7 (9th Circuit, 1973). 
• An expectation of profits. Profit is generally defined to be either money received for the use 
of capital or capital appreciation. In United Housing Foundation, Inc. v. Forman, 421 U.S. 837 
(1975), stock sold to potential apartment renters, which would be applied to their 
security deposit, was not held to be an investment contract because the individuals were 
attracted solely by the prospect of somewhere to live, not financial return on their 
money. 
• Profit must be generated solely from the efforts of others.  The essential managerial efforts, which 
affect the success or failure of the enterprise, come from the third party (the promoter) 
not the investor. In Howey, the subsidiary company was to plant, cultivate, and harvest 
the oranges. As a general rule, the more actively involved an investor is in the enterprise, 
the less likely it is that an investment contract will be held to exist. Subsequent case law 
has diluted “solely” to “primarily” or “substantially” from the efforts of others. 
Nevertheless, if the investor’s efforts  are significant in the success of the enterprise, an 
investment contract will not be found to exist. For example, in the Forman case 
mentioned above, the court stated “an in vestment contract is the presence of an 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1518                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
investment in a common venture premised on a reasonable expectation of profits to be 
derived from the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts of others.” 
 
Risk Capital Test  
As an alternative to the Howey Test many state and federal courts are using the so-called 
“Risk Capital Test.” This “test” allows the invest or to play a more active role if the funds he 
contributes are part of the “risk capital” of the business. A person entrusts money or other 
capital to another with the expectation of deriving a profit. The failure or success of the 
venture is dependent upon the managerial efforts of the other person. Several states have 
formally adopted this test, sometimes known as the Hawaii Market Test, as an alternative 
definition of investment contract. However, the Supreme Court has expressly declined to 
decide if this test should be used. 
 
Examples of Investment Contracts 
Following are types of investments that frequently qualify as “investment contracts” and are, 
therefore, considered securities. Several types of related frauds are also listed to demonstrate 
the broad and expansive nature of investment contract schemes. More information about 
these schemes can also be found in the Consumer Fraud section. 
 
PONZI SCHEMES 
A Ponzi scheme is named after Charles Ponzi who, in the early 1920s, persuaded tens of 
thousands of Bostonians to invest over $10 million. He created an entity, aptly named the 
Securities and Exchange Company, and issued investors a promissory note guaranteeing a 50 
percent return in 90 days on every $1,000 invested. 
 
The scheme involved the alleged buying of international postal reply coupons in Europe 
using foreign currencies, which had depreciated substantially against the dollar in the years 
after World War I. Ponzi claimed that these coupons, bought at a discount, could then be 
redeemed at full face value, yielding a substantial profit. 
 
There were two main problems. First, although Ponzi claimed to be trading over $10 million 
worth of postal reply coupons, only a few hundred thousand dollars worth actually existed. 
A more fatal flaw was the fact that the scheme relied on new investor funds to pay returns to 
earlier investors. In August 1920, after the inevitable collapse of his scheme, Ponzi was 
arrested for mail fraud and larceny. Ponzi served jail time and was later deported to his 
native Italy. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1519 
Of course, the most infamous and costly Ponzi scheme was that of Bernard Madoff. In 
2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, one 
count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He was 
sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion dollars (the 
amount prosecutors say flowed through his business).  
 
Madoff told his clients that he generated such high returns by employing a “split-strike 
conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that involves a 
combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to generate 
predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely correlated to 
an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put options on the 
same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay clients who 
requested withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds 
from new investments to pay them off, and so, like all Ponzi schemes, it collapsed. The 
“Consumer Fraud” chapter contains more detail about the Madoff case. 
 
PYRAMID SCHEMES 
These typically involve a scheme whereby fees or dues paid by a member to join an 
organization are to be paid to another member and there is a provision for increasing 
membership through a chain process of new members bringing in other new members. The 
members make money not by commission on the bona fide retail sale of a legitimate 
product, but by signing up new people. An organizational structure that, like the Ponzi 
scheme, relies on bringing in new people must eventually collapse. Although all pyramid 
schemes are fraudulent, and in many states specifically deemed illegal, not all pyramid 
schemes necessarily meet the Howey Test.   
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1520                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WORM, RABBIT, AND OSTRICH FARMS 
Although sometimes amusing when viewed objectively by the investigator, many investors 
have been defrauded by being persuaded to invest in exactly these types of opportunities. 
Fraud examiners can practice applying the Howey Test to these types of cases in an attempt 
to determine whether an investment contract exists. What, if anything, does the investor 
need to do in order to get the promised return? If, for example, the investor’s involvement is 
purely passive, then an investment contract will be held to exist. However, where the 
investor is involved in feeding the ostriches and marketing the meat, then the last element of 
the Howey Test fails. 
 
PRIME BANK FRAUD 
These schemes involve the issuance and purported trading of so-called “prime bank” notes 
or other high-yield investment opportunities. Investors are often told that they can obtain 
returns exceeding several hundred percent per year when their funds are placed in an off-
 shore trading program. Excessive complexity and secrecy generally characterize these 
fraudulent programs. Investors are usually told that this opportunity is only available to a 
select few and the signing of non-disclosure agreements is mandatory. Typically the 
explanation of how the program actually works is full of obscure terminology and makes 
reference to legitimate banks or organizations such as the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) to lend credibility. Often, investors are told that there is little or no risk of losing their 
principal. Despite warnings published by the state regulators, the SEC, the IMF, the 
International Chamber of Commerce, and the World Bank, this type of fraud continues to 
fleece millions of dollars from investors worldwide. 
 
PRECIOUS METAL SCHEMES 
Typically these involve the purchase of interests in gold or silver coins, bullion, diamonds, 
and other precious or semi-precious stones.  
 
VIATICALS 
A viatical settlement involves the sale by a terminally ill person, at a discount, of the right to 
death benefits from the proceeds of their life insurance policy. In and of itself, this does not 
constitute the offer or sale of a security. However, an industry has evolved to buy these 
rights and then sell fractional interests in them to investors. Frequently, these policy rights 
are pooled and the investors are sold an interest in the pool. Investor returns increase 
according to how deeply the policy is discounted and are inversely related to how long the 
beneficiary survives. Whether such investments constitute securities is a matter of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1521 
considerable debate. In July 1996, the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
held that viatical settlements sold by Life Pa rtners were not securities because the profits do 
not predominantly derive from the efforts of a party other than the investor. See, SEC v. Life 
Partners, Inc. 87 F. 3d 536 (D.C. Cir 1996). The appellate court ruled, in essence, that the 
ministerial functions performed by Life Partners did not have an impact on the profits of the 
investor and therefore that the last part of the Howey Test was not met. 
 
PARTNERSHIPS 
Interests in limited partnerships are generally held to be securities because this type of 
structure conforms closely to Howey. General partnerships will not usually be held to be 
securities. This is normally because in a true general partnership the partners take an active 
role in the operation of the business. However, be warned that some promoters will try to 
disguise an investment contract as a general partnership. It is important to look beyond the 
surface wrapping and determine if the partners really take an active role in operating the 
entity. Some investment opportunities involving wireless cable and pay telephone leasing are 
good examples of this tactic.  
  
JOINT VENTURES 
Interests in a joint venture will often be found to be securities. The Howey Test should be 
applied and, as with partnership interests, careful attention should be paid to the extent to 
which the investor actively participates in the management or operation of the business.  
 
OIL, GAS, AND MINERAL INTERESTS 
Usually the sale of fractional ownership of oil and gas wells, or mineral rights constitutes the 
sale of a security. The misrepresentations and omissions found in oil and gas scams are often 
repeated in other mineral mining schemes, such as gold or coal. Investors have a right to be 
advised of the risks inherent in a securities investment and oil/gas opportunities are 
traditionally very high risk. If investors have been assured or guaranteed of success in 
striking oil, fraud examiners should consider that a red flag. Naturally, as in all cases of 
securities fraud, one should look for discrepancies in promoters’ credentials, business 
history, and commission. The following types of misrepresentations and omissions are often 
encountered: 
• Drilling and completion costs — Costs are often hugely inflated to bilk the investor. 
• Lease — Promoters frequently do not have a valid mineral rights lease. 
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1522                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Discovery and production potential — The investor may be misled regarding the 
likelihood of striking oil and the amount produced. This information is usually contained 
in the geologist’s report. 
• Wells — The promoter may exaggerate the number and depth of wells, thus inflating the 
operating costs paid by investors. 
• Self-dealing — The promoter may declare a good well dry in order to reap the benefits of 
a productive well later when the investors have given up. 
• Dry holes — Often these are completed by the promoter solely to improve his 
completion record and collect completion funds from investors. 
• Royalties — Insiders may be assigned the majority of royalties while investors receive only 
a small portion. 
• Number of partners — Promoters are likely to oversell the well, i.e., 99/64ths. 
 
Occasionally, the investment may be a complete fabrication. This is even more likely in 
overseas mineral investments. Geologists’ re ports may be falsified or promoters may  
rely on investors’ reluctance to travel to remote spots in order to see their well or mine  
for themselves.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A good example of this is the Bre-X gold scandal that occurred in the spring of 1997. The 
Canadian mining company claimed to have found the largest gold deposit discovered in the 
twentieth century in Busang, on the island of Borneo. Share pric es of the before unheard of, 
penny-stock company skyrocketed as rumors of the tremendous discovery circulated. 
Optimistic investors largely ignored the red flags that began to emerge. The initial concern 
that most had was that the mine was located in Indonesia, creating potential difficulties due 
to poor U.S. relations with that country.  
 
Not to be deterred by proximity or diplomatic difficulties, investors continued to avidly 
acquire stock in the former junior mining company. Bre-X geological reports of as many as 
5.68 grams of gold per ton continued the trend. Then, however, a multitude of problems 
seemed to arise. 
 
The accuracy of the sampling began to come into question. Instead of preserving parts of the 
core samples for verification, Bre-X allowed them to be crushed. And soon after, a fire 
destroyed the geologists’ records, further casting the veracity of the discovery into doubt. 
Insiders began surreptitiously selling off large amounts of their shares. News that the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1523 
Indonesian government had withheld key permits was concealed from investors. After the 
exploration manager’s mysterious death (he supposedly committed suicide by jumping out of 
a helicopter), share prices plunged from approximately C$100 to around C$2. Bre-X’s 
market value declined by 90 percent. The Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement 
System lost C$45 million and Canada’s Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec recorded 
a loss of C$70 million. The core samples, it was later revealed, had been “salted.” 
 
The most disturbing aspect of this case is the severe handicap investigators faced caused by 
jurisdictional questions. “This could be a monumental scam that will be nearly impossible 
to prosecute,” said a private investigator wo rking on the case. He explains some of the 
difficulties, “No one really has jurisdiction. The salting [of the gold samples] took place in 
Indonesia, but what laws were really broken in that country? The law against salting? 
There is none. The law against deceiving shareholders? That happened in Canada and the 
U.S. Most of the main suspects probably disappeared in the Philippines. But what law did 
they break in the Philippines? Are they fugitives? No. Can a prosecutor in Canada get a 
warrant for those guys in the Philippines for what they did in Indonesia? Very tricky.” 
 
In Indonesia, no extradition or law-enforcement cooperation agreements exist with Canada 
or the U.S., which means the criminal investigation is being handled by the Indonesians 
themselves. Likewise, though the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta has been asked by 
Washington to look into the Busang fraud, the U.S. and Indonesia have a poor track 
record of cooperating in criminal matters.  
 
Investors in such ventures can easily find themselves with no legal recourse if things go 
wrong. Obviously, different countries have varying laws regarding investor rights. Naturally, 
this makes investigating a case such as this quite difficult. The principals of Bre-X claimed 
not to have known about sample salting. They portrayed themselves as victims and blamed 
the geologists for the fraudulent samples. The geologists, however, were Philippine nationals 
and retreated to their homeland, further complicating the investigation. The Philippine 
government suspects foul play in the death of the head geologist, Michael de Guzman, and is 
more concerned with the Indonesian inquiry into the matter than with turning over their 
countrymen for questioning. 
 
When examining the case from a “follow the money” standpoint, the trail seems to lead to 
Bre-X insiders. Even as they concealed news of  permits being withheld by the Indonesian 
government, insiders secretly sold off huge amounts of stock at great profit. According to 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1524                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the Wall Street Journal, Bre-X Chairman David Walsh, Vice Chairman and Chief Geologist 
John Felderhof, and two other executives sold nearly C$38 million of stock. 
 
HEDGE FUNDS 
Although there is no statutory or regulatory definition of “hedge fund,” the term typically 
refers to private pooled investment vehicles managed by advisers who generally have a very 
large financial interest in the funds based on a management fee that includes a percentage of 
the fund’s performance. Hedge funds employ various speculative and aggressive strategies 
that are not commonly available to mutual funds. They often combine traditional 
investments with short sales, leveraging, and arbitrage strategies to maximize returns.  
 
In the past few years, the U.S. securities market has seen a significant growth in the number 
and size of hedge funds. According to the SEC, assets under management by hedge funds 
have grown dramatically and are now estimated to exceed $2 trillion. This is a massive jump 
from the $38 billion hedge fund industry in 1990. Consequently, hedge fund fraud has grown 
substantially enough for the SEC to take extraordinary measures to regulate it. Between 2000 
and 2004, the SEC brought 51 cases against hedge fund advisers for defrauding hedge fund 
investors or using the funds to defraud others. In 2005, the SEC brought 11 hedge fund 
fraud cases and had several investigations underway. In 2007, the SEC created a hedge fund 
working group within the Division of Enforcement. Working with other federal law 
enforcement agencies and self-regulatory organizations, the group leads agency efforts to 
combat hedge fund insider trading. In the most significant insider trading case in 20 years, 
the SEC filed charges in 2007 against 14 defendants in a scheme involving hedge funds that 
netted more than $15 million in illegal profits on thousands of trades, using information 
stolen from UBS Securities LLC and Morgan Stanley.    
 
With the enormous growth in the hedge fund industry, advisers are becoming more 
aggressive and less meticulous in their transactions. Typical hedge fund fraud by investors 
includes: 
• Theft of investor assets;  
• Late trading;  
• Insider trading;  
• Overvaluation of portfolios;  
• Entering into inappropriate timing arrangements;  
• Exploitation of mutual fund investors for private gain;  
• Entering into inappropriate arrangements with mutual fund advisers in which the mutual 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1525 
fund advisers waive restrictions on market timing in exchange for placement of other 
assets by the hedge fund adviser in funds managed by a mutual fund adviser; and  
• Conspiring with intermediaries to identify hedge funds from mutual fund personnel. 
 
PROMISSORY NOTES 
A note is defined as a security, but in practice, the law is more complicated than that. Under 
certain circumstances, promissory notes are not held to be securities. A note is presumed to 
be a security unless it bears a strong resemblance to a category of instruments that are not 
securities. Generally, longer-term commercial paper is similar in many respects to a bond and 
may be held to be a security unless it relates to such transactions as consumer finance or 
residential mortgages. For example, in the case of a residential mortgage, the note you sign is 
simply a promise to repay, not a method to raise capital for some business venture.  
 
With notes and other potential securities it is often helpful to apply the family resemblance 
test and look at three things: 
 
MOTIVE AND EXPECTATION  
What is the issuer’s primary motive? If it is to raise money for the general use of a business 
enterprise then a security may be held to exist. What is the buyer’s primary motive? Is it 
really a loan or an investment-type transaction? What is a reasonable investor thinking? What 
are his expectations? 
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION   
Is there some form of common trading? If so, a security probably exists. 
 
REGULATION  
Is there some other regulatory system that significantly reduces the risk of the transaction 
thereby rendering the application of the securities laws unnecessary? If the transaction is 
deemed appropriately regulated in ways other than through the application of the securities 
laws, then it is less likely that securities laws will be brought to bear. 
 
 
Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options 
There have been numerous frauds involving commodity futures, exchange-traded options, 
and OTC options. In December 1994, Orange County California became the largest 
municipality ever to file for bankruptcy. This was largely caused by risky investment 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1526                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
strategies utilizing OTC options that resulted in trading losses of about $10 billion. In more 
recent news, the catastrophic failure of Enron was partially caused by a fraudulent hedge 
transaction utilizing an OTC option. Through a company he controlled, Andrew S. Fastow 
sold worthless options to Enron making it appear that the value of Enron’s investment in 
Avici Systems, Inc. was hedged. Fastow pocketed the premium for the bogus options while 
Enron appeared to have established a hedge position, protecting the value of their 
investment. Other notable failures related to exchange-traded derivatives include Barings 
PLC, the 223-year-old London merchant bank that helped finance the Louisiana Purchase, 
and the Canadian Pacific Railway, which collapsed as a result of hidden derivatives losses.  
 
Derivatives trading is risky business. But a lack of adequate internal controls led to many of 
the losses mentioned above. Internal controls must be airtight in a firm that engages in 
hedging or trading activities using exchange-traded or OTC derivatives. Insufficient market 
and product knowledge was also a major factor in these financial debacles.  
 
Commodity Futures Primer 
As mentioned previously, commodity futures contracts are agreements between buyers and 
sellers to make or take delivery of a commodity at a future date, at an agreed upon price. 
Commodity futures contracts are standardized. Contract specifications such as the contract 
size, delivery months, commodity grade, location of delivery, and other details for each 
futures contract are preset in the contract terms. Price and quantity are the only things 
negotiated by the counterparties to a trade. In the United States, agricultural, industrial, and 
financial futures are traded on organized exchanges known as contract markets. 
 
The possibility of delivery keeps futures contracts in line with their underlying cash markets. 
If a contract rises too high in price relative to the cash market, traders might sell futures with 
the intent of making delivery. This forces the futures price down and is the reason futures 
markets reflect the price of their underlying cash market. Some futures contracts are “cash 
settled.” The value of these contracts is derived from an underlying index value. When a 
futures contract is cash settled, traders will often use a calculated “fair value” to determine if 
the futures are high or low compared to the underlying index. If fair value indicates that 
futures are too high, a trader might sell futures, expecting the difference to narrow.  
 
Futures contracts do not have any intrinsic value in and of themselves; their value is derived 
from the underlying commodity, index, or security. Because futures contracts “derive” their 
price from their underlying cash market, they are called derivatives. There are other 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1527 
derivative markets, such as exchange-traded options on futures, options on securities, and 
over-the-counter (OTC) options, which will be discussed later in this section. The contracts 
traded on these markets also derive their values from an underlying commodity, security,  
or index. 
 
The Principle of Offset 
One of the features of commodity futures markets that make them so liquid and cost 
effective is the principle of offset. The obligation of the buyer (to accept future delivery) and 
the obligation of the seller (to make future delivery) is not with each other but with the 
central clearing function of the exchange (exchanges may have a separate clearing 
corporation or clearing may be a part of the exchange itself). Clearing matches futures 
transactions and becomes counterparty to both sides of the trade, eliminating counterparty 
credit risk by guarantying both sides of the transaction. As a result, traders can liquidate their 
positions (obligations) by merely executing an equal and opposite offsetting transaction 
(selling out a long position or buying back a short). Clearing also transfers funds between 
firms when futures trades are marked to market at the end of each day.  
 
Trading on Margin 
Commodity futures are traded on margin. Only a small percentage, usually about 5 percent 
of the contract’s notional value, is required to establish a position (long or short) in a futures 
market (notional value is the contract size in units multiplied by the price per unit). Margins 
are set by the exchange for each commodity and are raised or lowered from time to time to 
reflect changing market volatility and notional contract values. Brokerage firms may require 
greater margin of their customers but may not require less than what the exchange has set. 
Each exchange will have a margin committee made up of exchange members and support 
personnel that monitors and evaluates the markets and makes margin changes  
as appropriate.  
 
There are two types of margin: initial margin, the amount of money per contract that must 
be present in the account when the position is initiated, and maintenance (variation) margin, 
the minimum amount of money per contract that must be maintained in the account while 
the position is open. For example, a December corn contract had a closing price of $2.84 
1/4 per bushel. The notional value of this contract is $14,212 (5,000 bushels x $2.84 1/4). 
The initial margin requirement set by the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) is $810 per 
contract, which is 5.69 percent of the notional contract value, while maintenance margin is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1528                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
set at $625 per contract, which is 4.39 percent of the notional contract value. Positions can 
be liquidated without customer authorization in accounts that violate margin requirements.  
 
Trading Basics 
A trader who buys futures contracts (assuming this is not an offsetting transaction) is long 
the market and will profit if prices rise (for example, if you bought a December corn 
contract at $2.70 per bushel and the price rose to $2.80 per bushel, you would have an 
unrealized profit of $500 (.10  cents x 5,000 bushels)). Because open commodity positions 
(transactions that are not offset) are marked to market at the end of the trading day, this 
$500 profit will be credited to your trading a ccount and is available as margin for additional 
contract purchases. This transfer of funds occurs through the clearing corporation of  
the exchange.  
 
The transaction counterpart of the long buyer is the short seller. Using the above example, if 
you sold a December corn contract at $2.70 per bushel and the price rose to $2.80 per 
bushel, you would have an unrealized loss of $500 (.10 cents x 5,000 bushels). Again, open 
commodity positions are marked to market at the end of the trading day, meaning that this 
$500 loss will be debited from your trading account. 
 
Options Primer 
Like commodity futures contracts, options contracts are agreements between counterparties. 
The main difference between these markets is that commodity futures impose obligations on 
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physical delivery of the commodity or to 
agree to cash settlement at contract expiration. Options contracts confer rights, not 
obligations, to the option buyer and impose obligations on the option seller. Importantly, if 
an option is not exercised, it just expires (over 90 percent of exchange-traded options expire 
worthless). In contrast, if a commodity contract is held to expiration, the long gets delivery 
and the short must make delivery. Options can be exchange-traded, over-the-counter (OTC), 
between individual business entities, or between individual persons. Businesses and 
individuals commonly use options in real estate, personal property, and interest rate 
transactions.  
 
Standardized exchange-traded options contracts are known as plain vanilla options. That is, 
there are no embedded features that would affect the basic option contract  
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1529 
(off-exchange or OTC options often have embedded features that can make them complex 
or exotic). Standardized equity options are traded at several exchanges in the United States. 
The most successful is the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  
 
Exchange-Traded Options 
Like commodities futures, exchange-traded options are contract markets with central 
clearing that eliminates individual counterparty credit risk and allows offsetting transactions. 
Option contracts are standardized, expire at a future date, are marked to market, call for 
physical delivery, and are derivatives. This is where the similarities to commodity futures 
markets end.  
 
The buyer of an option contract purchases the right, not the obligation, to buy or sell 
something at a specified price (exercise or strike price) by the expiration date of the option 
contract. The object of the option contract (what the option is written on) is called the 
underlying. The value of the underlying is the main (but not only) factor from which the 
option contract derives its value.  
 
There are two kinds of options: calls and puts. A call option is the right but not the 
obligation to purchase the underlying security at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s 
expiration date. A put option is the right but not the obligation to sell the underlying security 
at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s expiration date. In options transactions, the seller 
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer. Option 
buyers pay a premium to option writers for the options they buy. Option writers (sellers) 
collect this premium for the options they write and are obligated to deliver the underlying 
security if the option is exercised.  
 
Exchange-traded equity options are standardized, plain vanilla, American style options. 
American Style options can be exercised at any time by the buyer (European style options 
can only be exercised on the expiration day). For example, IBM call options traded at the 
CBOE are for 100 shares of IBM common stock.  The option writer is obligated to deliver 
100 shares of IBM common stock at the strike price if the option buyer chooses to exercise 
the option.  
 
Relationship of the Underlying Security to an Option 
The value of options is primarily derived from the value of the underlying security. For 
example, XYZ common stock closed today at $88.29 per share and the strike prices of the 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1530                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
October 2008 XYZ calls ranged from $65 per share to $135 per share. The more that the 
share price of XYZ is above a particular strike price the greater the value of that option. The 
stock price of $88 per share is about $23 over  the strike price of the XYZ $65 calls. The 
current premium for XYZ $65 calls is $22.90 per share. A trader who had previously bought 
this call option could sell it back into the market for about $2,290 ($22.90 x 100 shares) or 
could exercise the option and buy the stock at $65 with the market at $88.  
 
Options can be in the money, out of the money, or at the money. A call option is in the 
money when the price of the underlying security exceeds its strike price. Likewise, a put 
option is in the money when the price of the underlying security is less than its strike price. 
Options are at the money when the price of the underlying security is about the same as the 
strike price. All other options are out of the money.  
 
Option Values and Premiums 
There are two values that make up option premiums: intrinsic value and time value.  
To have any intrinsic value an option must be in the money. Out of the money options have 
only time value. From the above example, the XYZ $85 call closed today at a premium of 
$5.70 per share. This call option is $3 in the money because the underlying XYZ stock 
closed above the strike price at $88 per share.  The premium has $3 intrinsic value while the 
remaining $2.70 is time value. 
 
While the concept of intrinsic value is rather straightforward the concept of time value is 
complex and beyond the scope of this writing. It is worth noting, however, that the 
mathematical formula for pricing option time value was first introduced by Fischer Black 
and Myron S. Scholes in 1973. The formula takes six factors into account: underlying price, 
strike price, time to expiration, volatility of the underlying, dividends and interest rates. For 
further information on this and other topics on options, visit the Learning Center on the 
CBOE Web page (www.cboe.com). 
 
Over-the-Counter (OTC) Options 
OTC options are agreements made between private parties. Banks, large brokerage firms, 
insurance companies, and many other businesses are active in the OTC options markets. 
Trillions of dollars in notional value are at stake in the OTC market on a daily basis. 
 
OTC options are not centrally cleared or standardized. These options are usually customized 
by the option writer to fit the needs of the option buyer. Because OTC options are not 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1531 
centrally cleared counterparty, credit risk can be a major concern and risk factor. The option 
is worthless if the option writer cannot perform.  
 
OTC options can be plain vanilla, complex, or exotic. The complex and exotic forms can be 
particularly problematic for market participants, accountants, and auditors and are beyond 
the scope of this writing. 
 
 
Securities Fraud Schemes 
 
Securities Fraud by Registered Persons and Entities 
Frequent allegations of misconduct by registered individuals or firms fall into one or more of 
the following areas: 
 
Churning  
Churning is the excessive trading of a customer account for the purpose of generating 
commissions. For securities and options there is a commission charged when the trade is 
entered into and when the trade is liquidated. Commodity futures have a round-turn 
commission scheme meaning that the commission covers both the purchase and sale. 
Commissions on commodity futures are not charged until the trade is closed out.  
 
DEFINITION OF EXCESSIVE TRADING ACTIVITY 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) states that to establish churning, a 
complainant must prove that (1) the broker controlled the trading in an account; (2) the 
volume of trading was excessive in light of the complainant’s trading objectives; and (3) the 
broker acted with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the customer’s interests. 
Hinch v. Commonwealth Financial Group, Inc.,  [1996-1998 Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep. 
27,056 at 45,020 (CFTC May 13, 1997); Johnson v. Don Charles & Company, [1990-1992 
Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep.  (CCH) 24,986 (CFTC Jan. 16, 1991).  
 
Two questions arise in churning cases: who had trading authorization over the account and 
when did the account activity and commissions become excessive. If customers are making 
their own trades, they cannot possibly accuse the broker of churning their accounts. But 
brokers or some other people have trading authority (discretion) over the accounts and 
participate in the commissions, a conflict of interest exists and there may be predication for a 
charge of churning.  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1532                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Many of the regulatory definitions of churning are inherently vague and offer little practical 
guidance. Customer trading objectives are simple: make profits and avoid losses. The best 
test to detect churning is to calculate the amount of monthly gross commissions generated 
from the account as a percentage of the average account balance. For example, an active 
trading account with an average daily balance of $10,000 might reasonably generate (on the 
high side) about $500 dollars (5 percent) in gross commissions in an average month. Gross 
commissions would probably increase in months when the markets are experiencing  
greater price volatility and trading has been successful. The CFE should look for the 
following indicators: 
• Did the broker have trading authority (discretion) over the account? 
• Have gross commissions increased during periods of decreasing market volatility?  
• Are the gross commissions for the month in question substantially higher than the 
average monthly gross commissions for this account? 
• Are gross commissions greater than 5 percent of the average account balance? 
• Did commissions consume realized profits and/or aggravate losses?  
• Were numerous trades entered into and exited over short time periods for small gains or 
losses? 
• Was the trading unit (number of contracts per trade) too large for this account 
(overtrading)? 
• Were the trades made for this account recommended by the research department of the 
brokerage and disseminated to other customers?  
• Did unauthorized trading take place?    
 
If the broker had discretionary authority to trade the account and any of the above factors 
are true, further investigation for churning is warranted. Finally, brokerage supervisors are 
required to perform due diligence to ensure that churning and other trading abuses do  
not occur.  
 
Unsuitable Recommendations 
Securities representatives are required to “know their customer.” They must take into 
account the financial profile and level of sophistication of the individual investor. Placing 
clients into unsuitable securities, for example recommending high-risk options to a senior 
citizen with limited assets, is prohibited. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1533 
 EXAMPLE 
 
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
Litigation Release No. 20438 / January 24, 2008 
People of the State of California v. Daniel William Heath, Denis Timothy O’Brien, John 
William Heath, and Larre Jaye Schlarmann, Superior Court of California, County 
of Riverside, Case No. RIF117775 
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced that on January 10 and 11, 2008 
a jury in Riverside County, California, convicted three men on felony charges involving a 
fraudulent scheme that was the subject of a prior enforcement action brought by the 
Commission, which raised more than $187 mill ion from over 1,800 victims, mostly senior 
citizens and the elderly. Convicted for their role in the scheme were Daniel William Heath, 
51, formerly of Chino Hills, California, Denis Timothy O’Brien, 53, formerly of Yorba 
Linda, California, and Heath’s father, John William Heath, 81, formerly of Covina, 
California. Daniel Heath was found guilty on 400 felony counts, O’Brien on 70 felony 
counts, and John Heath on 52 felony counts. In 2004, the Riverside County District 
Attorney’s Office arrested and charged them with committing securities fraud, elder abuse, 
grand theft, money laundering, tax fraud, and conspiracy, all under California law. Larre 
Jaye Schlarmann, 52, formerly of Carlsbad, California, was also arrested, pleaded guilty to 
securities fraud, elder abuse, money laundering, and tax fraud, and was sentenced to serve 
15 years in state prison. Daniel Heath faces a maximum of 117 years in state prison, 
O’Brien 37 years, and John Heath 28 years.  
 
In April 2004, the Commission filed a compla int against Daniel Heath and his entities, 
and O’Brien, alleging they fraudulently in duced elderly investors through “free lunch” 
seminars to invest in “secured” notes that paid a “guaranteed” return. The court appointed 
a permanent receiver over the Heath entities. Final judgments of permanent injunction and 
other relief were entered against Heath and O’Brien enjoining them from violating the anti-fraud, 
securities registration, and broker-dealer registrations provisions of the federal 
securities laws for their role in the scheme.  The judgments ordered Heath and O’Brien to 
disgorge to the receiver their ill-gotten gains plus prejudgment interest. The Commission then 
instituted administrative proceedings against Heath and O’Brien barring them from 
association with a broker or dealer. Heath and O’Brien consented to the entry of the final 
judgments and administrative orders with out admitting or denying the Commission’s 
allegations and findings. In September 2007, the Commission instituted administrative 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1534                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceedings against Martin S. Duffield, 52, of West Covina, California, and Raul A. 
Jordan, 52, of Pasadena, California, for viol ating the anti-fraud, securities registration, 
and broker-dealer registrations provisions for their role in the scheme. Duffield was barred 
association with any broker or dealer and Jordan was barred from association with any 
broker or dealer, with the right to reapply for association after five (5) years to the 
appropriate self-regulatory organization, or if there is none, to the Commission. Duffield 
and Jordan were ordered to disgorge ill-gotten gains to the receiver plus prejudgment interest. 
Duffield and Jordan consented to  the entry of the orders with out admitting or denying the 
Commission's findings. 
 
Administration of the court-order receivership over the Heath entities will continue. 
 
Failure to Supervise  
Broker-dealer firms are responsible for oversight of their representatives to ensure adherence 
to Rules of Fair Practice and state and federal laws. 
 
Failure to Report Client Complaints 
Investment and advisory firms are required to report client complaints to the SEC, yet may 
neglect to do so, fearing an investigation. 
 
Parking
Parking is the practice of selling a security to one party with the understanding that the seller 
will repurchase the security later at an agreed-upon price. This scheme allows circumvention 
of ownership reporting requirements and net capital rules. 
 
Front Running — Dual Trading 
Front running an order is a type of insider trading. Although it usually will not cause a direct 
loss to the customer, it could, and is a violation of exchange rules. Front running involves 
the use for profit of the privileged knowledge of a customer’s order to buy or sell a large 
amount of a commodity, options, or security that, because of its size, is likely to move the 
market. Back office personnel could have knowledge of such an order and buy or sell for 
their own account ahead of the customer. Because order fillers on the exchange floor are 
allowed to trade for their own account and fill orders for customers (dual trading) they also 
have an opportunity.  
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1535 
Consider the following scenario: an order is received from a hedger to sell 500 December 
cattle futures contracts at the market. If the order filler knows that current market conditions 
are such that this order will move the market significantly lower, it would be very tempting 
to sell a few contracts for himself and profit from the market decline when he executes the 
customer order. Order fillers are required to ope rate in the best interest of the customer and 
“work” the order to get the best price. Howev er, once the trader has established his short 
position, it is really in his own interest to drive the market as far down as possible when 
executing the 500 contract sell order. In this situation, the order filler may not give his best 
efforts and could hurt the customer. 
 
The vast majority of exchange members would never put themselves ahead of a customer, 
but it has happened in the past. In today’s markets with sophisticated surveillance, exchange 
investigative personnel actively guard against this type of activity. The time stamps on the 
customer order, time and sales reports from the exchange, and the account activity of the 
trader would have to be obtained and examined to substantiate any front running allegation. 
This information is easily obtainable. Brokerage compliance personnel should easily detect 
front running by back office personnel by periodically checking their account activity or not 
allowing them to open trading accounts at all. 
 
Bucket Shops 
Bucket shops are fraudulent enterprises that masquerade as licensed brokerage operations. A 
true retail futures brokerage would be required to be registered and meet certain financial 
thresholds. Salespeople would be required to pass the Series Three National Commodity 
Futures Examination and all other personnel would need to be registered as Associated 
Persons. There may also be other registration or licensing requirements depending on the 
type of business that the brokerage engages in. (See 
www.nfa.futures.org/registration/who_has_to_r egister.asp). Bucket shops bypass all these 
requirements and operate like legitimate businesses. 
 
The solution to finding whether or not an individual or firm is legitimate is easy. Go to: 
www.nfa.futures.org/basicnet for commodity futures brokers and firms 
www.finra.org/Investors/ToolsCalculators/BrokerCheck/index.htm for stock, options and 
futures brokers and firms 
www.sec.gov/investor/brokers.htm for securities brokers and firms 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1536                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
You will be able to search files for any firm or individual authorized to do securities, options 
or futures business, their license status and any complaints brought against them. If a firm or 
professional does not appear on one of these pages they are not legitimate.  
 
Excessive Markups 
Excessive markups involve selling at a marked-up price or buying at a marked-down price 
not reasonably related to the prevailing market price. 
 
Misuse or Misappropriation of Customer’s Securities 
This scheme may involve outright theft or using the securities in improper ways, for 
example, as collateral for loans or to conduct other securities transactions (e.g., margin 
trading). 
 
Unauthorized Trading 
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, only the customer named on the trading account can 
authorize trades. Any losses accruing to the customer account because of an unauthorized 
trade, whether made by mistake or intentionally, are the responsibility of the brokerage firm 
and must be reimbursed to the customer. Gains from unauthorized trades also belong to the 
customer. This prevents brokers from executing unauthorized trades, claiming error, and 
taking any profits that may occur. The only entries to the brokerage company error account 
should be losses; profits in an error account should be investigated. Customers must report 
unauthorized trades to the management of the brokerage firm as soon as detected. Silence 
would imply ratification of the transaction. 
 
Systematically Trading Accounts Against Each Other 
Systematically trading accounts against each other usually occurs between investment pools. 
The scheme involves someone with trading authority simultaneously establishing opposite 
market positions in two separate investment pools that he controls. A person who has 
trading authority and other controls over the pool may receive a monthly management fee of 
about 1.5 percent of the pool balance, a percentage of any of the pool’s gains, perhaps 10 
percent per quarter, and a portion or all of the commissions on trades. The conflicts of 
interest in such a business arrangement are obvious. It is in the interest of the pool operator 
to maintain account balances a high as possible, trade the accounts for commissions and to 
have at least some profits. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1537 
Assume that a pool operator established two limited partnerships for trading commodities, 
that he was general partner of both partnerships, and that he was to be compensated as 
previously described. The general partner, who has trading authority, then buys 100 
contracts of December Corn for Pool A, establishing a long market position, and at the 
same time sells 100 contracts of December Corn for Pool B, establishing a short market 
position. (If these transactions occurred in the same account they would offset each other.) 
 
Over time one of the pools will suffer a loss while the other will enjoy a gain. For the general 
partner things haven’t changed much. The amount of equity in the two pools combined will 
be about the same with the loss in one pool being offset by the gain in the other pool. This 
preserves the basis for the general partner’s management fee while the profitable pool will 
owe him a percentage of the gain.  
 
In the long run, one of the investment pools will dissolve because of trading losses while the 
other will enjoy handsome profits. This then takes on some of the characteristics of a Ponzi 
scheme when the pool operator creates a new limited partnership, advertises his success 
from the results of the profitable pool, and participants in the successful pool tell their 
friends. The trick here is to ensure that participants in the original two pools don’t know 
each other.  
 
Supervisors and compliance managers of brokerages should be on the lookout for this type 
of activity. They can do little, however, if the general partner maintains the trading accounts 
at two separate brokerages. The CFE will need to acquire the trading records of all pools run 
by a pool operator in order to establish if such a trading scheme has occurred. The 
comparison of market positions over time is simple and the information is easily obtainable 
from the brokerages once it is discovered who they are.  
 
The general partner would have committed a material breach of contract in that he failed in 
his fiduciary duties to the limited partners. There are also numerous violations of federal 
regulatory and SRO rules that prohibit this type of trading scheme. 
 
Block Order Schemes 
When several different accounts are combined on the same order it is called a block order. 
For example, a broker may wish to execute the same buy order for 10 of his customers. To 
accomplish this he may write an order ticket such as: “For account 12345 and others, buy 
100 contracts of December cattle at the market.” The justification for this type of order is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1538                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that time is of the essence. If the market is volatile, customers will need their order executed 
as quickly as possible. Writing 10 separate order tickets for each account and calling the 
orders to the trading floor separately would take too much time. By combining all the orders 
on one ticket and providing one account number, time is saved and the other account 
numbers and quantities can be added to the order ticket when the executed order (fill) is 
reported back to the broker. 
 
The potential for abuse is obvious. Prices move rapidly in volatile markets and the accounts 
the order has been executed for have not all been made known. The time from when the 
block order is placed and when the fill is reported back to the broker can take many minutes. 
On some busy days it can take an hour or more. During this time the market is moving and 
the executed order will either be in a loss or gain position by the time it is reported back. 
This is where fraud can occur. 
 
For example, assume that 100 contracts of December cattle were bought at 80.00 (cents per 
pound) and that when the fill is reported thirty minutes later the market is at 81.00. This 
favorable change in market price (100 points) is equivalent to $400 profit per contract or 
$40,000 profit for the entire order. The broker then gives out the “other” account numbers 
to the floor clerk to complete the order with 55 contracts going to a favored account and 5 
contracts going to the other nine accounts. The broker then immediately sells 55 December 
cattle contracts for the favored account realizing a $22,000 profit. Of course, if the market 
had moved lower by the time the fill was reported the favored account would not have been 
added to the order or the loss taken would have been minimal.  
 
Proving such a scheme is easy. The CFE will need to obtain 1) the monthly brokerage recap 
of the salesman, 2) copies of all order tickets written by the salesman for the time period in 
question (brokerages must keep the hard copies for several years), 3) a copy of the telephone 
audio recording of the placement of the order and reported fill from the trading floor (all 
calls to the trading floor are recorded and archived), and 4) copies of the “daily equity 
statements” provided to the salesman by the brokerage firm detailing account numbers, 
account names, open positions and the cash value of all accounts represented by the 
salesman. A block order scheme will easily be detected by analyzing this information. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1539 
Market Manipulation 
Market manipulation consists of a series of transactions designed to artificially raise or lower 
price or to give the appearance of trading activity for the purpose of inducing others to buy 
or sell. This is especially common with penny stocks or micro-cap stocks. Penny stocks are 
low-priced (usually less than $5), speculative securities that are registered but do not meet the 
listing requirements of an exchange. Micro-cap just means the stocks of companies with very 
small market capitalization. Once the price has been artificially inflated the stock is sold to 
unsuspecting victims. 
 
Insider Trading 
Under the legal theory of misappropriation, the use of non-public information to profit from 
purchase or sale of securities may violate the insiders’ fiduciary duty to their company or 
shareholders. Although not all courts accept this argument, criminal charges are not unusual 
in cases of this nature. Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken, indicted for insider trading in the 
late 1980s, both served time in prison.  
  
EXAMPLE 
A California psychotherapist, pleaded guilty to securities fraud after federal officials accused 
him of making a nice profit after trading on some inside information he learned during a 
counseling session with a client. 
 
According to federal officials, the psychotherapist bought common stock in Lockheed Corp. 
hours after his client — a company executive undergoing marriage counseling — mentioned 
the secret and ultimately successful merger talks between Lockheed and Martin Marietta 
Corp. 
 
Under a legal doctrine known as the “misappropriation theory,” he was deemed to have 
violated securities laws because he stole information from a person who had assumed his 
trust and discretion, and then used the in formation to trade on the stock market. 
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
In 2000, the SEC adopted rules concerning public disclosure of information. Regulation FD 
(Fair Disclosure) was promulgated to eliminate “selective” disclosure by companies to 
certain groups (such as brokers and analysts) before such information was made available to 
the public. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1540                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Regulation states that if a company, or someone on its behalf, discloses “material non-
 public” information to a particular group (primarily market securities professionals), it must 
make a public disclosure of the information. The timing of the disclosure depends on 
whether the disclosure was intentional or inadvertent. If the disclosure was intentional, then 
company must make the disclosure simultaneously. If the disclosure was inadvertent, then 
the company must make the disclosure “promptly.” 
 
The SEC provides three options for proper dissemination: 
1. File the information with the SEC on a Form 8-K.  
2. Disseminate the information through a press release.  
3. Disseminate the information through any other method or combination of methods that 
are reasonably designed to provide broad public distribution of the information, such as 
an announcement at a press conference open to the public.  
 
Regulation FD only applies to material communications between company executives or 
authorized spokespersons to analysts, institutional investors, and holders of the company’s 
stock. Regulation FD also applies only to senior executives and excludes communications 
with the media, with ratings agencies, and with customers conducted in the normal course of 
business. Information is considered “material” if there is a substantial likelihood that a 
reasonable shareholder would consider it important in making an investment decision, or if 
it would have significantly altered the total mix of information available. 
 
INSIDER TRADING RULES 
Rule 10b-5, promulgated under section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
prohibits any false statements or other fraudulent activity in connection with the purchase or 
sale of any security, including insider trading. It provides the main basis for the SEC to 
investigate possible security fraud claims. Rule 10b-5 contains civil and administrative 
remedies (such as the power to initiate actions to enjoin further violations) enforced by the 
SEC as well as criminal sanctions enforced by the Department of Justice. Specifically, rule 
10b-5 makes it unlawful for anybody to directly or indirectly conduct operations of business 
that would deceive another person concerning transactions involving securities. Although 
the text of the Securities Exchange Act does not provide for a private cause of action for 
rule 10b-5 violations, the Supreme Court found an implied right, which typically requires the 
plaintiff to prove (1) a material misstatement or omission; (2) intentional fraud or deceit by 
the party charged with the violation; (3) relia nce on the misrepresentation or omission in the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1541 
purchase or sale of a security; and (4) econom ic loss caused by the purchase or sale of  
the security.  
 
However, 10b-5 claims do have certain limitations. For example, there is no private cause of 
action against those who merely aided and abetted the primary violators, and in Stoneridge 
Investment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., the Court held that there is no private cause 
of action against third parties who neither make alleged misstatements nor engage in 
deceptive conduct on which investors relied. 
 
In Stoneridge, a group of investors in Charter Communications, Inc. accused two Charter 
suppliers of entering in a business scheme with Charter, which allowed Charter to issue 
fraudulent financial statements. In the alleged scheme, Charter gave its equipment vendor 
above-normal payments for T.V. set-top boxes and the supplier then gave back the extra 
payments as advertising fees. Charter then fraudulently accounted the returned payments as 
revenue. The Court ruled that the Rule 10b-5 does not extend to third parties (aiders or 
abettors) who do not make alleged misstatements and do not engage in deceptive conduct 
on which investors relied. There was no basis for finding that the group of investors did not 
rely on anything the suppliers said or did. The investors could not have relied upon the 
suppliers’ deceptive acts for two reasons: (1) Charter’s suppliers did not take part in 
preparing or distributing the fraudulent statements; and (2) the suppliers did not make any 
misstatements relied upon by the public or violate any duty to disclose. As a result, the Court 
held that the group of investors could not show reliance on any of the suppliers’ actions.  
 
The interesting thing about the Stoneridge decision is that it cannot be broadly read to say that 
secondary actors (lawyers, accountants, and bankers) are free from liability under Rule 10b-5. 
The Court held that deceptive conduct can provide the basis for securities fraud liability if 
plaintiffs can establish that they relied on that conduct. Unlike the relationship between the 
investors and suppliers in Stoneridge, lawyers and accountants often serve as advisers, which 
could be considered as taking part in activities that investors could rely upon.  
 
The SEC also recently issued Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b5-2 to supplement section 10(b) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5. Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b5-2 deal with 
unsettled issues that have arisen under Rule 10b-5. 
 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1542                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rule 10b5-1 addresses the issue of when insider trading liability arises in connection with a 
trader’s “use” or “knowing possession” of mater ial non-public information. Specifically, rule 
10b5-1 prohibits the purchase or sale of a security “on the basis of” material, non-public 
information. However, the Rule also sets forth an affirmative defense for traders if they can 
show that such trades were made pursuant to a preexisting, written 10b5-1 trading plan.  
 
Recently, the SEC indicated that it intends to scrutinize plans contemplated by Rule 10b5-1 
more critically. This increased scrutiny likely resulted from the publication of a 2006 study by 
Alan Jagolizer, an assistant professor at the Stanford University Graduate School of 
Business, which suggested that on average, sales under Rule 10b5-1 plans were generating 
“abnormal trade returns” and that such plans seemed to outperform the market.  
 
Rule 10b5-2 addresses the issue of when a breach of a family or other non-business 
relationship may give rise to liability under the misappropriation theory of insider trading. 
Under the misappropriation theory, as defined by the Supreme Court case in United States v. 
O’Hagan, 521 U.S. 642 (1997), a person is liable for securities fraud if he: 
• Misappropriates confidential information, 
• For the purpose of securities trading, 
• In breach of a duty owed to the sources, and 
• Trades based on the misappropriated information. 
 
Rule 10b5-2 seeks to provide further guidance regarding what types of relationships create a 
“duty” not to use the information received. For example, if a person agrees to keep the 
information in confidence, a duty of trust or confidence will exist. Similarly, if two persons 
have a “history, pattern, or practice of sharing confidences,” such that the recipient 
reasonably should know that the other expects that the inside information will remain 
confidential, a duty of trust or confidence will exist. 
 
Subsection (b)(3) also creates a presumption that any person who receives inside information 
from his spouse, parent, child, or sibling will owe that other person a duty of trust or 
confidence. 
 
Disclosures (Misrepresentations and Omissions) 
Securities laws require that the investor receive full and fair disclosure of all material 
information. Giving the investor or prospective investor false or misleading information is 
clearly a misrepresentation. An omission occurs when the issuer, in connection with the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1543 
offer or sale of securities, omits a material fact necessary in order to make the statements 
made not misleading. Making misrepresentations to the investor or failing to inform the 
investor of certain facts (omissions) is a violation of both state and federal law only if the 
misrepresentation or omission is material.  
 
It is important to show the materiality of misrepresentations or omissions. Even if 
representations made, for example in a prospectus, are clearly false, it is still necessary to 
show materiality. In a 1988 decision, the Supreme Court stated that a fact is material “if its 
disclosure would change the total mix of facts available and there is a substantial likelihood 
that a reasonable shareholder would consider the facts important to her investment 
decision.”  See, Basic Inc. v Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988). 
 
As a general rule, the examiner or investigator needs to determine the answer to the 
following question: Would a reasonable investor wish to know this information in order to 
make an informed decision? If the answer is “yes,” then this information, or the lack thereof, 
has a high likelihood of being deemed material. (If an actual investor acted based on the 
misrepresentation, that clearly strengthens the case, but it is not essential that the false or 
misleading statement influenced an investor, merely that a reasonable investor could have 
been so influenced.) 
 
The issuer of a biotechnology stock falsely claiming that the Food and Drug Administration 
has approved their new cancer drug would be an example of a misrepresentation that is 
clearly material to any prospective investor. Similarly, if the Chairman of the company had 
recently been released from prison after serving time for securities fraud, this fact should 
feature prominently in any offering document. Failure to disclose this fact would obviously 
constitute the omission of a material fact.    
 
The SEC has adopted a so-called “safe harbor” provision whereby certain forward-looking 
statements and projections will not be held to be fraudulent. Issuers will not be held liable if 
these type of statements were believed true at the time and were accompanied by appropriate 
cautionary language. 
   
Note also that federal and state laws usually prohibit the promoter from stating that the 
offering has government approval of some kind. For example, even if the offering is 
registered, the promoter cannot state that it is “SEC approved.” 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1544                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Securities Fraud by Unregistered Persons 
In conducting investigations or examinations relating to alleged violations of the securities 
laws, the fraud examiner should always begin by seeking the answer to these crucial 
questions:  
• Is the security registered? If not, does it meet an exemption? 
• Is the person offering or selling the security registered? If not, is the transaction exempt? 
• Are there indicators of fraud present? 
 
Exemptions 
Examples of exemptions under the 1933 Act include securities issued by the U.S. 
Government and those issued by state or local governments. Registration is also not required 
for limited offerings of securities issued pursuant to Regulation D of the Act. 
 
Issuance of securities undertaken pursuant to Rules 501 through 508 of “Reg D” is fairly 
complex, but for these purposes the essential elements are as follows:   
• Rule 501 defines “accredited investors” to include banks, insurance companies, certain 
charities, and individuals with a net worth exceeding $1 million or annual income of 
more than $200,000 ($300,000 including spouse).  
• Rule 504 allows an issuer to sell up to $1 million in securities in a 12-month period to 
any number of purchasers. Rule 504 also allows general solicitation and advertising. 
• Rule 505 increases the limit to $5 million, reduces the maximum number of non-
 accredited investors to 35, and does not allow general solicitation or advertising. 
• Rule 506 allows the issuance of any amount of securities to any number of accredited 
and up to 35 non-accredited but sophisticated investors. Again no general solicitation or 
advertising is allowed.  
 
The most relied upon exemption from registration where we are likely to see fraud is the so-called
“private placement” exemption. In most states, this exemption is available where the 
security is sold to a small number of people and there is no general solicitation. In Florida, 
for example, there must be no more than 35 non-accredited investors in a 12-month period, 
they must receive full and fair disclosure of material information, and there is a prohibition 
on general solicitation or advertising. It is common to find that one or more of the 
conditions necessary for the claimed exemption are not present and/or that the offering  
is fraudulent. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1545 
Backdating Stock Options 
As a supplement to salary, companies frequently offer employees stock options, which grant 
the recipient the privilege to purchase a share of the company’s stock at a future date for a 
specific price, called the strike price. A strike price is the value of a share at a particular date. 
Generally, the strike price is set at the price of the underlying stock on the day the option is 
granted; therefore the option becomes valuable only with future increases in the stock price.  
 
In this way, companies grant stock options as an incentive for employees to boost company 
performance and thus raise the stock price. However, the practice of backdating stock 
options gives the employee a chance to profit by purchasing stock at past low prices, 
providing an immediate payoff. Backdating stock options occurs when a company alters the 
date of the grant to a time when the stock was trading at a lower price in the interest of 
making the option instantly valuable and further increasing the employee’s gain if the stock 
price continues to rise.  
 
For example, on June 1, 2008, Company XYZ grants its CEO a stock option that provides 
the executive the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 2009 for the 
strike price. Per its usual policy, the strike price is set at the price of the company stock on 
the date of the option grant. On June 1, 2008  (the grant date), XYZ stock was trading at $40 
per share. Therefore, if the stock price increases to $45 per share by January 1, 2009, the 
CEO could exercise the option and purchase the shares for $40 per share, then sell them 
immediately on the market for $45 per share, resulting in a gain of $5 per share. However, 
the company has recently experienced a dramatic increase in its share price. On May 24, 
2008, the stock was trading for $15 per share.  To provide the CEO with an opportunity to 
exploit the increase in share price, even though it has already occurred, the company chooses 
to backdate the stock options to make it appear as if they were granted on May 24, 2008. 
Because the strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date, the strike 
price is effectively changed to $15 per share. As a result, the CEO now has the option to buy 
100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 2009 for $15 per share. Thus, the CEO has 
immediately gained $25 per share (the difference between the stock price on the actual grant 
date of June 1 and the stated grant date of May 24) based solely on the manipulation of the 
grant date used.  
 
Backdating stock options came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) when academic research revealed a pattern of stock prices descending 
just prior to many reported dates of option grants, then ascending immediately afterwards. 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1546                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Backdating is not necessarily illegal, but can be if not handled appropriately. In order to be 
legal, the practice must be explicitly reported to shareholders and the government. Failure to 
do so may constitute securities fraud.  
 
In August of 2002, certain provisions laid out under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect, 
requiring companies to report stock options grants within two days. These rules greatly 
reduced the time companies had to choose a favorable grant date; companies were 
previously allowed weeks or months before they were required to report stock options 
grants. Consequently, the apparent pattern of backdating nearly disappeared around this 
time. However, reports of actual practices in stock options and the recorded data remain 
inconsistent in many cases because not all companies adhere to Sarbanes-Oxley.  
 
Additionally, the revelation of the prevalence of backdating has caused concern that 
companies may not have recorded and disclosed the option grants on the financial 
statements in an accurate manner. In response to the issue, the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) issued a practice alert to prepare auditors for the possibility of 
financial misstatements due to backdating stock options. To keep a tight rope on the 
possibility of this type of illegal activity, auditors should assess the information obtained 
from the audit to determine the need for further procedures. 
 
 
Investigative Tips 
 
Promotional Materials 
Usually, but by no means on every occasion, the fraud examiner will discover that various 
written information has been provided to investors and potential investors. This disclosure is 
often in the form of documents entitled “prospectus,” “offering memorandum,” or “private 
placement offering memorandum.” These documents can sometimes provide the “smoking 
gun” and should therefore be examined in detail. Do not overlook the information utilized 
in various advertising media to persuade the public to invest. How did the investor hear of 
this opportunity? Cold call, direct mail, newspapers, magazines, television, or the Internet?    
 
A properly prepared prospectus (which usually indicates that the issuer claims the security is 
registered) or a private placement memorandum (the issuer claims the security is exempt) 
would normally be expected to contain detailed information concerning the issuer and the 
security being offered. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1547 
Such information should describe the type of security, the initial price, and the amount being 
offered for sale. The issuing company, its business, products, background, and the 
qualifications of its officers and directors should be described. Any legal problems involving 
the company or its officers should be disclosed. The financial condition of the issuer should 
be discussed with audited financial statements where applicable. Frequently, there will be 
projections or forecasts of expected future growth and development (see “safe harbor” 
provisions discussed earlier). Usually, there will be risk disclosures of various kinds in bold 
font stating that, for example, “these securiti es have not been registered” or “purchase of 
these securities involves a high degree of risk.” 
   
These documents should be examined thoroughly for misrepresentations, omissions, and 
downright lies. Look closely at the background of principals. If in doubt, conduct a detailed 
background investigation of the principal officers of the corporation. Look especially for any 
previous criminal or regulatory action relating to securities fraud or offenses involving 
dishonesty. Also check for lawsuits, bankruptcies, or other civil or administrative action 
against the entity or its principals whether allegedly resolved or not. Look not only for the 
disposition of the action, but also for potential evidence gathered during the course of the 
suit, for example, depositions. Do not forget to verify any claimed experience in the relevant 
industry or academic qualifications. Closely compare the information, if any, disclosed in 
advertisements and the offering document with the results of the background investigation. 
 
A few other pertinent questions are: 
• What promises are made regarding the viability of the product or service? Is a patent 
claimed? Does it exist? 
• Is there a functioning business you can check out or is it in the developmental stage? 
Ascertain when and where the corporation was legally incorporated, or in the case of a 
partnership, where it was legally filed. 
• Are investors promised guaranteed returns? 
• Can financial statements concerning assets, liabilities, and income be verified? 
• How will investor funds be used? Follow the money trail. Were the proceeds invested as 
represented or used for other purposes? Is the issue potentially oversubscribed? 
• Are sales commissions paid to unregistered persons? Usually this is illegal. Also check to 
see if commissions paid are unusually high or concealed from investors. 
• Are the insiders retaining a majority of the stock while the investors fund the company? 
Are there any other undisclosed benefits to insiders? 
• Is there adequate risk disclosure? Investors may not have been made fully aware of a 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1548                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
high percentage of failure, the degree of competition, or inexperience on the part of  
the principals. 
 
Is It a Security or an Investment? 
Some states include an investment fraud provision in their securities law. The advantage of 
this provision, if available, is that usually “investment” is much more broadly defined than 
“security.” For example, in Florida, investment means the commitment of money or 
property principally induced by a representation that an economic benefit may be derived. In 
many cases, it is much easier to prove that there is an investment than to show there was a 
security sold. The violation, of course, would be the fraud in relation to the sale of the 
investment and would constitute a third degree felony in the State of Florida.  
 
Investigative Resources 
• Central Registration Depository (CRD) run by FINRA is a national database of information 
on registered (and some unregistered) individuals and companies. Now available via the 
Internet to authorized users, it includes qualification, employment, and disciplinary 
actions in addition to basic biographical data. 
• North American State Securities Administrators Association (NASAA) the organization of state 
securities regulators. (www.nasaa.org) 
• Federal Trade Commission has bulletins regarding a number of investment and other 
securities. (www.ftc.gov) 
• Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC home page is an excellent source of 
information and links. In addition to general information and details of enforcement 
actions, the public can also access the Electronic Data Gathering Analysis and Retrieval 
System (EDGAR). EDGAR contains many of the documents that public companies are 
required to file with the Commission, including the annual report known as a 10-K. 
(www.sec.gov) 
 
Self-regulatory organizations (SROs) mentioned previously are all a good source of information 
and a useful resource for the investigator: 
• Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (www.finra.org) 
• Commodities Futures Trading Commission (www.cftc.gov) 
• National Futures Association (www.nfa.futures.org) 
• New York Stock Exchange ( www.nyse.com) 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1549 
Securities Fraud and the Internet 
Of course, the very technology that gives us access to almost limitless information also gives 
the criminal greater opportunity to commit crime. Another factor that works in favor of the 
online scam artist is that there has traditionally been a culture of trust and benevolence on 
the Internet.  
 
Using the Internet to promote fraudulent investment schemes is relatively easy and cheap. 
There is the potential to reach hundreds of thousands of people using equipment and 
software that are very inexpensive. There is enough competition between providers of 
Internet access that the cost of maintaining a home page on the Web is very low. 
 
The Internet is already being used to solicit investors. Many illegal pyramid schemes have 
professional-looking websites, for example. Use of e-mail and the Internet also makes it 
easier for crooks to conceal their identities and operate anonymously from other countries.  
 
Securities laws are based on geographic boundaries; on the Internet there are no boundaries. 
With the proliferation of “cyber cash” and va rious ways of exchanging payment for goods 
and services over the Internet, the fraud examiner can expect to see a huge rise in financial 
fraud committed online. Particularly prevalent online are the so called “pump-and-dump” 
schemes in which promoters use Internet newsletters and bulletin boards to hype stocks they 
bought for little or no money so they can sell on a rising market. 
 
Same Old Frauds, New Medium 
Many of the fraudulent schemes proliferating in cyberspace are not new; rather, they are 
recycled and repackaged to appeal to a new generation of gullible consumers. 
 
Newsletters 
In this context, a newsletter is not an independent, objective publication discussing the 
merits of a particular securities offering. Such objective analysis does exist, but, more often 
than not, the slick marketing document is a far cry from the independent analysis that it 
purports to be. In reality, the company publishing the newsletter is often paid to hype a 
particular stock by the promoter. Consequently, there is a serious danger of 
misrepresentation to the investor. Usually the cozy relationship between the stock promoter 
and the newsletter publisher is not disclosed to the prospective investor. Neither is the fact 
that the promoter pays to have his offering receive prominent and flattering treatment. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1550                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The newsletter may take the form of an actual document mailed out to subscribers who may 
or may not pay for the privilege. Often, the information is imparted via a professional 
website designed to motivate investors to act on the great opportunity being offered.  
 
Usually, information will be gathered on those who subscribe to such publications or view 
the website. This data is rich with free leads to securities representatives or others who 
promote the securities being hyped in the newsletter. The identity of investors who have 
shown some type of interest in a particular offering covered in the publication is a valuable 
source of new business.  
 
Online Trading 
A recent legal opinion has allowed a bulletin board to be used to buy and sell securities 
without registration. This bypassing of federal registration requirements may make the 
raising of venture capital easier, but it will reduce consumer protection and potentially create 
a regulatory nightmare. 
 
Greater utilization of the Internet to promote both legitimate and fraudulent securities 
offerings will increasingly challenge the investigator or examiner. The fraud examiner will 
continue to face jurisdictional as well as technical issues as the Internet becomes the medium 
of choice for the financial criminal. 
 
[Editor’s Note: The Association would like to thank Chris Hancock, CFE, for his assistance in preparing 
this chapter. Mr. Hancock is the investigations manager for the State of Florida Department of Banking and 
Finance, Northwest Florida Region, and specializes in the investigation of financial crime with an emphasis 
on securities fraud. 
 
We would also like to thank Richard J. Bobel, CFE, MBA, CPA, who authored the material on 
commodities, options, and derivatives. Mr. Bobel is a former commodity broker and college/university faculty 
member who specialized in derivati ve markets and worked for many years as a research economist for the 
Chicago Board of Trade where he designed commodity  futures and options contracts. Richard was a 
contributing author to the CBOT Commodity Trading Manual  and the CBOT Speculation 
Workbook. He can contacted at 847-828-7417 or at RJB@RJBCPA.com] 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1601 



:


secur fraud
introduct
in order to effect conduct investig or examin of fraudul secur
transact fraud examin and investig need a gener understand of both feder
and state law and the philosophi behind regul mani financi product and
opportun can be deem to be secur but that is often far from obviou to an
untrain observ thi section help provid fraud examin with the tool necessari to
recogn secur fraud and conduct a success investig
the primari purpos of secur regul is to balanc the legitim need of busi to
rais capit against the need to protect investor the worth of a secur come from the
valu of the interest it representsit ha no inher valu secur ar not a commod
to be consum but more resembl a currenc be trade
although there is some common between feder and state law regard the regul
of the secur industri there exist a complex web of law from 50 state in addit to
feder regul each state ha it own secur law and even where the law is similar
interpret and rule mai differ markedli regul of secur transact cover not
onli their sale but also the offer of secur to the public
feder regul
secur act of 1933
concern over the 1929 stock market crash and over the manipul of the secur
market precipit the need for feder intervent in 1933 the secur act wa
enact to regul the public offer of secur and protect investor the 1933 act
sometim known as the truth in secur es act defin secur to includ
ani note stock treasuri stock bond debentur invest contract fraction
undivid interest in ani oil ga or other miner right ani put call straddl option
ani interest or instrument commonli known as a secur titl 15 usc
77ba1
secur fraud financi transact
11502 2011 fraud examin manual
of cours both feder and state law provid for exempt exempt basic fall
under two categori exempt secur and exempt transact for exampl certain oblig
issu or guarante by the unit state govern or by state or local govern ar
exempt secur
thi act also requir that investor be given full and fair disclosur of materi inform
concern their invest or prospect invest in thi wai the sale of secur
differ from mani other commerci transact where caveat emptor is the rule here the
investor is entitl to all inform necessari for an inform invest decis to
be made
secur exchang act of 1934
unlik the 1933 act the secur exchang act of 1934 mainli deal with postissu
trade thi act which gave birth to the secur and exchang commiss sec
requir the registr of secur broker and dealer simpli put the 1933 act can be
thought of as regul the issuanc of the secur themselv while the 1934 act cover
subsequ trade thi secondari market trade repres by far the greatest volum of
secur transact trade gener take place on market with actual trade floor
call exchang or on socal overthecount market such as nasdaq
the 1934 act contain section 10b a comprehens antifraud provis which permit
the sec to set forth rule and regul that prohibit manipul or decept devic or
contriv via the mail or other mean of interst commerc for exampl under
section 10b the sec promulg rule 10b5 which prohibit fals statement and other
fraudul activ in connect with secur transact specif rule 10b5 state
that
it shall be unlaw for ani person directli or indirectli by the us of ani mean or
instrument of interst commerc or of the mail or of ani facil of ani nation
secur exchang
1 to emploi ani devic scheme or artific to defraud
2 to make ani untru statement of a materi fact or to omit to state a materi fact
necessari in order to make the statement made in the light of the circumst under
which thei were made not mislead or
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11503
3 to engag in ani act practic or cours of busi which oper or would oper as
a fraud or deceit upon ani person in connect with the purchas or sale of ani
secur
invest advisor act of 1940
regist secur dealer ar requir to adher to the rule of fair practic issu by the
nation associ of secur dealer and the invest advis act of 1940 thi
act mandat registr and regul of invest advis it appli to anyon who
advis other as part of a regular busi and for compens on the invest
purchas or sale of secur thi doe not appli to those who do not receiv
compens or who publish financi advic in a newspap or magazin
invest compani act of 1940
under the invest compani act of 1940 invest compani ar requir to regist
with the sec which also regul their activ thi act dictat qualif for offic
and director requir that certain matter ar submit for stockhold approv and
mandat sec permiss for certain transact such as those between insid and
affili it divid invest compani into three categori
faceamount certif compani ani comp ani engag in issu fix incom
debentur type secur
unit invest trustscompani organ under a trust indentur contract of
agenc or those similar in natur which do not have a board of director and issu onli
redeem secur
manag compani firm that do not fit the criteria of the first two categori fall
into thi on thi includ open and closedend compani whether list on secur
exchang or not openend compani ar commonli refer to as mutual fund
and the net asset valu of a share is calcul base on the market valu of the fund
portfolio divid by the number of share outstand the share of closedend
compani trade in a similar manner to regular stock ie the valu is determin by the
market forc of suppli and demand
although there ar crimin penalti attach to violat of the feder secur law the
secur and exchang commiss doe not have the power to take crimin action sec
investig that disclos potenti crimin violat ar usual refer to the feder
bureau of investig
secur fraud financi transact
11504 2011 fraud examin manual
less seriou violat mai be address us the commiss administr power the
sec ha the power to issu ceas and desist order levi fine and order disgorg
of profit
the sarbanesoxlei act
the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 is on of the most signific chang in the secur field
sinc the 1934 act wa pass it wa design to restor investor confid in capit
market and help elimin financi statement fraud in publicli trade compani while at
the same time significantli increas the penalti for corpor account fraud
the most signific chang brought on by the act includ
the creation of the public compani account oversight board
requir for senior financi offic to certifi sec file
standard for audit committe independ
standard for auditor independ
enhanc financi disclosur requir
protect for corpor whistleblow
enhanc penalti for whitecollar crime
the act is discuss in detail in the law relat to fraud chapter in the law section of
the fraud examin manual howev some of the more import provis as thei relat
to corpor govern ar reproduc here
certif oblig for ceo and cfo
on of the most signific chang effect by the sarbanesoxlei act is the requir
that the chief execut offic and the chief financi offic of public compani
person certifi annual and quarterli sec file these certif essenti requir
ceo and cfo to take respons for their compani financi statement and prevent
them from deleg thi respons to their subordin and then claim ignor
when fraud is uncov in the financi statement
there ar two type of offic certif mandat by sarbanesoxlei crimin
certif which ar set forth in section 906 of the act and codifi at 18 usc 1350
and civil certif which ar set forth in section 302
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11505
crimin certif 906
period file with the sec must now be accompani by a statement sign by the ceo
and cfo which certifi that the report fulli compli with the sec period report
requir and that the inform in the report fairli present in all materi respect
the financi condit and result of oper of the compani
these certif ar known as crimin certif becaus the act impos crimin
penalti on offic who violat the certif requir
corpor offic who knowingli violat the certif requir ar subject to
fine of up to 1000000 and up to 10 year imprison or both
corpor offic who willfulli violat the certif requir ar subject to fine
of up to 5000000 and up to 20 year imprison or both
civil certif 302
section 302 of the act requir the ceo and cfo to person certifi the follow in
their report
thei have person review the report
base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the financi mislead
base on their knowledg the financi inform in the report fairli present in all
materi respect the financi condit result of oper and cash flow of the
compani
thei ar respons for design maintain and evalu the compani intern
control thei have evalu the control within 90 dai prior to the report and thei
have present their conclus about the effect of those control in the report
thei have disclos to the auditor and the audit committe ani materi weak in
the control and ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other
employe who have a signific role in the compani intern control and
thei have indic in their report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control sinc the file of the last report
note that in item 2 and 3 the ceo and cfo ar not requir to certifi that the financi
ar accur or that there is no misstat thei ar simpli requir to certifi that to their
knowledg the financi ar accur and not mislead howev thi doe not mean that
senior financi offic can simpli plead ignor about their compani sec file in
order to avoid liabil the term fairli present in item 3 is a broader standard than what
is requir by gaap in certifi that their sec file meet thi standard the ceo and
secur fraud financi transact
11506 2011 fraud examin manual
cfo essenti must certifi that the comp ani 1 ha select appropri account
polici to ensur the materi accuraci of the report 2 ha properli appli those
account standard and 3 ha disclos financi inform that reflect the underli
transact and event of the compani furthermor the other certif rule see 1
and 46 abov mandat that ceo and cfo take an activ role in their compani public
report and in the design and mainten of intern control
it is signific that in item 4 the ceo and cfo not onli have to certifi that thei ar
respons for their compani intern control but also that thei have evalu the
control within 90 dai prior to their quarterli or annual report essenti thi certif
requir mandat that compani activ and continu reevalu their control
structur to prevent fraud
in conjunct with the 302 certif requir on the respons of the ceo
and cfo for intern control 404 of the act requir all annual report to contain an
intern control report that 1 state manag respons for establish and
maintain an adequ intern control structur and procedur for financi report
and 2 contain an assess of the effect of the intern control structur and
procedur of the compani for financi report
item 5 requir the ceo and cfo to certifi that thei have disclos to their auditor and
their audit committe ani materi weak in the compani intern control and also
ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other kei employe
obvious thi is a veri broad report standard that goe beyond the materi standard
gener us in financi statement audit the ceo and cfo now must report to their
auditor and audit committe ani fraud commit by a manag thi place a greater burden
on the ceo and cfo to take part in antifraud effort and to be awar of fraudul activ
within their compani in order to meet thi certif requir
item 6 is signific becaus period sec file must now includ statement detail
signific chang to the intern control of publicli trade compani
standard for audit committe independ
audit committe respons
section 301 of the act requir that the audit committe for each publicli trade compani
shall be directli respons for appoint compens and overse the work of the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11507
compani outsid auditor the act also mandat that the auditor must report directli to
the audit committe not manag and make it the respons of the audit
committe to resolv disput between manag and the auditor section 301 also
requir that the audit committe must have the author and fund to hire independ
counsel and ani other advisor it deem necessari to carri out it duti
composit of the audit committe
the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that each member of a compani audit committe must
be a member of it board of director and must otherwis be independ the term
independ mean that the audit committe member can onli receiv compens from
the compani for hi servic on the board of director the audit committe or anoth
committe of the board of director thei cannot be paid by the compani for ani other
consult or advisori work
financi expert
section 407 of the act requir everi public compani to disclos in it period report to
the sec whether or not the audit committe ha at least on member who is a financi
expert and if not to explain the reason why the act defin a financi expert as a
person who through educ and experi as a public account or auditor or a cfo
comptrol chief financi offic or a similar posit 1 ha an understand of gener
accept account principl and financi statement 2 ha experi in prepar or
audit financi statement of compar compani and the applic of such principl
in account for estim accrual and reserv 3 ha experi with intern control
and 4 ha an understand of audit committe function
establish a whistleblow structur
the act make it the respons of the audit committe to establish procedur eg a
hotlin for receiv and deal with complaint and anonym employe tip regard
irregular in the compani account met hod intern control or audit matter
enhanc financi disclosur requir
offbal sheet transact
the sarbanesoxlei act direct the sec to issu rule that requir the disclosur of all
materi offbal sheet transact by publicli trade compani the rule requir
disclosur of all materi offbal sheet transact arrang oblig
includ conting oblig and other relationship the compani mai have with
secur fraud financi transact
11508 2011 fraud examin manual
unconsolid entiti or person that mai have a materi current or futur effect on the
compani financi condit chang in financi condit liquid capit expenditur
capit resourc or signific compon of revenu or expens these disclosur ar
requir in all annual and quarterli sec report
pro forma financi inform
section 401 also direct the sec to issu rule on pro forma financi statement these
rule requir that pro forma financi must not contain ani untru statement or omiss
that would make them mislead and requir that the pro forma financi be reconcil to
gaap these rule appli to all pro forma financi statement that ar file with the sec or
that ar includ in ani public disclosur or press releas
prohibit on person loan to execut
section 402 make it illeg for public compani to make person loan or otherwis extend
credit either directli or indirectli to or for ani director or execut offic there is an
except that appli to consum lender if the loan ar consum loan of the type the
compani normal make to the public and on the same term
restrict on insid trade
section 403 establish disclosur requir for stock transact by director and
offic of public compani or by person who own more than 10 percent of a publicli
trade compani stock report of chang in benefici ownership by these person must
now be file with the sec by the end of the second busi dai follow the transact
under 306 director and offic ar also prohibit from trade in the compani
secur dure ani pension fund blackout period thi restrict onli appli to
secur that were acquir as a result of their employ or servic to the compani a
blackout period is defin as ani period of more than three consecut busi dai in
which at least 50 percent of the particip in the compani retir plan ar restrict
from trade in the compani secur if director or offic violat thi provis thei
can be forc to disgorg to the compani all profit receiv from the sale of secur
dure the blackout period
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11509
code of ethic for senior financi offic
pursuant to 406 of the act the sec must establish rule that requir public compani to
disclos whether thei have adopt a code of ethic for their senior financi offic and if
not to explain the reason why the rule requir immedi public disclosur ani
time there is a chang of the code of ethic or a waiver of the code of ethic for a senior
financi offic
enhanc review of period file
section 408 of the act now requir the sec to make regular and systemat review of
disclosur made by public compani in their period report to the sec review of a
compani disclosur includ it financi statement must be made at least onc everi
three year prior to thi enact review were typic minim and tend to coincid
with regist offer
real time disclosur
under 409 public compani must publicli disclos inform concern materi
chang in their financi condit or oper these disclosur must be in plain
english and must be made on a rapid and current basi
protect for corpor whistleblow under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act establish broad protect for corpor whistleblow there
ar two section of the act that address whistleblow protect section 806 deal with
civil protect and section 1107 establish crimin liabil for those who retali against
whistleblow
civil liabil whistleblow protect
section 806 of the act which is codifi at titl 18 usc 1514a creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 806 make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud in order to trigger 806 protect the employe must
report the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a
member of congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also
protect against retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a
secur fraud financi transact
11510 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or
sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect cover retaliatori act not onli by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
if a public compani is found to have violat 806 the act provid for an award of
compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti includ
reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag includ
litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction whistleblow protect
section 1107 of sarbanesoxlei codifi at titl 18 usc 1513 make it a crime to
knowingli with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for provid
truth inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder
offens thi protect is onli trigger when inform is provid to a law enforc
offic it doe not appli to report made to supervisor or to member of congress as is
the case under 806
addition the act codifi three crimin offens to titl 18 of the code first it is a
crimin offens to alter destroi mutil conceal coverup or falsifi ani record or
document with the intent to imped obstruct or influenc a feder investig or
bankruptci proceed carri a maximum sentenc of 20 year imprison 18 usc
1519 secondli all audit account of secur issuer must maintain all audit or
review workpap for a period of 5 year where there is a know and will violat of
thi offens a sentenc of up to 10 year mai be impos 18 usc 1520 final the
act made codifi an addit secur fraud offenc that can carri a maximum sentenc
of 25 year imprison 18 usc 1348
in gener the coverag of 1107 is much broader than the civil liabil whistleblow
protect of 806 while the 806 protect appli onli to employe of publicli trade
compani 1107 crimin whistleblow protect cover all individu and
organ regardless of where thei work also 806 onli appli to violat of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11511
secur law or sec rule and regul section 1107 on the other hand protect
individu who provid truth inform about the commiss or possibl commiss
of ani feder offens
violat of 1107 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to 10 year in prison
for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to 500000
other crimin penalti
secur fraud
section 807 of the act make secur fraud a crime under 18 usc 1348 provid for
fine up to 250000 and up to 25 year in prison
secur fraud titl 18 us code 1348
whoever knowingli execut or attempt to execut a scheme or artific
1 to defraud ani person in connect with ani secur of an issuer with a class of
secur regist under section 12 of the secur exchang act of 1934 15 usc
78l or that is requir to file report under section 15d of the secur exchang act
of 1934 15 usc 78od or
2 to obtain by mean of fals or fraudul pretens representat ion or promis ani
monei or properti in connect with the purchas or sale of ani secur of an issuer with a
class of secur regist under section 12 of the secur exchang act of 1934 15
usc 78l or that is requir to file report under section 15d of the secur
exchang act of 1934 15 usc 78od
shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than 25 year or both
document destruct
section 802 of the act make destroi evid to obstruct an investig or ani other
matter within the jurisdict of ani us depart illeg and punish by a fine of up to
250000 and up to 20 year in prison
the final rule adopt by the sec under section 802 specif requir that account
who perform audit on publicli trade compani must maintain all audit or review work
paper for a period of seven year although the origin provis of section 802 onli
secur fraud financi transact
11512 2011 fraud examin manual
requir a retent period of five year the sec extend the requir to be consist
with the sevenyear retent period requir under the audit standard promulg by
the public compani account oversight board pcaob per section 103 of the act
violat of the final sec rule mai be punish by fine up to 250000 and up to 10
year in jail for individu or fine up to 500000 for corpor
section 1102 of the act amend 1512 of the us code to make it a crimin offens to
corruptli alter destroi mutil or conceal a record or document with the intent to impair
it integr or us in an offici proceed or to otherwis obstruct influenc or imped
ani offici proceed or attempt to do so violat of thi section ar punish by fine
up to 250000 and imprison for up to 20 year
freez of asset
dure an investig of possibl secur violat by a publicli trade compani or ani
of it offic director partner agent control person or employe the sec can
petit a feder court to issu a 45dai freez on extraordinari payment to ani of the
forego person if grant the payment will be place in an interestbear escrow
account while the investig commenc thi provis wa enact to prevent
corpor asset from be improperli distribut while an investig is underwai
bankruptci loophol
section 803 amend the bankruptci code so that judgment settlement damag fine
penalti restitut payment disgorg payment etc result from violat of
feder secur law ar nondischarg thi wa intend to prevent corpor
wrongdoer from shelter their asset under bankruptci protect
disgorg of bonus
on of the most uniqu aspect of the sarbanesoxlei act is 304 which state that if a
publicli trade compani is requir to prepar an account restat due to the
compani materi noncompli as a result of misconduct with ani financi report
requir under secur law then the ceo and cfo must reimburs the compani for
ani bonu or other incentivebas or equitybas compens receiv dure the
12 month after the initi file of the report that requir restat and
ani profit realiz from the sale of the compani secur dure the same 12
month period
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11513
while the act requir the ceo and cfo to disgorg their bonus if the compani
financi statement have to be restat becaus of misconduct it make no mention of
whose misconduct trigger thi provis there is certainli noth in the text of 304 that
limit the disgorg provis to instanc of misconduct by the ceo and cfo
presum then the ceo and cfo could be requir to disgorg their bonus and
profit from the sale of compani stock even if thei had no knowledg of and took no part in
the misconduct that made the restat necessari
selfregulatori organ
sec deleg signific regulatori author to selfregulatori organ sro
sro overse the market thei oper and polic the member firm particip in those
market sro creat and enforc rule deal with such area as secur list
exchang and settlement procedur and member qualif
the malonei act of 1938 amend the secur exchang act of 1934 to allow the
nation associ of secur dealer nasd to regul the busi of member
subject to secur and exchang commiss oversight
in 2007 the financi industri regulatori author finra wa creat through the
consolid of nasd and the member regul enforc and arbitr function
of the new york stock exchang finra is dedic to investor protect and market
integr through effect and effici regul and complementari complianc and
technologybas servic
finra touch virtual everi aspect of the secur businessfrom regist and
educ industri particip to examin secur firm write rule enforc those
rule and the feder secur law inform and educ the invest public provid
trade report and other industri util and administ the largest disput resolut
forum for investor and regist firm it also perform market regul under contract
for the nasdaq stock market the american stock exchang the intern secur
exchang and the chicago climat exchang all told finra overse more than 5000
brokerag firm about 172000 branch offic and more than 676000 regist secur
repres
secur fraud financi transact
11514 2011 fraud examin manual
secur brokerdeal must regist with the sec and in those state where thei plan to
do busi if thei plan to do busi with the public thei must also becom finra
member typic registr requir includ busi financi disciplinari
inform and disclosur of crimin convict
state regul
the first state secur law of ani substanc were enact in kansa around 1911 state
secur law ar often refer to as blue sky law the term blue sky came into us in
1917 after a judg issu an opinion describ the purpos of these law as prevent
specul scheme which have no more basi than so mani feet of blue sky
the initi step taken in kansa to regul the secur industri and protect consum
were quickli imit by other state in 1956 the nation confer of commission
on uniform state law and the american bar associ promulg the uniform
secur act more than 30 state have adop ted most or all of the uniform secur act
which wa revis in 1985 and amend in 1988
the revis uniform act ha four part
regul of brokerdeal most state requir brokerdeal to regist with the
state secur regul brokerdeal mean a person engag in the busi of
effect transact in secur for the account of other or for the person own
account and doe not includ an issuer sell hi own secur
registr of securitiesmost state requir that an issuer propos to offer secur
for sale file some type of registr applic
antifraud provis fraud is usual defin in languag similar to rule 10b of the
secur and exchang act of 1934 crimin civil and administr penalti ar
usual attach to violat of state antifraud provis
definit exempt administr provis the definit of secur is
basic the same as that under the secur act of 1933 provid power for state
regul to examin book and record and take disciplinari action
to simplifi to a gener rule of thumb unless certain exempt appli befor a secur is
sold or offer for sale
there must be a registr in place to cover the secur
the brokerdeal must be regist
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11515
there must be full and fair disclosur of all materi inform
as long as there is no conflict with feder law each state can supplement or duplic
feder requir howev in 1996 congress pass the nation secur market
improv act preempt state regul in sever signific area
nation secur market improv act of 1996
the most signific feder legisl develop in secur regul in recent year is
the nation secur market improv act of 1996 often refer to as nsmia
pronounc nismia it is an attempt to standard secur regul in the unit
state and us feder law to preempt some of the state requir essenti the
author of a state to requir registr of certain secur or control certain transact
ha been remov
three main chang that ar of particular import
so call cover secur ar no longer regul by the state a state cannot
requir registr of secur that ar deem cover essenti these ar secur
list on the major exchang mutual fund and certain privat placement
previous all individu and compani offer invest advic came under state
jurisdict now onli those with asset of less than 25 million fall under state
regul
although nsmia significantli reduc the enforc power of state in sever area
a state can still take action in case involv fraud
what constitut a secur
the definit of secur in both state and feder law includ instrument that can easili
be identifi as secur these more tradit secur ar usual easi to spot
tradit secur
type of invest most commonli recogn as secur includ
stock
a stock is an equiti that repres a right of ownership in a corpor there ar mani
differ class includ common prefer nonvot and restrict
secur fraud financi transact
11516 2011 fraud examin manual
bond
a bond is a debt instrument exampl includ treasuri bill corpor bond municip
bond and junk bond although the term junk bond ha a veri neg connot thei
ar simpli highrisk belowinvestmentgrad commerci bond
certif of deposit
a certif of deposit cd is acknowledg by a bank of the receipt of monei with a
promis to repai it with interest
less obviou but still clearli secur ar
futur
a futur is a contract agre to bui or sell a specifi quantiti of someth such as foreign
currenc or commod at some futur time at a price agre upon now in futur
contract the deliveri or sale of the product is assum and the investor ha an oblig
to fulfil the contract note that in realiti few futur contract actual result in deliveri
usual the investor will enter into offset futur contract prior to the deliveri date as
futur contract ar freeli transfer the two transact can offset each other
option
an investor can purchas an option to bui known as a call or sell known as a put an
asset such as stock bond commod or real estat on or befor a futur date at a price
agre upon now with an option the investor bui the right but not the oblig to
perform the contract the price paid for the option is known as the option premium the
price at which the option mai be exercis is known as the strike price of cours onc an
option ha expir it ceas to have ani valu whatsoev
futur and option ar essenti method of manag price risk often call hedg
thei can be us for exampl by farmer or intern manufactur compani as a
form of insur against advers price or currenc exchang rate chang thei ar
exampl of deriv mani esoter type of invest vehicl have been creat often
us complex mathemat model these deriv product allow trade to take place in
variou indic for exampl the dow jone industri index or the standard and poor 500
and also in secur known as strip collater mortgag oblig and leap
futur and option ar discuss in more detail below
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11517
invest contract
other transact ar less obvious secur but fall under the catchal categori of an
invest contract unfortun the term invest contract is not usual defin
by statut and it is therefor necessari to look to case law to determin whether a particular
transact mai constitut an invest contract mani fraudul scheme involv
exot invest can be argu to constitut the offer or sale of invest contract
the howei test
in the case sec v howei co 328 us 293 299 1946 a compani wa sell subdivid
section of a florida orang orchard that were to be manag by a subsidiari compani in it
opinion in the case the us suprem court outlin a fourel test to determin if an
invest contract wa present in essenc the suprem court state that there must be
an invest of monei or other asset
a common enterpris in veri gener term the common enterpris requir mean the
success of the investor is depend on the effort and success of those seek the
invest of third parti typic the promot the third parti who provid the
entrepreneuri skill share in the profit or loss with the investor usual the
common enterpris requir will be met where the fortun of the investor ar
interwoven with and depend upon the effort and success of those seek the
invest or a thirdparti see sec v glenn w turn er enterpris inc 474 f2nd 476
482 n7 9th circuit 1973
an expect of profit profit is gener defin to be either monei receiv for the us
of capit or capit appreci in unit hous foundat inc v forman 421 us 837
1975 stock sold to potenti apart renter which would be appli to their
secur deposit wa not held to be an invest contract becaus the individu were
attract sole by the prospect of somewher to live not financi return on their
monei
profit must be gener sole from the effort of other the essenti manageri effort which
affect the success or failur of the enterpris come from the third parti the promot
not the investor in howei the subsidiari compani wa to plant cultiv and harvest
the orang as a gener rule the more activ involv an investor is in the enterpris
the less like it is that an invest contract will be held to exist subsequ case law
ha dilut sole to primarili or substanti from the effort of other
nevertheless if the investor effort ar signific in the success of the enterpris an
invest contract will not be found to exist for exampl in the forman case
mention abov the court state an in vestment contract is the presenc of an
secur fraud financi transact
11518 2011 fraud examin manual
invest in a common ventur premis on a reason expect of profit to be
deriv from the entrepreneuri or manageri effort of other
risk capit test
as an altern to the howei test mani state and feder court ar us the socal
risk capit test thi test allow the invest or to plai a more activ role if the fund he
contribut ar part of the risk capit of the busi a person entrust monei or other
capit to anoth with the expect of deriv a profit the failur or success of the
ventur is depend upon the manageri effort of the other person sever state have
formal adopt thi test sometim known as the hawaii market test as an altern
definit of invest contract howev the suprem court ha expressli declin to
decid if thi test should be us
exampl of invest contract
follow ar type of invest that frequent qualifi as invest contract and ar
therefor consid secur sever type of relat fraud ar also list to demonstr
the broad and expans natur of invest contract scheme more inform about
these scheme can also be found in the consum fraud section
ponzi scheme
a ponzi scheme is name after charl ponzi who in the earli 1920 persuad ten of
thousand of bostonian to invest over 10 million he creat an entiti aptli name the
secur and exchang compani and issu investor a promissori note guarante a 50
percent return in 90 dai on everi 1000 invest
the scheme involv the alleg bui of intern postal repli coupon in europ
us foreign currenc which had depreci substanti against the dollar in the year
after world war i ponzi claim that these coupon bought at a discount could then be
redeem at full face valu yield a substanti profit
there were two main problem first although ponzi claim to be trade over 10 million
worth of postal repli coupon onli a few hundr thousand dollar worth actual exist
a more fatal flaw wa the fact that the scheme reli on new investor fund to pai return to
earlier investor in august 1920 after the inevit collaps of hi scheme ponzi wa
arrest for mail fraud and larceni ponzi serv jail time and wa later deport to hi
nativ itali
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11519
of cours the most infam and costli ponzi scheme wa that of bernard madoff in
2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud on
count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he wa
sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion dollar the
amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi
madoff told hi client that he gener such high return by emploi a splitstrik
convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that involv a
combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to gener
predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close correl to
an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put option on the
same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who
request withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund
from new invest to pai them off and so like all ponzi scheme it collaps the
consum fraud chapter contain more detail about the madoff case
pyramid scheme
these typic involv a scheme wherebi fee or due paid by a member to join an
organ ar to be paid to anoth member and there is a provis for increas
membership through a chain process of new member bring in other new member the
member make monei not by commiss on the bona fide retail sale of a legitim
product but by sign up new peopl an organiz structur that like the ponzi
scheme reli on bring in new peopl must eventu collaps although all pyramid
scheme ar fraudul and in mani state specif deem illeg not all pyramid
scheme necessarili meet the howei test
secur fraud financi transact
11520 2011 fraud examin manual
worm rabbit and ostrich farm
although sometim amus when view object by the investig mani investor
have been defraud by be persuad to invest in exactli these type of opportun
fraud examin can practic appli the howei test to these type of case in an attempt
to determin whether an invest contract exist what if anyth doe the investor
need to do in order to get the promis return if for exampl the investor involv is
pure passiv then an invest contract will be held to exist howev where the
investor is involv in feed the ostrich and market the meat then the last element of
the howei test fail
prime bank fraud
these scheme involv the issuanc and purport trade of socal prime bank note
or other highyield invest opportun investor ar often told that thei can obtain
return exceed sever hundr percent per year when their fund ar place in an off
shore trade program excess complex and secreci gener character these
fraudul program investor ar usual told that thi opportun is onli avail to a
select few and the sign of nondisclosur agreement is mandatori typic the
explan of how the program actual work is full of obscur terminolog and make
refer to legitim bank or organ such as the intern monetari fund
imf to lend credibl often investor ar told that there is littl or no risk of lose their
princip despit warn publish by the state regul the sec the imf the
intern chamber of commerc and the world bank thi type of fraud continu to
fleec million of dollar from investor worldwid
preciou metal scheme
typic these involv the purchas of interest in gold or silver coin bullion diamond
and other preciou or semipreci stone
viatic
a viatic settlement involv the sale by a termin ill person at a discount of the right to
death benefit from the proce of their life insur polici in and of itself thi doe not
constitut the offer or sale of a secur howev an industri ha evolv to bui these
right and then sell fraction interest in them to investor frequent these polici right
ar pool and the investor ar sold an interest in the pool investor return increas
accord to how deepli the polici is discount and ar invers relat to how long the
beneficiari surviv whether such invest constitut secur is a matter of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11521
consider debat in juli 1996 the circuit court of appeal for the district of columbia
held that viatic settlement sold by life pa rtner were not secur becaus the profit do
not predominantli deriv from the effort of a parti other than the investor see sec v life
partner inc 87 f 3d 536 dc cir 1996 the appel court rule in essenc that the
ministeri function perform by life partner did not have an impact on the profit of the
investor and therefor that the last part of the howei test wa not met
partnership
interest in limit partnership ar gener held to be secur becaus thi type of
structur conform close to howei gener partnership will not usual be held to be
secur thi is normal becaus in a true gener partnership the partner take an activ
role in the oper of the busi howev be warn that some promot will try to
disguis an invest contract as a gener partnership it is import to look beyond the
surfac wrap and determin if the partner realli take an activ role in oper the
entiti some invest opportun involv wireless cabl and pai telephon leas ar
good exampl of thi tactic
joint ventur
interest in a joint ventur will often be found to be secur the howei test should be
appli and as with partnership interest care attent should be paid to the extent to
which the investor activ particip in the manag or oper of the busi
oil ga and miner interest
usual the sale of fraction ownership of oil and ga well or miner right constitut the
sale of a secur the misrepresent and omiss found in oil and ga scam ar often
repeat in other miner mine scheme such as gold or coal investor have a right to be
advis of the risk inher in a secur invest and oilga opportun ar
tradition veri high risk if investor have been assur or guarante of success in
strike oil fraud examin should consid that a red flag natur as in all case of
secur fraud on should look for discrep in promot credenti busi
histori and commiss the follow type of misrepresent and omiss ar often
encount
drill and complet cost cost ar often huge inflat to bilk the investor
leas promot frequent do not have a valid miner right leas
secur fraud financi transact
11522 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri and product potenti the investor mai be misl regard the
likelihood of strike oil and the amount produc thi inform is usual contain
in the geologist report
well the promot mai exagger the number and depth of well thu inflat the
oper cost paid by investor
selfdeal the promot mai declar a good well dry in order to reap the benefit of
a product well later when the investor have given up
dry hole often these ar complet by the promot sole to improv hi
complet record and collect complet fund from investor
royalti insid mai be assign the major of royalti while investor receiv onli
a small portion
number of partner promot ar like to oversel the well ie 9964th
occasion the invest mai be a complet fabric thi is even more like in
oversea miner invest geologist re port mai be falsifi or promot mai
reli on investor reluct to travel to remot spot in order to see their well or mine
for themselv
exampl
a good exampl of thi is the brex gold scandal that occur in the spring of 1997 the
canadian mine compani claim to have found the largest gold deposit discov in the
twentieth centuri in busang on the island of borneo share pric es of the befor unheard of
pennystock compani skyrocket as rumor of the tremend discoveri circul
optimist investor larg ignor the red flag that began to emerg the initi concern
that most had wa that the mine wa locat in indonesia creat potenti difficulti due
to poor us relat with that countri
not to be deter by proxim or diplomat difficulti investor continu to avidli
acquir stock in the former junior mine compani brex geolog report of as mani as
568 gram of gold per ton continu the trend then howev a multitud of problem
seem to aris
the accuraci of the sampl began to come into question instead of preserv part of the
core sampl for verif brex allow them to be crush and soon after a fire
destroi the geologist record further cast the verac of the discoveri into doubt
insid began surreptiti sell off larg amount of their share new that the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11523
indonesian govern had withheld kei permit wa conceal from investor after the
explor manag mysteri death he supposedli commit suicid by jump out of
a helicopt share price plung from approxim c100 to around c2 brex
market valu declin by 90 percent the ontario municip employe retir
system lost c45 million and canada caiss de dpt et placement du qubec record
a loss of c70 million the core sampl it wa later reveal had been salt
the most disturb aspect of thi case is the sever handicap investig face caus by
jurisdict question thi could be a monument scam that will be nearli imposs
to prosecut said a privat investig wo rking on the case he explain some of the
difficulti no on realli ha jurisdict the salt of the gold sampl took place in
indonesia but what law were realli broken in that countri the law against salt
there is none the law against deceiv sharehold that happen in canada and the
us most of the main suspect probabl disappear in the philippin but what law did
thei break in the philippin ar thei fugit no can a prosecutor in canada get a
warrant for those gui in the philippin for what thei did in indonesia veri tricki
in indonesia no extradit or lawenforc cooper agreement exist with canada
or the us which mean the crimin investig is be handl by the indonesian
themselv likewis though the us embassi in jakarta ha been ask by
washington to look into the busang fraud the us and indonesia have a poor track
record of cooper in crimin matter
investor in such ventur can easili find themselv with no legal recours if thing go
wrong obvious differ countri have vari law regard investor right natur
thi make investig a case such as thi quit difficult the princip of brex claim
not to have known about sampl salt thei portrai themselv as victim and blame
the geologist for the fraudul sampl the geologist howev were philippin nation
and retreat to their homeland further complic the investig the philippin
govern suspect foul plai in the death of the head geologist michael de guzman and is
more concern with the indonesian inquiri into the matter than with turn over their
countrymen for question
when examin the case from a follow the monei standpoint the trail seem to lead to
brex insid even as thei conceal new of permit be withheld by the indonesian
govern insid secretli sold off huge amount of stock at great profit accord to
secur fraud financi transact
11524 2011 fraud examin manual
the wall street journal brex chairman david walsh vice chairman and chief geologist
john felderhof and two other execut sold nearli c38 million of stock
hedg fund
although there is no statutori or regulatori definit of hedg fund the term typic
refer to privat pool invest vehicl manag by advis who gener have a veri
larg financi interest in the fund base on a manag fee that includ a percentag of
the fund perform hedg fund emploi variou specul and aggress strategi
that ar not commonli avail to mutual fund thei often combin tradit
invest with short sale leverag and arbitrag strategi to maxim return
in the past few year the us secur market ha seen a signific growth in the number
and size of hedg fund accord to the sec asset under manag by hedg fund
have grown dramat and ar now estim to exce 2 trillion thi is a massiv jump
from the 38 billion hedg fund industri in 1990 consequ hedg fund fraud ha grown
substanti enough for the sec to take extraordinari measur to regul it between 2000
and 2004 the sec brought 51 case against hedg fund advis for defraud hedg fund
investor or us the fund to defraud other in 2005 the sec brought 11 hedg fund
fraud case and had sever investig underwai in 2007 the sec creat a hedg fund
work group within the divis of enforc work with other feder law
enforc agenc and selfregulatori organ the group lead agenc effort to
combat hedg fund insid trade in the most signific insid trade case in 20 year
the sec file charg in 2007 against 14 defend in a scheme involv hedg fund that
net more than 15 million in illeg profit on thousand of trade us inform
stolen from ub secur llc and morgan stanlei
with the enorm growth in the hedg fund industri advis ar becom more
aggress and less meticul in their transact typic hedg fund fraud by investor
includ
theft of investor asset
late trade
insid trade
overvalu of portfolio
enter into inappropri time arrang
exploit of mutual fund investor for privat gain
enter into inappropri arrang with mutual fund advis in which the mutual
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11525
fund advis waiv restrict on market time in exchang for placement of other
asset by the hedg fund advis in fund manag by a mutual fund advis and
conspir with intermediari to identifi hedg fund from mutual fund personnel
promissori note
a note is defin as a secur but in practic the law is more complic than that under
certain circumst promissori note ar not held to be secur a note is presum to
be a secur unless it bear a strong resembl to a categori of instrument that ar not
secur gener longerterm commerci paper is similar in mani respect to a bond and
mai be held to be a secur unless it relat to such transact as consum financ or
residenti mortgag for exampl in the case of a residenti mortgag the note you sign is
simpli a promis to repai not a method to rais capit for some busi ventur
with note and other potenti secur it is often help to appli the famili resembl
test and look at three thing
motiv and expect
what is the issuer primari motiv if it is to rais monei for the gener us of a busi
enterpris then a secur mai be held to exist what is the buyer primari motiv is it
realli a loan or an investmenttyp transact what is a reason investor think what
ar hi expect
plan of distribut
is there some form of common trade if so a secur probabl exist
regul
is there some other regulatori system that significantli reduc the risk of the transact
therebi render the applic of the secur law unnecessari if the transact is
deem appropri regul in wai other than through the applic of the secur
law then it is less like that secur law will be brought to bear
commod futur exchangetrad option and otc option
there have been numer fraud involv commod futur exchangetrad option
and otc option in decemb 1994 orang counti california becam the largest
municip ever to file for bankruptci thi wa larg caus by riski invest
secur fraud financi transact
11526 2011 fraud examin manual
strategi util otc option that result in trade loss of about 10 billion in more
recent new the catastroph failur of enron wa partial caus by a fraudul hedg
transact util an otc option through a compani he control andrew s fastow
sold worthless option to enron make it appear that the valu of enron invest in
avici system inc wa hedg fastow pocket the premium for the bogu option while
enron appear to have establish a hedg posit protect the valu of their
invest other notabl failur relat to exchangetrad deriv includ bare
plc the 223yearold london merchant bank that help financ the louisiana purchas
and the canadian pacif railwai which collaps as a result of hidden deriv loss
deriv trade is riski busi but a lack of adequ intern control led to mani of
the loss mention abov intern control must be airtight in a firm that engag in
hedg or trade activ us exchangetrad or otc deriv insuffici market
and product knowledg wa also a major factor in these financi debacl
commod futur primer
as mention previous commod futur contract ar agreement between buyer and
seller to make or take deliveri of a commod at a futur date at an agre upon price
commod futur contract ar standard contract specif such as the contract
size deliveri month commod grade locat of deliveri and other detail for each
futur contract ar preset in the contract term price and quantiti ar the onli thing
negoti by the counterparti to a trade in the unit state agricultur industri and
financi futur ar trade on organ exchang known as contract market
the possibl of deliveri keep futur contract in line with their underli cash market
if a contract rise too high in price rel to the cash market trader might sell futur with
the intent of make deliveri thi forc the futur price down and is the reason futur
market reflect the price of their underli cash market some futur contract ar cash
settl the valu of these contract is deriv from an underli index valu when a
futur contract is cash settl trader will often us a calcul fair valu to determin if
the futur ar high or low compar to the underli index if fair valu indic that
futur ar too high a trader might sell futur expect the differ to narrow
futur contract do not have ani intrins valu in and of themselv their valu is deriv
from the underli commod index or secur becaus futur contract deriv their
price from their underli cash market thei ar call deriv there ar other
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11527
deriv market such as exchangetrad option on futur option on secur and
overthecount otc option which will be discuss later in thi section the contract
trade on these market also deriv their valu from an underli commod secur
or index
the principl of offset
on of the featur of commod futur market that make them so liquid and cost
effect is the principl of offset the oblig of the buyer to accept futur deliveri and
the oblig of the seller to make futur deliveri is not with each other but with the
central clear function of the exchang exchang mai have a separ clear
corpor or clear mai be a part of the exchang itself clear match futur
transact and becom counterparti to both side of the trade elimin counterparti
credit risk by guaranti both side of the transact as a result trader can liquid their
posit oblig by mere execut an equal and opposit offset transact
sell out a long posit or bui back a short clear also transfer fund between
firm when futur trade ar mark to market at the end of each dai
trade on margin
commod futur ar trade on margin onli a small percentag usual about 5 percent
of the contract notion valu is requir to establish a posit long or short in a futur
market notion valu is the contract size in unit multipli by the price per unit margin
ar set by the exchang for each commod and ar rais or lower from time to time to
reflect chang market volatil and notion contract valu brokerag firm mai requir
greater margin of their custom but mai not requir less than what the exchang ha set
each exchang will have a margin committe made up of exchang member and support
personnel that monitor and evalu the market and make margin chang
as appropri
there ar two type of margin initi margin the amount of monei per contract that must
be present in the account when the posit is initi and mainten variat margin
the minimum amount of monei per contract that must be maintain in the account while
the posit is open for exampl a decemb corn contract had a close price of 284
14 per bushel the notion valu of thi contract is 14212 5000 bushel x 284 14
the initi margin requir set by the chicago board of trade cbot is 810 per
contract which is 569 percent of the notion contract valu while mainten margin is
secur fraud financi transact
11528 2011 fraud examin manual
set at 625 per contract which is 439 percent of the notion contract valu posit can
be liquid without custom author in account that violat margin requir
trade basic
a trader who bui futur contract assum thi is not an offset transact is long
the market and will profit if price rise for exampl if you bought a decemb corn
contract at 270 per bushel and the price rose to 280 per bushel you would have an
unreal profit of 500 10 cent x 5000 bushel becaus open commod posit
transact that ar not offset ar mark to market at the end of the trade dai thi
500 profit will be credit to your trade a ccount and is avail as margin for addit
contract purchas thi transfer of fund occur through the clear corpor of
the exchang
the transact counterpart of the long buyer is the short seller us the abov exampl if
you sold a decemb corn contract at 270 per bushel and the price rose to 280 per
bushel you would have an unreal loss of 500 10 cent x 5000 bushel again open
commod posit ar mark to market at the end of the trade dai mean that thi
500 loss will be debit from your trade account
option primer
like commod futur contract option contract ar agreement between counterparti
the main differ between these market is that commod futur impos oblig on
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physic deliveri of the commod or to
agre to cash settlement at contract expir option contract confer right not
oblig to the option buyer and impos oblig on the option seller importantli if
an option is not exercis it just expir over 90 percent of exchangetrad option expir
worthless in contrast if a commod contract is held to expir the long get deliveri
and the short must make deliveri option can be exchangetrad overthecount otc
between individu busi entiti or between individu person busi and
individu commonli us option in real estat person properti and interest rate
transact
standard exchangetrad option contract ar known as plain vanilla option that is
there ar no embed featur that would affect the basic option contract
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11529
offexchang or otc option often have embed featur that can make them complex
or exot standard equiti option ar trade at sever exchang in the unit state
the most success is the chicago board option exchang cboe
exchangetrad option
like commod futur exchangetrad option ar contract market with central
clear that elimin individu counterparti credit risk and allow offset transact
option contract ar standard expir at a futur date ar mark to market call for
physic deliveri and ar deriv thi is where the similar to commod futur
market end
the buyer of an option contract purchas the right not the oblig to bui or sell
someth at a specifi price exercis or strike price by the expir date of the option
contract the object of the option contract what the option is written on is call the
underli the valu of the underli is the main but not onli factor from which the
option contract deriv it valu
there ar two kind of option call and put a call option is the right but not the
oblig to purchas the underli secur at the strike exercis price by the option
expir date a put option is the right but not the oblig to sell the underli secur
at the strike exercis price by the option expir date in option transact the seller
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer option
buyer pai a premium to option writer for the option thei bui option writer seller
collect thi premium for the option thei write and ar oblig to deliv the underli
secur if the option is exercis
exchangetrad equiti option ar standard plain vanilla american style option
american style option can be exercis at ani time by the buyer european style option
can onli be exercis on the expir dai for exampl ibm call option trade at the
cboe ar for 100 share of ibm common stock the option writer is oblig to deliv
100 share of ibm common stock at the strike price if the option buyer choos to exercis
the option
relationship of the underli secur to an option
the valu of option is primarili deriv from the valu of the underli secur for
exampl xyz common stock close todai at 8829 per share and the strike price of the
secur fraud financi transact
11530 2011 fraud examin manual
octob 2008 xyz call rang from 65 per share to 135 per share the more that the
share price of xyz is abov a particular strike price the greater the valu of that option the
stock price of 88 per share is about 23 over the strike price of the xyz 65 call the
current premium for xyz 65 call is 2290 per share a trader who had previous bought
thi call option could sell it back into the market for about 2290 2290 x 100 share or
could exercis the option and bui the stock at 65 with the market at 88
option can be in the monei out of the monei or at the monei a call option is in the
monei when the price of the underli secur exce it strike price likewis a put
option is in the monei when the price of the underli secur is less than it strike price
option ar at the monei when the price of the underli secur is about the same as the
strike price all other option ar out of the monei
option valu and premium
there ar two valu that make up option premium intrins valu and time valu
to have ani intrins valu an option must be in the monei out of the monei option have
onli time valu from the abov exampl the xyz 85 call close todai at a premium of
570 per share thi call option is 3 in the monei becaus the underli xyz stock
close abov the strike price at 88 per share the premium ha 3 intrins valu while the
remain 270 is time valu
while the concept of intrins valu is rather straightforward the concept of time valu is
complex and beyond the scope of thi write it is worth note howev that the
mathemat formula for price option time valu wa first introduc by fischer black
and myron s schole in 1973 the formula take six factor into account underli price
strike price time to expir volatil of the underli dividend and interest rate for
further inform on thi and other topic on option visit the learn center on the
cboe web page wwwcboecom
overthecount otc option
otc option ar agreement made between privat parti bank larg brokerag firm
insur compani and mani other busi ar activ in the otc option market
trillion of dollar in notion valu ar at stake in the otc market on a daili basi
otc option ar not central clear or standard these option ar usual custom
by the option writer to fit the need of the option buyer becaus otc option ar not
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11531
central clear counterparti credit risk can be a major concern and risk factor the option
is worthless if the option writer cannot perform
otc option can be plain vanilla complex or exot the complex and exot form can be
particularli problemat for market particip account and auditor and ar beyond
the scope of thi write
secur fraud scheme
secur fraud by regist person and entiti
frequent alleg of misconduct by regist individu or firm fall into on or more of
the follow area
churn
churn is the excess trade of a custom account for the purpos of gener
commiss for secur and option there is a commiss charg when the trade is
enter into and when the trade is liquid commod futur have a roundturn
commiss scheme mean that the commiss cover both the purchas and sale
commiss on commod futur ar not charg until the trade is close out
definit of excess trade activ
the commod futur trade commiss cftc state that to establish churn a
complain must prove that 1 the broker control the trade in an account 2 the
volum of trade wa excess in light of the complain trade object and 3 the
broker act with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the custom interest
hinch v commonwealth financi group inc 19961998 transfer binder comm fut l rep
27056 at 45020 cftc mai 13 1997 johnson v don charl compani 19901992
transfer binder comm fut l rep cch 24986 cftc jan 16 1991
two question aris in churn case who had trade author over the account and
when did the account activ and commiss becom excess if custom ar make
their own trade thei cannot possibl accus the broker of churn their account but
broker or some other peopl have trade author discret over the account and
particip in the commiss a conflict of interest exist and there mai be predic for a
charg of churn
secur fraud financi transact
11532 2011 fraud examin manual
mani of the regulatori definit of churn ar inher vagu and offer littl practic
guidanc custom trade object ar simpl make profit and avoid loss the best
test to detect churn is to calcul the amount of monthli gross commiss gener
from the account as a percentag of the averag account balanc for exampl an activ
trade account with an averag daili balanc of 10000 might reason gener on the
high side about 500 dollar 5 percent in gross commiss in an averag month gross
commiss would probabl increas in month when the market ar experienc
greater price volatil and trade ha been success the cfe should look for the
follow indic
did the broker have trade author discret over the account
have gross commiss increas dure period of decreas market volatil
ar the gross commiss for the month in question substanti higher than the
averag monthli gross commiss for thi account
ar gross commiss greater than 5 percent of the averag account balanc
did commiss consum realiz profit andor aggrav loss
were numer trade enter into and exit over short time period for small gain or
loss
wa the trade unit number of contract per trade too larg for thi account
overtrad
were the trade made for thi account recommend by the research depart of the
brokerag and dissemin to other custom
did unauthor trade take place
if the broker had discretionari author to trade the account and ani of the abov factor
ar true further investig for churn is warrant final brokerag supervisor ar
requir to perform due dilig to ensur that churn and other trade abus do
not occur
unsuit recommend
secur repres ar requir to know their custom thei must take into
account the financi profil and level of sophist of the individu investor place
client into unsuit secur for exampl recommend highrisk option to a senior
citizen with limit asset is prohibit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11533
exampl
unit state secur and exchang commiss
litig releas no 20438 januari 24 2008
peopl of the state of california v daniel william heath deni timothi obrien john
william heath and larr jay schlarmann superior court of california counti
of riversid case no rif117775
the secur and exchang commiss announc that on januari 10 and 11 2008
a juri in riversid counti california convict three men on feloni charg involv a
fraudul scheme that wa the subject of a prior enforc action brought by the
commiss which rais more than 187 mill ion from over 1800 victim mostli senior
citizen and the elderli convict for their role in the scheme were daniel william heath
51 formerli of chino hill california deni timothi obrien 53 formerli of yorba
linda california and heath father john william heath 81 formerli of covina
california daniel heath wa found guilti on 400 feloni count obrien on 70 feloni
count and john heath on 52 feloni count in 2004 the riversid counti district
attornei offic arrest and charg them with commit secur fraud elder abus
grand theft monei launder tax fraud and conspiraci all under california law larr
jay schlarmann 52 formerli of carlsbad california wa also arrest plead guilti to
secur fraud elder abus monei launder and tax fraud and wa sentenc to serv
15 year in state prison daniel heath face a maximum of 117 year in state prison
obrien 37 year and john heath 28 year
in april 2004 the commiss file a compla int against daniel heath and hi entiti
and obrien alleg thei fraudul in duce elderli investor through free lunch
seminar to invest in secur note that paid a guarante return the court appoint
a perman receiv over the heath entiti final judgment of perman injunct and
other relief were enter against heath and obrien enjoin them from violat the antifraud
secur registr and brokerdeal registr provis of the feder
secur law for their role in the scheme the judgment order heath and obrien to
disgorg to the receiv their illgotten gain plu prejudg interest the commiss then
institut administr proceed against heath and obrien bar them from
associ with a broker or dealer heath and obrien consent to the entri of the final
judgment and administr order with out admit or deni the commiss
alleg and find in septemb 2007 the commiss institut administr
secur fraud financi transact
11534 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed against martin s duffield 52 of west covina california and raul a
jordan 52 of pasadena california for viol at the antifraud secur registr
and brokerdeal registr provis for their role in the scheme duffield wa bar
associ with ani broker or dealer and jordan wa bar from associ with ani
broker or dealer with the right to reappli for associ after five 5 year to the
appropri selfregulatori organ or if there is none to the commiss duffield
and jordan were order to disgorg illgotten gain to the receiv plu prejudg interest
duffield and jordan consent to the entri of the order with out admit or deni the
commiss find
administr of the courtord receivership over the heath entiti will continu
failur to supervis
brokerdeal firm ar respons for oversight of their repres to ensur adher
to rule of fair practic and state and feder law
failur to report client complaint
invest and advisori firm ar requir to report client complaint to the sec yet mai
neglect to do so fear an investig
park
park is the practic of sell a secur to on parti with the understand that the seller
will repurchas the secur later at an agreedupon price thi scheme allow circumvent
of ownership report requir and net capit rule
front run dual trade
front run an order is a type of insid trade although it usual will not caus a direct
loss to the custom it could and is a violat of exchang rule front run involv
the us for profit of the privileg knowledg of a custom order to bui or sell a larg
amount of a commod option or secur that becaus of it size is like to move the
market back offic personnel could have knowledg of such an order and bui or sell for
their own account ahead of the custom becaus order filler on the exchang floor ar
allow to trade for their own account and fill order for custom dual trade thei also
have an opportun
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11535
consid the follow scenario an order is receiv from a hedger to sell 500 decemb
cattl futur contract at the market if the order filler know that current market condit
ar such that thi order will move the market significantli lower it would be veri tempt
to sell a few contract for himself and profit from the market declin when he execut the
custom order order filler ar requir to op rate in the best interest of the custom and
work the order to get the best price howev er onc the trader ha establish hi short
posit it is realli in hi own interest to drive the market as far down as possibl when
execut the 500 contract sell order in thi situat the order filler mai not give hi best
effort and could hurt the custom
the vast major of exchang member would never put themselv ahead of a custom
but it ha happen in the past in todai market with sophist surveil exchang
investig personnel activ guard against thi type of activ the time stamp on the
custom order time and sale report from the exchang and the account activ of the
trader would have to be obtain and examin to substanti ani front run alleg
thi inform is easili obtain brokerag complianc personnel should easili detect
front run by back offic personnel by period check their account activ or not
allow them to open trade account at all
bucket shop
bucket shop ar fraudul enterpris that masquerad as licens brokerag oper a
true retail futur brokerag would be requir to be regist and meet certain financi
threshold salespeopl would be requir to pass the seri three nation commod
futur examin and all other personnel would need to be regist as associ
person there mai also be other registr or licens requir depend on the
type of busi that the brokerag engag in see
wwwnfafuturesorgregistrationwhohastor egisterasp bucket shop bypass all these
requir and oper like legitim busi
the solut to find whether or not an individu or firm is legitim is easi go to
wwwnfafuturesorgbasicnet for commod futur broker and firm
wwwfinraorginvestorstoolscalculatorsbrokercheckindexhtm for stock option and
futur broker and firm
wwwsecgovinvestorbrokershtm for secur broker and firm
secur fraud financi transact
11536 2011 fraud examin manual
you will be abl to search file for ani firm or individu author to do secur option
or futur busi their licens statu and ani complaint brought against them if a firm or
profession doe not appear on on of these page thei ar not legitim
excess markup
excess markup involv sell at a markedup price or bui at a markeddown price
not reason relat to the prevail market price
misus or misappropri of custom secur
thi scheme mai involv outright theft or us the secur in improp wai for
exampl as collater for loan or to conduct other secur transact eg margin
trade
unauthor trade
unless otherwis agre to in write onli the custom name on the trade account can
author trade ani loss accru to the custom account becaus of an unauthor
trade whether made by mistak or intention ar the respons of the brokerag firm
and must be reimburs to the custom gain from unauthor trade also belong to the
custom thi prevent broker from execut unauthor trade claim error and
take ani profit that mai occur the onli entri to the brokerag compani error account
should be loss profit in an error account should be investig custom must report
unauthor trade to the manag of the brokerag firm as soon as detect silenc
would impli ratif of the transact
systemat trade account against each other
systemat trade account against each other usual occur between invest pool
the scheme involv someon with trade author simultan establish opposit
market posit in two separ invest pool that he control a person who ha
trade author and other control over the pool mai receiv a monthli manag fee of
about 15 percent of the pool balanc a percentag of ani of the pool gain perhap 10
percent per quarter and a portion or all of the commiss on trade the conflict of
interest in such a busi arrang ar obviou it is in the interest of the pool oper
to maintain account balanc a high as possibl trade the account for commiss and to
have at least some profit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11537
assum that a pool oper establish two limit partnership for trade commod
that he wa gener partner of both partnership and that he wa to be compens as
previous describ the gener partner who ha trade author then bui 100
contract of decemb corn for pool a establish a long market posit and at the
same time sell 100 contract of decemb corn for pool b establish a short market
posit if these transact occur in the same account thei would offset each other
over time on of the pool will suffer a loss while the other will enjoi a gain for the gener
partner thing havent chang much the amount of equiti in the two pool combin will
be about the same with the loss in on pool be offset by the gain in the other pool thi
preserv the basi for the gener partner manag fee while the profit pool will
ow him a percentag of the gain
in the long run on of the invest pool will dissolv becaus of trade loss while the
other will enjoi handsom profit thi then take on some of the characterist of a ponzi
scheme when the pool oper creat a new limit partnership advertis hi success
from the result of the profit pool and particip in the success pool tell their
friend the trick here is to ensur that particip in the origin two pool dont know
each other
supervisor and complianc manag of brokerag should be on the lookout for thi type
of activ thei can do littl howev if the gener partner maintain the trade account
at two separ brokerag the cfe will need to acquir the trade record of all pool run
by a pool oper in order to establish if such a trade scheme ha occur the
comparison of market posit over time is simpl and the inform is easili obtain
from the brokerag onc it is discov who thei ar
the gener partner would have commit a materi breach of contract in that he fail in
hi fiduciari duti to the limit partner there ar also numer violat of feder
regulatori and sro rule that prohibit thi type of trade scheme
block order scheme
when sever differ account ar combin on the same order it is call a block order
for exampl a broker mai wish to execut the same bui order for 10 of hi custom to
accomplish thi he mai write an order ticket such as for account 12345 and other bui
100 contract of decemb cattl at the market the justif for thi type of order is
secur fraud financi transact
11538 2011 fraud examin manual
that time is of the essenc if the market is volatil custom will need their order execut
as quickli as possibl write 10 separ order ticket for each account and call the
order to the trade floor separ would take too much time by combin all the order
on on ticket and provid on account number time is save and the other account
number and quantiti can be ad to the order ticket when the execut order fill is
report back to the broker
the potenti for abus is obviou price move rapidli in volatil market and the account
the order ha been execut for have not all been made known the time from when the
block order is place and when the fill is report back to the broker can take mani minut
on some busi dai it can take an hour or more dure thi time the market is move and
the execut order will either be in a loss or gain posit by the time it is report back
thi is where fraud can occur
for exampl assum that 100 contract of decemb cattl were bought at 8000 cent per
pound and that when the fill is report thirti minut later the market is at 8100 thi
favor chang in market price 100 point is equival to 400 profit per contract or
40000 profit for the entir order the broker then give out the other account number
to the floor clerk to complet the order with 55 contract go to a favor account and 5
contract go to the other nine account the broker then immedi sell 55 decemb
cattl contract for the favor account realiz a 22000 profit of cours if the market
had move lower by the time the fill wa report the favor account would not have been
ad to the order or the loss taken would have been minim
prove such a scheme is easi the cfe will need to obtain 1 the monthli brokerag recap
of the salesman 2 copi of all order ticket written by the salesman for the time period in
question brokerag must keep the hard copi for sever year 3 a copi of the telephon
audio record of the placement of the order and report fill from the trade floor all
call to the trade floor ar record and archiv and 4 copi of the daili equiti
statement provid to the salesman by the brokerag firm detail account number
account name open posit and the cash valu of all account repres by the
salesman a block order scheme will easili be detect by analyz thi inform
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11539
market manipul
market manipul consist of a seri of transact design to artifici rais or lower
price or to give the appear of trade activ for the purpos of induc other to bui
or sell thi is especi common with penni stock or microcap stock penni stock ar
lowpric usual less than 5 specul secur that ar regist but do not meet the
list requir of an exchang microcap just mean the stock of compani with veri
small market capit onc the price ha been artifici inflat the stock is sold to
unsuspect victim
insid trade
under the legal theori of misappropri the us of nonpubl inform to profit from
purchas or sale of secur mai violat the insid fiduciari duti to their compani or
sharehold although not all court accept thi argument crimin charg ar not unusu
in case of thi natur ivan boeski and michael milken indict for insid trade in the
late 1980 both serv time in prison
exampl
a california psychotherapist plead guilti to secur fraud after feder offici accus
him of make a nice profit after trade on some insid inform he learn dure a
counsel session with a client
accord to feder offici the psychotherapist bought common stock in lockhe corp
hour after hi client a compani execut undergo marriag counsel mention
the secret and ultim success merger talk between lockhe and martin marietta
corp
under a legal doctrin known as the misappropri theori he wa deem to have
violat secur law becaus he stole inform from a person who had assum hi
trust and discret and then us the in format to trade on the stock market
public disclosur requir
in 2000 the sec adopt rule concern public disclosur of inform regul fd
fair disclosur wa promulg to elimin select disclosur by compani to
certain group such as broker and analyst befor such inform wa made avail to
the public
secur fraud financi transact
11540 2011 fraud examin manual
the regul state that if a compani or someon on it behalf disclos materi non
public inform to a particular group primarili market secur profession it must
make a public disclosur of the inform the time of the disclosur depend on
whether the disclosur wa intent or inadvert if the disclosur wa intent then
compani must make the disclosur simultan if the disclosur wa inadvert then
the compani must make the disclosur promptli
the sec provid three option for proper dissemin
1 file the inform with the sec on a form 8k
2 dissemin the inform through a press releas
3 dissemin the inform through ani other method or combin of method that
ar reason design to provid broad public distribut of the inform such as
an announc at a press confer open to the public
regul fd onli appli to materi commun between compani execut or
author spokesperson to analyst institut investor and holder of the compani
stock regul fd also appli onli to senior execut and exclud commun
with the media with rate agenc and with custom conduct in the normal cours of
busi inform is consid materi if there is a substanti likelihood that a
reason sharehold would consid it import in make an invest decis or if
it would have significantli alter the total mix of inform avail
insid trade rule
rule 10b5 promulg under section 10b of the secur exchang act of 1934
prohibit ani fals statement or other fraudul activ in connect with the purchas or
sale of ani secur includ insid trade it provid the main basi for the sec to
investig possibl secur fraud claim rule 10b5 contain civil and administr
remedi such as the power to initi action to enjoin further violat enforc by the
sec as well as crimin sanction enforc by the depart of justic specif rule
10b5 make it unlaw for anybodi to directli or indirectli conduct oper of busi
that would deceiv anoth person concern transact involv secur although
the text of the secur exchang act doe not provid for a privat caus of action for
rule 10b5 violat the suprem court found an impli right which typic requir the
plaintiff to prove 1 a materi misstat or omiss 2 intent fraud or deceit by
the parti charg with the violat 3 relia nce on the misrepresent or omiss in the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11541
purchas or sale of a secur and 4 econom ic loss caus by the purchas or sale of
the secur
howev 10b5 claim do have certain limit for exampl there is no privat caus of
action against those who mere aid and abet the primari violat and in stoneridg
invest partner llc v scientificatlanta inc the court held that there is no privat caus
of action against third parti who neither make alleg misstat nor engag in
decept conduct on which investor reli
in stoneridg a group of investor in charter commun inc accus two charter
supplier of enter in a busi scheme with charter which allow charter to issu
fraudul financi statement in the alleg scheme charter gave it equip vendor
abovenorm payment for tv settop box and the supplier then gave back the extra
payment as advertis fee charter then fraudul account the return payment as
revenu the court rule that the rule 10b5 doe not extend to third parti aider or
abettor who do not make alleg misstat and do not engag in decept conduct
on which investor reli there wa no basi for find that the group of investor did not
reli on anyth the supplier said or did the investor could not have reli upon the
supplier decept act for two reason 1 charter supplier did not take part in
prepar or distribut the fraudul statement and 2 the supplier did not make ani
misstat reli upon by the public or violat ani duti to disclos as a result the court
held that the group of investor could not show relianc on ani of the supplier action
the interest thing about the stoneridg decis is that it cannot be broadli read to sai that
secondari actor lawyer account and banker ar free from liabil under rule 10b5
the court held that decept conduct can provid the basi for secur fraud liabil if
plaintiff can establish that thei reli on that conduct unlik the relationship between the
investor and supplier in stoneridg lawyer and account often serv as advis which
could be consid as take part in activ that investor could reli upon
the sec also recent issu rule 10b51 and rule 10b52 to supplement section 10b of
the secur exchang act of 1934 and rule 10b5 rule 10b51 and rule 10b52 deal with
unsettl issu that have arisen under rule 10b5
secur fraud financi transact
11542 2011 fraud examin manual
rule 10b51 address the issu of when insid trade liabil aris in connect with a
trader us or know possess of mater ial nonpubl inform specif rule
10b51 prohibit the purchas or sale of a secur on the basi of materi nonpubl
inform howev the rule also set forth an affirm defens for trader if thei can
show that such trade were made pursuant to a preexist written 10b51 trade plan
recent the sec indic that it intend to scrutin plan contempl by rule 10b51
more critic thi increas scrutini like result from the public of a 2006 studi by
alan jagol an assist professor at the stanford univers graduat school of
busi which suggest that on averag sale under rule 10b51 plan were gener
abnorm trade return and that such plan seem to outperform the market
rule 10b52 address the issu of when a breach of a famili or other nonbusi
relationship mai give rise to liabil under the misappropri theori of insid trade
under the misappropri theori as defin by the suprem court case in unit state v
ohagan 521 us 642 1997 a person is liabl for secur fraud if he
misappropri confidenti inform
for the purpos of secur trade
in breach of a duti ow to the sourc and
trade base on the misappropri inform
rule 10b52 seek to provid further guidanc regard what type of relationship creat a
duti not to us the inform receiv for exampl if a person agre to keep the
inform in confid a duti of trust or confid will exist similarli if two person
have a histori pattern or practic of share confid such that the recipi
reason should know that the other expect that the insid inform will remain
confidenti a duti of trust or confid will exist
subsect b3 also creat a presumpt that ani person who receiv insid inform
from hi spous parent child or sibl will ow that other person a duti of trust or
confid
disclosur misrepresent and omiss
secur law requir that the investor receiv full and fair disclosur of all materi
inform give the investor or prospect investor fals or mislead inform is
clearli a misrepresent an omiss occur when the issuer in connect with the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11543
offer or sale of secur omit a materi fact necessari in order to make the statement
made not mislead make misrepresent to the investor or fail to inform the
investor of certain fact omiss is a violat of both state and feder law onli if the
misrepresent or omiss is materi
it is import to show the materi of misrepresent or omiss even if
represent made for exampl in a prospectu ar clearli fals it is still necessari to
show materi in a 1988 decis the suprem court state that a fact is materi if it
disclosur would chang the total mix of fact avail and there is a substanti likelihood
that a reason sharehold would consid the fact import to her invest
decis see basic inc v levinson 485 us 224 1988
as a gener rule the examin or investig need to determin the answer to the
follow question would a reason investor wish to know thi inform in order to
make an inform decis if the answer is ye then thi inform or the lack thereof
ha a high likelihood of be deem materi if an actual investor act base on the
misrepresent that clearli strengthen the case but it is not essenti that the fals or
mislead statement influenc an investor mere that a reason investor could have
been so influenc
the issuer of a biotechnolog stock fals claim that the food and drug administr
ha approv their new cancer drug would be an exampl of a misrepresent that is
clearli materi to ani prospect investor similarli if the chairman of the compani had
recent been releas from prison after serv time for secur fraud thi fact should
featur promin in ani offer document failur to disclos thi fact would obvious
constitut the omiss of a materi fact
the sec ha adopt a socal safe harbor provis wherebi certain forwardlook
statement and project will not be held to be fraudul issuer will not be held liabl if
these type of statement were believ true at the time and were accompani by appropri
cautionari languag
note also that feder and state law usual prohibit the promot from state that the
offer ha govern approv of some kind for exampl even if the offer is
regist the promot cannot state that it is sec approv
secur fraud financi transact
11544 2011 fraud examin manual
secur fraud by unregist person
in conduct investig or examin relat to alleg violat of the secur
law the fraud examin should alwai begin by seek the answer to these crucial
question
is the secur regist if not doe it meet an exempt
is the person offer or sell the secur regist if not is the transact exempt
ar there indic of fraud present
exempt
exampl of exempt under the 1933 act includ secur issu by the us
govern and those issu by state or local govern registr is also not requir
for limit offer of secur issu pursuant to regul d of the act
issuanc of secur undertaken pursuant to rule 501 through 508 of reg d is fairli
complex but for these purpos the essenti element ar as follow
rule 501 defin accredit investor to includ bank insur compani certain
chariti and individu with a net worth exceed 1 million or annual incom of
more than 200000 300000 includ spous
rule 504 allow an issuer to sell up to 1 million in secur in a 12month period to
ani number of purchas rule 504 also allow gener solicit and advertis
rule 505 increas the limit to 5 million reduc the maximum number of non
accredit investor to 35 and doe not allow gener solicit or advertis
rule 506 allow the issuanc of ani amount of secur to ani number of accredit
and up to 35 nonaccredit but sophist investor again no gener solicit or
advertis is allow
the most reli upon exempt from registr where we ar like to see fraud is the socal
privat placement exempt in most state thi exempt is avail where the
secur is sold to a small number of peopl and there is no gener solicit in florida
for exampl there must be no more than 35 nonaccredit investor in a 12month period
thei must receiv full and fair disclosur of materi inform and there is a prohibit
on gener solicit or advertis it is common to find that on or more of the
condit necessari for the claim exempt ar not present andor that the offer
is fraudul
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11545
backdat stock option
as a supplement to salari compani frequent offer employe stock option which grant
the recipi the privileg to purchas a share of the compani stock at a futur date for a
specif price call the strike price a strike price is the valu of a share at a particular date
gener the strike price is set at the price of the underli stock on the dai the option is
grant therefor the option becom valuabl onli with futur increas in the stock price
in thi wai compani grant stock option as an incent for employe to boost compani
perform and thu rais the stock price howev the practic of backdat stock
option give the employe a chanc to profit by purchas stock at past low price
provid an immedi payoff backdat stock option occur when a compani alter the
date of the grant to a time when the stock wa trade at a lower price in the interest of
make the option instantli valuabl and further increas the employe gain if the stock
price continu to rise
for exampl on june 1 2008 compani xyz grant it ceo a stock option that provid
the execut the right to purchas 100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 2009 for the
strike price per it usual polici the strike price is set at the price of the compani stock on
the date of the option grant on june 1 2008 the grant date xyz stock wa trade at 40
per share therefor if the stock price increas to 45 per share by januari 1 2009 the
ceo could exercis the option and purchas the share for 40 per share then sell them
immedi on the market for 45 per share result in a gain of 5 per share howev
the compani ha recent experienc a dramat increas in it share price on mai 24
2008 the stock wa trade for 15 per share to provid the ceo with an opportun to
exploit the increas in share price even though it ha alreadi occur the compani choos
to backdat the stock option to make it appear as if thei were grant on mai 24 2008
becaus the strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date the strike
price is effect chang to 15 per share as a result the ceo now ha the option to bui
100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 2009 for 15 per share thu the ceo ha
immedi gain 25 per share the differ between the stock price on the actual grant
date of june 1 and the state grant date of mai 24 base sole on the manipul of the
grant date us
backdat stock option came to the attent of the us secur and exchang
commiss sec when academ research reveal a pattern of stock price descend
just prior to mani report date of option grant then ascend immedi afterward
secur fraud financi transact
11546 2011 fraud examin manual
backdat is not necessarili illeg but can be if not handl appropri in order to be
legal the practic must be explicitli report to sharehold and the govern failur to
do so mai constitut secur fraud
in august of 2002 certain provis laid out under the sarbanesoxlei act took effect
requir compani to report stock option grant within two dai these rule greatli
reduc the time compani had to choos a favor grant date compani were
previous allow week or month befor thei were requir to report stock option
grant consequ the appar pattern of backdat nearli disappear around thi
time howev report of actual practic in stock option and the record data remain
inconsist in mani case becaus not all compani adher to sarbanesoxlei
addition the revel of the preval of backdat ha caus concern that
compani mai not have record and disclos the option grant on the financi
statement in an accur manner in respons to the issu the public compani account
oversight board pcaob issu a practic alert to prepar auditor for the possibl of
financi misstat due to backdat stock option to keep a tight rope on the
possibl of thi type of illeg activ auditor should assess the inform obtain
from the audit to determin the need for further procedur
investig tip
promot materi
usual but by no mean on everi occas the fraud examin will discov that variou
written inform ha been provid to investor and potenti investor thi disclosur is
often in the form of document entitl prospectu offer memorandum or privat
placement offer memorandum these document can sometim provid the smoke
gun and should therefor be examin in detail do not overlook the inform util
in variou advertis media to persuad the public to invest how did the investor hear of
thi opportun cold call direct mail newspap magazin televis or the internet
a properli prepar prospectu which usual indic that the issuer claim the secur is
regist or a privat placement memorandum the issuer claim the secur is exempt
would normal be expect to contain detail inform concern the issuer and the
secur be offer
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11547
such inform should describ the type of secur the initi price and the amount be
offer for sale the issu compani it busi product background and the
qualif of it offic and director should be describ ani legal problem involv
the compani or it offic should be disclos the financi condit of the issuer should
be discuss with audit financi statement where applic frequent there will be
project or forecast of expect futur growth and develop see safe harbor
provis discuss earlier usual there will be risk disclosur of variou kind in bold
font state that for exampl these secur es have not been regist or purchas of
these secur involv a high degre of risk
these document should be examin thoroughli for misrepresent omiss and
downright li look close at the background of princip if in doubt conduct a detail
background investig of the princip offic of the corpor look especi for ani
previou crimin or regulatori action relat to secur fraud or offens involv
dishonesti also check for lawsuit bankruptci or other civil or administr action
against the entiti or it princip whether allegedli resolv or not look not onli for the
disposit of the action but also for potenti evid gather dure the cours of the
suit for exampl deposit do not forget to verifi ani claim experi in the relev
industri or academ qualif close compar the inform if ani disclos in
advertis and the offer document with the result of the background investig
a few other pertin question ar
what promis ar made regard the viabil of the product or servic is a patent
claim doe it exist
is there a function busi you can check out or is it in the development stage
ascertain when and where the corpor wa legal incorpor or in the case of a
partnership where it wa legal file
ar investor promis guarante return
can financi statement concern asset liabil and incom be verifi
how will investor fund be us follow the monei trail were the proce invest as
repres or us for other purpos is the issu potenti oversubscrib
ar sale commiss paid to unregist person usual thi is illeg also check to
see if commiss paid ar unusu high or conceal from investor
ar the insid retain a major of the stock while the investor fund the compani
ar there ani other undisclos benefit to insid
is there adequ risk disclosur investor mai not have been made fulli awar of a
secur fraud financi transact
11548 2011 fraud examin manual
high percentag of failur the degre of competit or inexperi on the part of
the princip
is it a secur or an invest
some state includ an invest fraud provis in their secur law the advantag of
thi provis if avail is that usual invest is much more broadli defin than
secur for exampl in florida invest mean the commit of monei or
properti princip induc by a represent that an econom benefit mai be deriv in
mani case it is much easier to prove that there is an invest than to show there wa a
secur sold the violat of cours would be the fraud in relat to the sale of the
invest and would constitut a third degre feloni in the state of florida
investig resourc
central registr depositori crd run by finra is a nation databas of inform
on regist and some unregist individu and compani now avail via the
internet to author user it includ qualif employ and disciplinari
action in addit to basic biograph data
north american state secur administr associ nasaa the organ of state
secur regul wwwnasaaorg
feder trade commiss ha bulletin regard a number of invest and other
secur wwwftcgov
secur and exchang commiss the sec home page is an excel sourc of
inform and link in addit to gener inform and detail of enforc
action the public can also access the electron data gather analysi and retriev
system edgar edgar contain mani of the document that public compani ar
requir to file with the commiss includ the annual report known as a 10k
wwwsecgov
selfregulatori organ sro mention previous ar all a good sourc of inform
and a us resourc for the investig
financi industri regulatori author wwwfinraorg
commod futur trade commiss wwwcftcgov
nation futur associ wwwnfafuturesorg
new york stock exchang wwwnysecom
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11549
secur fraud and the internet
of cours the veri technolog that give us access to almost limitless inform also give
the crimin greater opportun to commit crime anoth factor that work in favor of the
onlin scam artist is that there ha tradition been a cultur of trust and benevol on
the internet
us the internet to promot fraudul invest scheme is rel easi and cheap
there is the potenti to reach hundr of thousand of peopl us equip and
softwar that ar veri inexpens there is enough competit between provid of
internet access that the cost of maintain a home page on the web is veri low
the internet is alreadi be us to solicit investor mani illeg pyramid scheme have
professionallook websit for exampl us of email and the internet also make it
easier for crook to conceal their ident and oper anonym from other countri
secur law ar base on geograph boundari on the internet there ar no boundari
with the prolifer of cyber cash and va riou wai of exchang payment for good
and servic over the internet the fraud examin can expect to see a huge rise in financi
fraud commit onlin particularli preval onlin ar the so call pumpanddump
scheme in which promot us internet newslett and bulletin board to hype stock thei
bought for littl or no monei so thei can sell on a rise market
same old fraud new medium
mani of the fraudul scheme prolifer in cyberspac ar not new rather thei ar
recycl and repackag to appeal to a new gener of gullibl consum
newslett
in thi context a newslett is not an independ object public discuss the
merit of a particular secur offer such object analysi doe exist but more often
than not the slick market document is a far cry from the independ analysi that it
purport to be in realiti the compani publish the newslett is often paid to hype a
particular stock by the promot consequ there is a seriou danger of
misrepresent to the investor usual the cozi relationship between the stock promot
and the newslett publish is not disclos to the prospect investor neither is the fact
that the promot pai to have hi offer receiv promin and flatter treatment
secur fraud financi transact
11550 2011 fraud examin manual
the newslett mai take the form of an actual document mail out to subscrib who mai
or mai not pai for the privileg often the inform is impart via a profession
websit design to motiv investor to act on the great opportun be offer
usual inform will be gather on those who subscrib to such public or view
the websit thi data is rich with free lead to secur repres or other who
promot the secur be hype in the newslett the ident of investor who have
shown some type of interest in a particular offer cover in the public is a valuabl
sourc of new busi
onlin trade
a recent legal opinion ha allow a bulletin board to be us to bui and sell secur
without registr thi bypass of feder registr requir mai make the
rais of ventur capit easier but it will reduc consum protect and potenti creat
a regulatori nightmar
greater util of the internet to promot both legitim and fraudul secur
offer will increasingli challeng the investig or examin the fraud examin will
continu to face jurisdict as well as technic issu as the internet becom the medium
of choic for the financi crimin
editor note the associ would like to thank chri hancock cfe for hi assist in prepar
thi chapter mr hancock is the investig manag for the state of florida depart of bank and
financ northwest florida region and special in the investig of financi crime with an emphasi
on secur fraud
we would also like to thank richard j bobel cfe mba cpa who author the materi on
commod option and deriv mr bobel is a former commod broker and collegeunivers faculti
member who special in derivati ve market and work for mani year as a research economist for the
chicago board of trade where he design commod futur and option contract richard wa a
contribut author to the cbot commod trade manual and the cbot specul
workbook he can contact at 8478287417 or at rjbrjbcpacom
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11601
