2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Federal Regulation/Securities Act of 1933


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Securities Act of 1933 
Concern over the 1929 stock market crash and over the manipulation of the securities 
markets precipitated the need for federal intervention. In 1933, the Securities Act was 
enacted to regulate the public offering of securities and protect investors. The 1933 Act, 
sometimes known as the “Truth in Securiti es Act,” defines securities to include: 
 
 “…any note, stock, treasury stock, bond, debenture, … investment contract, fractional 
undivided interest in any oil, gas or other mineral rights, any put, call, straddle, option … 
any interest or instrument commonly known as a security…” [Title 15, U.S.C., § 
77b(a)(1)].  
 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1502                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Of course, both federal and state laws provide for exemptions. Exemptions basically fall 
under two categories, exempt securities and exempt transactions. For example, certain obligations 
issued or guaranteed by the United States government or by state or local governments are 
exempted securities.  
 
This Act also requires that investors be given full and fair disclosure of material information 
concerning their investment or prospective investment. In this way the sale of securities 
differs from many other commercial transactions where caveat emptor is the rule. Here, the 
investor is entitled to all information necessary for an informed investment decision to  
be made. 
 



:


secur act of 1933
concern over the 1929 stock market crash and over the manipul of the secur
market precipit the need for feder intervent in 1933 the secur act wa
enact to regul the public offer of secur and protect investor the 1933 act
sometim known as the truth in secur es act defin secur to includ
ani note stock treasuri stock bond debentur invest contract fraction
undivid interest in ani oil ga or other miner right ani put call straddl option
ani interest or instrument commonli known as a secur titl 15 usc
77ba1
secur fraud financi transact
11502 2011 fraud examin manual
of cours both feder and state law provid for exempt exempt basic fall
under two categori exempt secur and exempt transact for exampl certain oblig
issu or guarante by the unit state govern or by state or local govern ar
exempt secur
thi act also requir that investor be given full and fair disclosur of materi inform
concern their invest or prospect invest in thi wai the sale of secur
differ from mani other commerci transact where caveat emptor is the rule here the
investor is entitl to all inform necessari for an inform invest decis to
be made
