2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/What Constitutes a Security?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


What Constitutes a Security? 
The definition of securities in both state and federal law includes instruments that can easily 
be identified as securities. These more traditional securities are usually easy to spot.  
 
Traditional Securities 
Types of investments most commonly recognized as securities include: 
 
Stocks 
A stock is an equity that represents a right of ownership in a corporation. There are many 
different classes including common, preferred, non-voting, and restricted. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1516                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bonds 
A bond is a debt instrument. Examples include treasury bills, corporate bonds, municipal 
bonds, and junk bonds. Although the term junk bonds has a very negative connotation, they 
are simply high-risk, below-investment-grade, commercial bonds. 
 
Certificates of Deposit 
A certificate of deposit (CD) is acknowledgement by a bank of the receipt of money with a 
promise to repay it with interest. 
 
Less obvious, but still clearly securities are: 
 
Futures 
A future is a contract agreeing to buy or sell a specified quantity of something (such as foreign 
currency or commodities) at some future time at a price agreed upon now. In futures 
contracts, the delivery or sale of the product is assumed, and the investor has an obligation 
to fulfill the contract. Note that in reality, few futures contracts actually result in delivery. 
Usually, the investor will enter into offsetting futures contracts prior to the delivery date. As 
futures contracts are freely transferable, the two transactions can offset each other. 
 
Options 
An investor can purchase an option to buy (known as a “call”) or sell (known as a “put”) an 
asset (such as stocks, bonds, commodities, or real estate) on or before a future date at a price 
agreed upon now. With an option, the investor buys the right, but not the obligation, to 
perform the contract. The price paid for the option is known as the option premium. The 
price at which the option may be exercised is known as the strike price. Of course, once an 
option has expired it ceases to have any value whatsoever. 
 
Futures and options are essentially methods of managing price risk, often called “hedging.” 
They can be used, for example, by farmers or international manufacturing companies as a 
form of insurance against adverse price or currency exchange rate changes. They are 
examples of derivatives. Many esoteric types of  investment vehicles have been created, often 
using complex mathematical models. These derivative products allow trading to take place in 
various indices (for example the Dow Jones Industrial Index or the Standard and Poor’s 500) 
and also in securities known as strips, collateralized mortgage obligations, and leaps. 
 
Futures and options are discussed in more detail below. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1517 
Investment Contracts 
Other transactions are less obviously securities, but fall under the catch-all category of an 
“investment contract.” Unfortunately, the term “investment contract” is not usually defined 
by statute, and it is, therefore, necessary to look to case law to determine whether a particular 
transaction may constitute an investment contract. Many fraudulent schemes involving 
exotic investments can be argued to constitute the offer or sale of investment contracts. 
 
The Howey Test 
In the case SEC v. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293, 299 (1946), a company was selling subdivided 
sections of a Florida orange orchard that were to be managed by a subsidiary company. In its 
opinion in the case, the U.S. Supreme Court outlined a four-element test to determine if an 
investment contract was present. In essence, the Supreme Court stated that there must be: 
• An investment  of money or other asset.  
• A common enterprise.  In very general terms, the common enterprise requirement means the 
success of the investor is dependent on the efforts and success of those seeking the 
investment of third parties (typically the promoter). The third party, who provides the 
entrepreneurial skill, shares in the profits (or losses) with the investor. Usually, the 
common enterprise requirement will be met where “the fortunes of the investor are 
interwoven with and dependent upon the efforts and success of those seeking the 
investment or a third-party.” See SEC v. Glenn W. Turn er Enterprises, Inc.,  474 F.2nd 476, 
482 n.7 (9th Circuit, 1973). 
• An expectation of profits. Profit is generally defined to be either money received for the use 
of capital or capital appreciation. In United Housing Foundation, Inc. v. Forman, 421 U.S. 837 
(1975), stock sold to potential apartment renters, which would be applied to their 
security deposit, was not held to be an investment contract because the individuals were 
attracted solely by the prospect of somewhere to live, not financial return on their 
money. 
• Profit must be generated solely from the efforts of others.  The essential managerial efforts, which 
affect the success or failure of the enterprise, come from the third party (the promoter) 
not the investor. In Howey, the subsidiary company was to plant, cultivate, and harvest 
the oranges. As a general rule, the more actively involved an investor is in the enterprise, 
the less likely it is that an investment contract will be held to exist. Subsequent case law 
has diluted “solely” to “primarily” or “substantially” from the efforts of others. 
Nevertheless, if the investor’s efforts  are significant in the success of the enterprise, an 
investment contract will not be found to exist. For example, in the Forman case 
mentioned above, the court stated “an in vestment contract is the presence of an 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1518                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
investment in a common venture premised on a reasonable expectation of profits to be 
derived from the entrepreneurial or managerial efforts of others.” 
 
Risk Capital Test  
As an alternative to the Howey Test many state and federal courts are using the so-called 
“Risk Capital Test.” This “test” allows the invest or to play a more active role if the funds he 
contributes are part of the “risk capital” of the business. A person entrusts money or other 
capital to another with the expectation of deriving a profit. The failure or success of the 
venture is dependent upon the managerial efforts of the other person. Several states have 
formally adopted this test, sometimes known as the Hawaii Market Test, as an alternative 
definition of investment contract. However, the Supreme Court has expressly declined to 
decide if this test should be used. 
 
Examples of Investment Contracts 
Following are types of investments that frequently qualify as “investment contracts” and are, 
therefore, considered securities. Several types of related frauds are also listed to demonstrate 
the broad and expansive nature of investment contract schemes. More information about 
these schemes can also be found in the Consumer Fraud section. 
 
PONZI SCHEMES 
A Ponzi scheme is named after Charles Ponzi who, in the early 1920s, persuaded tens of 
thousands of Bostonians to invest over $10 million. He created an entity, aptly named the 
Securities and Exchange Company, and issued investors a promissory note guaranteeing a 50 
percent return in 90 days on every $1,000 invested. 
 
The scheme involved the alleged buying of international postal reply coupons in Europe 
using foreign currencies, which had depreciated substantially against the dollar in the years 
after World War I. Ponzi claimed that these coupons, bought at a discount, could then be 
redeemed at full face value, yielding a substantial profit. 
 
There were two main problems. First, although Ponzi claimed to be trading over $10 million 
worth of postal reply coupons, only a few hundred thousand dollars worth actually existed. 
A more fatal flaw was the fact that the scheme relied on new investor funds to pay returns to 
earlier investors. In August 1920, after the inevitable collapse of his scheme, Ponzi was 
arrested for mail fraud and larceny. Ponzi served jail time and was later deported to his 
native Italy. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1519 
Of course, the most infamous and costly Ponzi scheme was that of Bernard Madoff. In 
2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, one 
count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He was 
sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion dollars (the 
amount prosecutors say flowed through his business).  
 
Madoff told his clients that he generated such high returns by employing a “split-strike 
conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that involves a 
combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to generate 
predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely correlated to 
an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put options on the 
same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay clients who 
requested withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds 
from new investments to pay them off, and so, like all Ponzi schemes, it collapsed. The 
“Consumer Fraud” chapter contains more detail about the Madoff case. 
 
PYRAMID SCHEMES 
These typically involve a scheme whereby fees or dues paid by a member to join an 
organization are to be paid to another member and there is a provision for increasing 
membership through a chain process of new members bringing in other new members. The 
members make money not by commission on the bona fide retail sale of a legitimate 
product, but by signing up new people. An organizational structure that, like the Ponzi 
scheme, relies on bringing in new people must eventually collapse. Although all pyramid 
schemes are fraudulent, and in many states specifically deemed illegal, not all pyramid 
schemes necessarily meet the Howey Test.   
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1520                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WORM, RABBIT, AND OSTRICH FARMS 
Although sometimes amusing when viewed objectively by the investigator, many investors 
have been defrauded by being persuaded to invest in exactly these types of opportunities. 
Fraud examiners can practice applying the Howey Test to these types of cases in an attempt 
to determine whether an investment contract exists. What, if anything, does the investor 
need to do in order to get the promised return? If, for example, the investor’s involvement is 
purely passive, then an investment contract will be held to exist. However, where the 
investor is involved in feeding the ostriches and marketing the meat, then the last element of 
the Howey Test fails. 
 
PRIME BANK FRAUD 
These schemes involve the issuance and purported trading of so-called “prime bank” notes 
or other high-yield investment opportunities. Investors are often told that they can obtain 
returns exceeding several hundred percent per year when their funds are placed in an off-
 shore trading program. Excessive complexity and secrecy generally characterize these 
fraudulent programs. Investors are usually told that this opportunity is only available to a 
select few and the signing of non-disclosure agreements is mandatory. Typically the 
explanation of how the program actually works is full of obscure terminology and makes 
reference to legitimate banks or organizations such as the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) to lend credibility. Often, investors are told that there is little or no risk of losing their 
principal. Despite warnings published by the state regulators, the SEC, the IMF, the 
International Chamber of Commerce, and the World Bank, this type of fraud continues to 
fleece millions of dollars from investors worldwide. 
 
PRECIOUS METAL SCHEMES 
Typically these involve the purchase of interests in gold or silver coins, bullion, diamonds, 
and other precious or semi-precious stones.  
 
VIATICALS 
A viatical settlement involves the sale by a terminally ill person, at a discount, of the right to 
death benefits from the proceeds of their life insurance policy. In and of itself, this does not 
constitute the offer or sale of a security. However, an industry has evolved to buy these 
rights and then sell fractional interests in them to investors. Frequently, these policy rights 
are pooled and the investors are sold an interest in the pool. Investor returns increase 
according to how deeply the policy is discounted and are inversely related to how long the 
beneficiary survives. Whether such investments constitute securities is a matter of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1521 
considerable debate. In July 1996, the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
held that viatical settlements sold by Life Pa rtners were not securities because the profits do 
not predominantly derive from the efforts of a party other than the investor. See, SEC v. Life 
Partners, Inc. 87 F. 3d 536 (D.C. Cir 1996). The appellate court ruled, in essence, that the 
ministerial functions performed by Life Partners did not have an impact on the profits of the 
investor and therefore that the last part of the Howey Test was not met. 
 
PARTNERSHIPS 
Interests in limited partnerships are generally held to be securities because this type of 
structure conforms closely to Howey. General partnerships will not usually be held to be 
securities. This is normally because in a true general partnership the partners take an active 
role in the operation of the business. However, be warned that some promoters will try to 
disguise an investment contract as a general partnership. It is important to look beyond the 
surface wrapping and determine if the partners really take an active role in operating the 
entity. Some investment opportunities involving wireless cable and pay telephone leasing are 
good examples of this tactic.  
  
JOINT VENTURES 
Interests in a joint venture will often be found to be securities. The Howey Test should be 
applied and, as with partnership interests, careful attention should be paid to the extent to 
which the investor actively participates in the management or operation of the business.  
 
OIL, GAS, AND MINERAL INTERESTS 
Usually the sale of fractional ownership of oil and gas wells, or mineral rights constitutes the 
sale of a security. The misrepresentations and omissions found in oil and gas scams are often 
repeated in other mineral mining schemes, such as gold or coal. Investors have a right to be 
advised of the risks inherent in a securities investment and oil/gas opportunities are 
traditionally very high risk. If investors have been assured or guaranteed of success in 
striking oil, fraud examiners should consider that a red flag. Naturally, as in all cases of 
securities fraud, one should look for discrepancies in promoters’ credentials, business 
history, and commission. The following types of misrepresentations and omissions are often 
encountered: 
• Drilling and completion costs — Costs are often hugely inflated to bilk the investor. 
• Lease — Promoters frequently do not have a valid mineral rights lease. 
  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1522                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Discovery and production potential — The investor may be misled regarding the 
likelihood of striking oil and the amount produced. This information is usually contained 
in the geologist’s report. 
• Wells — The promoter may exaggerate the number and depth of wells, thus inflating the 
operating costs paid by investors. 
• Self-dealing — The promoter may declare a good well dry in order to reap the benefits of 
a productive well later when the investors have given up. 
• Dry holes — Often these are completed by the promoter solely to improve his 
completion record and collect completion funds from investors. 
• Royalties — Insiders may be assigned the majority of royalties while investors receive only 
a small portion. 
• Number of partners — Promoters are likely to oversell the well, i.e., 99/64ths. 
 
Occasionally, the investment may be a complete fabrication. This is even more likely in 
overseas mineral investments. Geologists’ re ports may be falsified or promoters may  
rely on investors’ reluctance to travel to remote spots in order to see their well or mine  
for themselves.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A good example of this is the Bre-X gold scandal that occurred in the spring of 1997. The 
Canadian mining company claimed to have found the largest gold deposit discovered in the 
twentieth century in Busang, on the island of Borneo. Share pric es of the before unheard of, 
penny-stock company skyrocketed as rumors of the tremendous discovery circulated. 
Optimistic investors largely ignored the red flags that began to emerge. The initial concern 
that most had was that the mine was located in Indonesia, creating potential difficulties due 
to poor U.S. relations with that country.  
 
Not to be deterred by proximity or diplomatic difficulties, investors continued to avidly 
acquire stock in the former junior mining company. Bre-X geological reports of as many as 
5.68 grams of gold per ton continued the trend. Then, however, a multitude of problems 
seemed to arise. 
 
The accuracy of the sampling began to come into question. Instead of preserving parts of the 
core samples for verification, Bre-X allowed them to be crushed. And soon after, a fire 
destroyed the geologists’ records, further casting the veracity of the discovery into doubt. 
Insiders began surreptitiously selling off large amounts of their shares. News that the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1523 
Indonesian government had withheld key permits was concealed from investors. After the 
exploration manager’s mysterious death (he supposedly committed suicide by jumping out of 
a helicopter), share prices plunged from approximately C$100 to around C$2. Bre-X’s 
market value declined by 90 percent. The Ontario Municipal Employees Retirement 
System lost C$45 million and Canada’s Caisse de dépôt et placement du Québec recorded 
a loss of C$70 million. The core samples, it was later revealed, had been “salted.” 
 
The most disturbing aspect of this case is the severe handicap investigators faced caused by 
jurisdictional questions. “This could be a monumental scam that will be nearly impossible 
to prosecute,” said a private investigator wo rking on the case. He explains some of the 
difficulties, “No one really has jurisdiction. The salting [of the gold samples] took place in 
Indonesia, but what laws were really broken in that country? The law against salting? 
There is none. The law against deceiving shareholders? That happened in Canada and the 
U.S. Most of the main suspects probably disappeared in the Philippines. But what law did 
they break in the Philippines? Are they fugitives? No. Can a prosecutor in Canada get a 
warrant for those guys in the Philippines for what they did in Indonesia? Very tricky.” 
 
In Indonesia, no extradition or law-enforcement cooperation agreements exist with Canada 
or the U.S., which means the criminal investigation is being handled by the Indonesians 
themselves. Likewise, though the U.S. Embassy in Jakarta has been asked by 
Washington to look into the Busang fraud, the U.S. and Indonesia have a poor track 
record of cooperating in criminal matters.  
 
Investors in such ventures can easily find themselves with no legal recourse if things go 
wrong. Obviously, different countries have varying laws regarding investor rights. Naturally, 
this makes investigating a case such as this quite difficult. The principals of Bre-X claimed 
not to have known about sample salting. They portrayed themselves as victims and blamed 
the geologists for the fraudulent samples. The geologists, however, were Philippine nationals 
and retreated to their homeland, further complicating the investigation. The Philippine 
government suspects foul play in the death of the head geologist, Michael de Guzman, and is 
more concerned with the Indonesian inquiry into the matter than with turning over their 
countrymen for questioning. 
 
When examining the case from a “follow the money” standpoint, the trail seems to lead to 
Bre-X insiders. Even as they concealed news of  permits being withheld by the Indonesian 
government, insiders secretly sold off huge amounts of stock at great profit. According to 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1524                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the Wall Street Journal, Bre-X Chairman David Walsh, Vice Chairman and Chief Geologist 
John Felderhof, and two other executives sold nearly C$38 million of stock. 
 
HEDGE FUNDS 
Although there is no statutory or regulatory definition of “hedge fund,” the term typically 
refers to private pooled investment vehicles managed by advisers who generally have a very 
large financial interest in the funds based on a management fee that includes a percentage of 
the fund’s performance. Hedge funds employ various speculative and aggressive strategies 
that are not commonly available to mutual funds. They often combine traditional 
investments with short sales, leveraging, and arbitrage strategies to maximize returns.  
 
In the past few years, the U.S. securities market has seen a significant growth in the number 
and size of hedge funds. According to the SEC, assets under management by hedge funds 
have grown dramatically and are now estimated to exceed $2 trillion. This is a massive jump 
from the $38 billion hedge fund industry in 1990. Consequently, hedge fund fraud has grown 
substantially enough for the SEC to take extraordinary measures to regulate it. Between 2000 
and 2004, the SEC brought 51 cases against hedge fund advisers for defrauding hedge fund 
investors or using the funds to defraud others. In 2005, the SEC brought 11 hedge fund 
fraud cases and had several investigations underway. In 2007, the SEC created a hedge fund 
working group within the Division of Enforcement. Working with other federal law 
enforcement agencies and self-regulatory organizations, the group leads agency efforts to 
combat hedge fund insider trading. In the most significant insider trading case in 20 years, 
the SEC filed charges in 2007 against 14 defendants in a scheme involving hedge funds that 
netted more than $15 million in illegal profits on thousands of trades, using information 
stolen from UBS Securities LLC and Morgan Stanley.    
 
With the enormous growth in the hedge fund industry, advisers are becoming more 
aggressive and less meticulous in their transactions. Typical hedge fund fraud by investors 
includes: 
• Theft of investor assets;  
• Late trading;  
• Insider trading;  
• Overvaluation of portfolios;  
• Entering into inappropriate timing arrangements;  
• Exploitation of mutual fund investors for private gain;  
• Entering into inappropriate arrangements with mutual fund advisers in which the mutual 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1525 
fund advisers waive restrictions on market timing in exchange for placement of other 
assets by the hedge fund adviser in funds managed by a mutual fund adviser; and  
• Conspiring with intermediaries to identify hedge funds from mutual fund personnel. 
 
PROMISSORY NOTES 
A note is defined as a security, but in practice, the law is more complicated than that. Under 
certain circumstances, promissory notes are not held to be securities. A note is presumed to 
be a security unless it bears a strong resemblance to a category of instruments that are not 
securities. Generally, longer-term commercial paper is similar in many respects to a bond and 
may be held to be a security unless it relates to such transactions as consumer finance or 
residential mortgages. For example, in the case of a residential mortgage, the note you sign is 
simply a promise to repay, not a method to raise capital for some business venture.  
 
With notes and other potential securities it is often helpful to apply the family resemblance 
test and look at three things: 
 
MOTIVE AND EXPECTATION  
What is the issuer’s primary motive? If it is to raise money for the general use of a business 
enterprise then a security may be held to exist. What is the buyer’s primary motive? Is it 
really a loan or an investment-type transaction? What is a reasonable investor thinking? What 
are his expectations? 
 
PLAN OF DISTRIBUTION   
Is there some form of common trading? If so, a security probably exists. 
 
REGULATION  
Is there some other regulatory system that significantly reduces the risk of the transaction 
thereby rendering the application of the securities laws unnecessary? If the transaction is 
deemed appropriately regulated in ways other than through the application of the securities 
laws, then it is less likely that securities laws will be brought to bear. 
 
 



:


what constitut a secur
the definit of secur in both state and feder law includ instrument that can easili
be identifi as secur these more tradit secur ar usual easi to spot
tradit secur
type of invest most commonli recogn as secur includ
stock
a stock is an equiti that repres a right of ownership in a corpor there ar mani
differ class includ common prefer nonvot and restrict
secur fraud financi transact
11516 2011 fraud examin manual
bond
a bond is a debt instrument exampl includ treasuri bill corpor bond municip
bond and junk bond although the term junk bond ha a veri neg connot thei
ar simpli highrisk belowinvestmentgrad commerci bond
certif of deposit
a certif of deposit cd is acknowledg by a bank of the receipt of monei with a
promis to repai it with interest
less obviou but still clearli secur ar
futur
a futur is a contract agre to bui or sell a specifi quantiti of someth such as foreign
currenc or commod at some futur time at a price agre upon now in futur
contract the deliveri or sale of the product is assum and the investor ha an oblig
to fulfil the contract note that in realiti few futur contract actual result in deliveri
usual the investor will enter into offset futur contract prior to the deliveri date as
futur contract ar freeli transfer the two transact can offset each other
option
an investor can purchas an option to bui known as a call or sell known as a put an
asset such as stock bond commod or real estat on or befor a futur date at a price
agre upon now with an option the investor bui the right but not the oblig to
perform the contract the price paid for the option is known as the option premium the
price at which the option mai be exercis is known as the strike price of cours onc an
option ha expir it ceas to have ani valu whatsoev
futur and option ar essenti method of manag price risk often call hedg
thei can be us for exampl by farmer or intern manufactur compani as a
form of insur against advers price or currenc exchang rate chang thei ar
exampl of deriv mani esoter type of invest vehicl have been creat often
us complex mathemat model these deriv product allow trade to take place in
variou indic for exampl the dow jone industri index or the standard and poor 500
and also in secur known as strip collater mortgag oblig and leap
futur and option ar discuss in more detail below
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11517
invest contract
other transact ar less obvious secur but fall under the catchal categori of an
invest contract unfortun the term invest contract is not usual defin
by statut and it is therefor necessari to look to case law to determin whether a particular
transact mai constitut an invest contract mani fraudul scheme involv
exot invest can be argu to constitut the offer or sale of invest contract
the howei test
in the case sec v howei co 328 us 293 299 1946 a compani wa sell subdivid
section of a florida orang orchard that were to be manag by a subsidiari compani in it
opinion in the case the us suprem court outlin a fourel test to determin if an
invest contract wa present in essenc the suprem court state that there must be
an invest of monei or other asset
a common enterpris in veri gener term the common enterpris requir mean the
success of the investor is depend on the effort and success of those seek the
invest of third parti typic the promot the third parti who provid the
entrepreneuri skill share in the profit or loss with the investor usual the
common enterpris requir will be met where the fortun of the investor ar
interwoven with and depend upon the effort and success of those seek the
invest or a thirdparti see sec v glenn w turn er enterpris inc 474 f2nd 476
482 n7 9th circuit 1973
an expect of profit profit is gener defin to be either monei receiv for the us
of capit or capit appreci in unit hous foundat inc v forman 421 us 837
1975 stock sold to potenti apart renter which would be appli to their
secur deposit wa not held to be an invest contract becaus the individu were
attract sole by the prospect of somewher to live not financi return on their
monei
profit must be gener sole from the effort of other the essenti manageri effort which
affect the success or failur of the enterpris come from the third parti the promot
not the investor in howei the subsidiari compani wa to plant cultiv and harvest
the orang as a gener rule the more activ involv an investor is in the enterpris
the less like it is that an invest contract will be held to exist subsequ case law
ha dilut sole to primarili or substanti from the effort of other
nevertheless if the investor effort ar signific in the success of the enterpris an
invest contract will not be found to exist for exampl in the forman case
mention abov the court state an in vestment contract is the presenc of an
secur fraud financi transact
11518 2011 fraud examin manual
invest in a common ventur premis on a reason expect of profit to be
deriv from the entrepreneuri or manageri effort of other
risk capit test
as an altern to the howei test mani state and feder court ar us the socal
risk capit test thi test allow the invest or to plai a more activ role if the fund he
contribut ar part of the risk capit of the busi a person entrust monei or other
capit to anoth with the expect of deriv a profit the failur or success of the
ventur is depend upon the manageri effort of the other person sever state have
formal adopt thi test sometim known as the hawaii market test as an altern
definit of invest contract howev the suprem court ha expressli declin to
decid if thi test should be us
exampl of invest contract
follow ar type of invest that frequent qualifi as invest contract and ar
therefor consid secur sever type of relat fraud ar also list to demonstr
the broad and expans natur of invest contract scheme more inform about
these scheme can also be found in the consum fraud section
ponzi scheme
a ponzi scheme is name after charl ponzi who in the earli 1920 persuad ten of
thousand of bostonian to invest over 10 million he creat an entiti aptli name the
secur and exchang compani and issu investor a promissori note guarante a 50
percent return in 90 dai on everi 1000 invest
the scheme involv the alleg bui of intern postal repli coupon in europ
us foreign currenc which had depreci substanti against the dollar in the year
after world war i ponzi claim that these coupon bought at a discount could then be
redeem at full face valu yield a substanti profit
there were two main problem first although ponzi claim to be trade over 10 million
worth of postal repli coupon onli a few hundr thousand dollar worth actual exist
a more fatal flaw wa the fact that the scheme reli on new investor fund to pai return to
earlier investor in august 1920 after the inevit collaps of hi scheme ponzi wa
arrest for mail fraud and larceni ponzi serv jail time and wa later deport to hi
nativ itali
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11519
of cours the most infam and costli ponzi scheme wa that of bernard madoff in
2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud on
count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he wa
sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion dollar the
amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi
madoff told hi client that he gener such high return by emploi a splitstrik
convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that involv a
combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to gener
predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close correl to
an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put option on the
same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who
request withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund
from new invest to pai them off and so like all ponzi scheme it collaps the
consum fraud chapter contain more detail about the madoff case
pyramid scheme
these typic involv a scheme wherebi fee or due paid by a member to join an
organ ar to be paid to anoth member and there is a provis for increas
membership through a chain process of new member bring in other new member the
member make monei not by commiss on the bona fide retail sale of a legitim
product but by sign up new peopl an organiz structur that like the ponzi
scheme reli on bring in new peopl must eventu collaps although all pyramid
scheme ar fraudul and in mani state specif deem illeg not all pyramid
scheme necessarili meet the howei test
secur fraud financi transact
11520 2011 fraud examin manual
worm rabbit and ostrich farm
although sometim amus when view object by the investig mani investor
have been defraud by be persuad to invest in exactli these type of opportun
fraud examin can practic appli the howei test to these type of case in an attempt
to determin whether an invest contract exist what if anyth doe the investor
need to do in order to get the promis return if for exampl the investor involv is
pure passiv then an invest contract will be held to exist howev where the
investor is involv in feed the ostrich and market the meat then the last element of
the howei test fail
prime bank fraud
these scheme involv the issuanc and purport trade of socal prime bank note
or other highyield invest opportun investor ar often told that thei can obtain
return exceed sever hundr percent per year when their fund ar place in an off
shore trade program excess complex and secreci gener character these
fraudul program investor ar usual told that thi opportun is onli avail to a
select few and the sign of nondisclosur agreement is mandatori typic the
explan of how the program actual work is full of obscur terminolog and make
refer to legitim bank or organ such as the intern monetari fund
imf to lend credibl often investor ar told that there is littl or no risk of lose their
princip despit warn publish by the state regul the sec the imf the
intern chamber of commerc and the world bank thi type of fraud continu to
fleec million of dollar from investor worldwid
preciou metal scheme
typic these involv the purchas of interest in gold or silver coin bullion diamond
and other preciou or semipreci stone
viatic
a viatic settlement involv the sale by a termin ill person at a discount of the right to
death benefit from the proce of their life insur polici in and of itself thi doe not
constitut the offer or sale of a secur howev an industri ha evolv to bui these
right and then sell fraction interest in them to investor frequent these polici right
ar pool and the investor ar sold an interest in the pool investor return increas
accord to how deepli the polici is discount and ar invers relat to how long the
beneficiari surviv whether such invest constitut secur is a matter of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11521
consider debat in juli 1996 the circuit court of appeal for the district of columbia
held that viatic settlement sold by life pa rtner were not secur becaus the profit do
not predominantli deriv from the effort of a parti other than the investor see sec v life
partner inc 87 f 3d 536 dc cir 1996 the appel court rule in essenc that the
ministeri function perform by life partner did not have an impact on the profit of the
investor and therefor that the last part of the howei test wa not met
partnership
interest in limit partnership ar gener held to be secur becaus thi type of
structur conform close to howei gener partnership will not usual be held to be
secur thi is normal becaus in a true gener partnership the partner take an activ
role in the oper of the busi howev be warn that some promot will try to
disguis an invest contract as a gener partnership it is import to look beyond the
surfac wrap and determin if the partner realli take an activ role in oper the
entiti some invest opportun involv wireless cabl and pai telephon leas ar
good exampl of thi tactic
joint ventur
interest in a joint ventur will often be found to be secur the howei test should be
appli and as with partnership interest care attent should be paid to the extent to
which the investor activ particip in the manag or oper of the busi
oil ga and miner interest
usual the sale of fraction ownership of oil and ga well or miner right constitut the
sale of a secur the misrepresent and omiss found in oil and ga scam ar often
repeat in other miner mine scheme such as gold or coal investor have a right to be
advis of the risk inher in a secur invest and oilga opportun ar
tradition veri high risk if investor have been assur or guarante of success in
strike oil fraud examin should consid that a red flag natur as in all case of
secur fraud on should look for discrep in promot credenti busi
histori and commiss the follow type of misrepresent and omiss ar often
encount
drill and complet cost cost ar often huge inflat to bilk the investor
leas promot frequent do not have a valid miner right leas
secur fraud financi transact
11522 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri and product potenti the investor mai be misl regard the
likelihood of strike oil and the amount produc thi inform is usual contain
in the geologist report
well the promot mai exagger the number and depth of well thu inflat the
oper cost paid by investor
selfdeal the promot mai declar a good well dry in order to reap the benefit of
a product well later when the investor have given up
dry hole often these ar complet by the promot sole to improv hi
complet record and collect complet fund from investor
royalti insid mai be assign the major of royalti while investor receiv onli
a small portion
number of partner promot ar like to oversel the well ie 9964th
occasion the invest mai be a complet fabric thi is even more like in
oversea miner invest geologist re port mai be falsifi or promot mai
reli on investor reluct to travel to remot spot in order to see their well or mine
for themselv
exampl
a good exampl of thi is the brex gold scandal that occur in the spring of 1997 the
canadian mine compani claim to have found the largest gold deposit discov in the
twentieth centuri in busang on the island of borneo share pric es of the befor unheard of
pennystock compani skyrocket as rumor of the tremend discoveri circul
optimist investor larg ignor the red flag that began to emerg the initi concern
that most had wa that the mine wa locat in indonesia creat potenti difficulti due
to poor us relat with that countri
not to be deter by proxim or diplomat difficulti investor continu to avidli
acquir stock in the former junior mine compani brex geolog report of as mani as
568 gram of gold per ton continu the trend then howev a multitud of problem
seem to aris
the accuraci of the sampl began to come into question instead of preserv part of the
core sampl for verif brex allow them to be crush and soon after a fire
destroi the geologist record further cast the verac of the discoveri into doubt
insid began surreptiti sell off larg amount of their share new that the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11523
indonesian govern had withheld kei permit wa conceal from investor after the
explor manag mysteri death he supposedli commit suicid by jump out of
a helicopt share price plung from approxim c100 to around c2 brex
market valu declin by 90 percent the ontario municip employe retir
system lost c45 million and canada caiss de dpt et placement du qubec record
a loss of c70 million the core sampl it wa later reveal had been salt
the most disturb aspect of thi case is the sever handicap investig face caus by
jurisdict question thi could be a monument scam that will be nearli imposs
to prosecut said a privat investig wo rking on the case he explain some of the
difficulti no on realli ha jurisdict the salt of the gold sampl took place in
indonesia but what law were realli broken in that countri the law against salt
there is none the law against deceiv sharehold that happen in canada and the
us most of the main suspect probabl disappear in the philippin but what law did
thei break in the philippin ar thei fugit no can a prosecutor in canada get a
warrant for those gui in the philippin for what thei did in indonesia veri tricki
in indonesia no extradit or lawenforc cooper agreement exist with canada
or the us which mean the crimin investig is be handl by the indonesian
themselv likewis though the us embassi in jakarta ha been ask by
washington to look into the busang fraud the us and indonesia have a poor track
record of cooper in crimin matter
investor in such ventur can easili find themselv with no legal recours if thing go
wrong obvious differ countri have vari law regard investor right natur
thi make investig a case such as thi quit difficult the princip of brex claim
not to have known about sampl salt thei portrai themselv as victim and blame
the geologist for the fraudul sampl the geologist howev were philippin nation
and retreat to their homeland further complic the investig the philippin
govern suspect foul plai in the death of the head geologist michael de guzman and is
more concern with the indonesian inquiri into the matter than with turn over their
countrymen for question
when examin the case from a follow the monei standpoint the trail seem to lead to
brex insid even as thei conceal new of permit be withheld by the indonesian
govern insid secretli sold off huge amount of stock at great profit accord to
secur fraud financi transact
11524 2011 fraud examin manual
the wall street journal brex chairman david walsh vice chairman and chief geologist
john felderhof and two other execut sold nearli c38 million of stock
hedg fund
although there is no statutori or regulatori definit of hedg fund the term typic
refer to privat pool invest vehicl manag by advis who gener have a veri
larg financi interest in the fund base on a manag fee that includ a percentag of
the fund perform hedg fund emploi variou specul and aggress strategi
that ar not commonli avail to mutual fund thei often combin tradit
invest with short sale leverag and arbitrag strategi to maxim return
in the past few year the us secur market ha seen a signific growth in the number
and size of hedg fund accord to the sec asset under manag by hedg fund
have grown dramat and ar now estim to exce 2 trillion thi is a massiv jump
from the 38 billion hedg fund industri in 1990 consequ hedg fund fraud ha grown
substanti enough for the sec to take extraordinari measur to regul it between 2000
and 2004 the sec brought 51 case against hedg fund advis for defraud hedg fund
investor or us the fund to defraud other in 2005 the sec brought 11 hedg fund
fraud case and had sever investig underwai in 2007 the sec creat a hedg fund
work group within the divis of enforc work with other feder law
enforc agenc and selfregulatori organ the group lead agenc effort to
combat hedg fund insid trade in the most signific insid trade case in 20 year
the sec file charg in 2007 against 14 defend in a scheme involv hedg fund that
net more than 15 million in illeg profit on thousand of trade us inform
stolen from ub secur llc and morgan stanlei
with the enorm growth in the hedg fund industri advis ar becom more
aggress and less meticul in their transact typic hedg fund fraud by investor
includ
theft of investor asset
late trade
insid trade
overvalu of portfolio
enter into inappropri time arrang
exploit of mutual fund investor for privat gain
enter into inappropri arrang with mutual fund advis in which the mutual
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11525
fund advis waiv restrict on market time in exchang for placement of other
asset by the hedg fund advis in fund manag by a mutual fund advis and
conspir with intermediari to identifi hedg fund from mutual fund personnel
promissori note
a note is defin as a secur but in practic the law is more complic than that under
certain circumst promissori note ar not held to be secur a note is presum to
be a secur unless it bear a strong resembl to a categori of instrument that ar not
secur gener longerterm commerci paper is similar in mani respect to a bond and
mai be held to be a secur unless it relat to such transact as consum financ or
residenti mortgag for exampl in the case of a residenti mortgag the note you sign is
simpli a promis to repai not a method to rais capit for some busi ventur
with note and other potenti secur it is often help to appli the famili resembl
test and look at three thing
motiv and expect
what is the issuer primari motiv if it is to rais monei for the gener us of a busi
enterpris then a secur mai be held to exist what is the buyer primari motiv is it
realli a loan or an investmenttyp transact what is a reason investor think what
ar hi expect
plan of distribut
is there some form of common trade if so a secur probabl exist
regul
is there some other regulatori system that significantli reduc the risk of the transact
therebi render the applic of the secur law unnecessari if the transact is
deem appropri regul in wai other than through the applic of the secur
law then it is less like that secur law will be brought to bear
