2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/What Constitutes a Security?/Options


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Options 
An investor can purchase an option to buy (known as a “call”) or sell (known as a “put”) an 
asset (such as stocks, bonds, commodities, or real estate) on or before a future date at a price 
agreed upon now. With an option, the investor buys the right, but not the obligation, to 
perform the contract. The price paid for the option is known as the option premium. The 
price at which the option may be exercised is known as the strike price. Of course, once an 
option has expired it ceases to have any value whatsoever. 
 
Futures and options are essentially methods of managing price risk, often called “hedging.” 
They can be used, for example, by farmers or international manufacturing companies as a 
form of insurance against adverse price or currency exchange rate changes. They are 
examples of derivatives. Many esoteric types of  investment vehicles have been created, often 
using complex mathematical models. These derivative products allow trading to take place in 
various indices (for example the Dow Jones Industrial Index or the Standard and Poor’s 500) 
and also in securities known as strips, collateralized mortgage obligations, and leaps. 
 
Futures and options are discussed in more detail below. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1517 



:


option
an investor can purchas an option to bui known as a call or sell known as a put an
asset such as stock bond commod or real estat on or befor a futur date at a price
agre upon now with an option the investor bui the right but not the oblig to
perform the contract the price paid for the option is known as the option premium the
price at which the option mai be exercis is known as the strike price of cours onc an
option ha expir it ceas to have ani valu whatsoev
futur and option ar essenti method of manag price risk often call hedg
thei can be us for exampl by farmer or intern manufactur compani as a
form of insur against advers price or currenc exchang rate chang thei ar
exampl of deriv mani esoter type of invest vehicl have been creat often
us complex mathemat model these deriv product allow trade to take place in
variou indic for exampl the dow jone industri index or the standard and poor 500
and also in secur known as strip collater mortgag oblig and leap
futur and option ar discuss in more detail below
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11517
