2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/What Constitutes a Security?/Examples of Investment Contracts/VIATICALS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


VIATICALS 
A viatical settlement involves the sale by a terminally ill person, at a discount, of the right to 
death benefits from the proceeds of their life insurance policy. In and of itself, this does not 
constitute the offer or sale of a security. However, an industry has evolved to buy these 
rights and then sell fractional interests in them to investors. Frequently, these policy rights 
are pooled and the investors are sold an interest in the pool. Investor returns increase 
according to how deeply the policy is discounted and are inversely related to how long the 
beneficiary survives. Whether such investments constitute securities is a matter of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1521 
considerable debate. In July 1996, the Circuit Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia 
held that viatical settlements sold by Life Pa rtners were not securities because the profits do 
not predominantly derive from the efforts of a party other than the investor. See, SEC v. Life 
Partners, Inc. 87 F. 3d 536 (D.C. Cir 1996). The appellate court ruled, in essence, that the 
ministerial functions performed by Life Partners did not have an impact on the profits of the 
investor and therefore that the last part of the Howey Test was not met. 
 



:


viatic
a viatic settlement involv the sale by a termin ill person at a discount of the right to
death benefit from the proce of their life insur polici in and of itself thi doe not
constitut the offer or sale of a secur howev an industri ha evolv to bui these
right and then sell fraction interest in them to investor frequent these polici right
ar pool and the investor ar sold an interest in the pool investor return increas
accord to how deepli the polici is discount and ar invers relat to how long the
beneficiari surviv whether such invest constitut secur is a matter of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11521
consider debat in juli 1996 the circuit court of appeal for the district of columbia
held that viatic settlement sold by life pa rtner were not secur becaus the profit do
not predominantli deriv from the effort of a parti other than the investor see sec v life
partner inc 87 f 3d 536 dc cir 1996 the appel court rule in essenc that the
ministeri function perform by life partner did not have an impact on the profit of the
investor and therefor that the last part of the howei test wa not met
