2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options 
There have been numerous frauds involving commodity futures, exchange-traded options, 
and OTC options. In December 1994, Orange County California became the largest 
municipality ever to file for bankruptcy. This was largely caused by risky investment 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1526                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
strategies utilizing OTC options that resulted in trading losses of about $10 billion. In more 
recent news, the catastrophic failure of Enron was partially caused by a fraudulent hedge 
transaction utilizing an OTC option. Through a company he controlled, Andrew S. Fastow 
sold worthless options to Enron making it appear that the value of Enron’s investment in 
Avici Systems, Inc. was hedged. Fastow pocketed the premium for the bogus options while 
Enron appeared to have established a hedge position, protecting the value of their 
investment. Other notable failures related to exchange-traded derivatives include Barings 
PLC, the 223-year-old London merchant bank that helped finance the Louisiana Purchase, 
and the Canadian Pacific Railway, which collapsed as a result of hidden derivatives losses.  
 
Derivatives trading is risky business. But a lack of adequate internal controls led to many of 
the losses mentioned above. Internal controls must be airtight in a firm that engages in 
hedging or trading activities using exchange-traded or OTC derivatives. Insufficient market 
and product knowledge was also a major factor in these financial debacles.  
 
Commodity Futures Primer 
As mentioned previously, commodity futures contracts are agreements between buyers and 
sellers to make or take delivery of a commodity at a future date, at an agreed upon price. 
Commodity futures contracts are standardized. Contract specifications such as the contract 
size, delivery months, commodity grade, location of delivery, and other details for each 
futures contract are preset in the contract terms. Price and quantity are the only things 
negotiated by the counterparties to a trade. In the United States, agricultural, industrial, and 
financial futures are traded on organized exchanges known as contract markets. 
 
The possibility of delivery keeps futures contracts in line with their underlying cash markets. 
If a contract rises too high in price relative to the cash market, traders might sell futures with 
the intent of making delivery. This forces the futures price down and is the reason futures 
markets reflect the price of their underlying cash market. Some futures contracts are “cash 
settled.” The value of these contracts is derived from an underlying index value. When a 
futures contract is cash settled, traders will often use a calculated “fair value” to determine if 
the futures are high or low compared to the underlying index. If fair value indicates that 
futures are too high, a trader might sell futures, expecting the difference to narrow.  
 
Futures contracts do not have any intrinsic value in and of themselves; their value is derived 
from the underlying commodity, index, or security. Because futures contracts “derive” their 
price from their underlying cash market, they are called derivatives. There are other 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1527 
derivative markets, such as exchange-traded options on futures, options on securities, and 
over-the-counter (OTC) options, which will be discussed later in this section. The contracts 
traded on these markets also derive their values from an underlying commodity, security,  
or index. 
 
The Principle of Offset 
One of the features of commodity futures markets that make them so liquid and cost 
effective is the principle of offset. The obligation of the buyer (to accept future delivery) and 
the obligation of the seller (to make future delivery) is not with each other but with the 
central clearing function of the exchange (exchanges may have a separate clearing 
corporation or clearing may be a part of the exchange itself). Clearing matches futures 
transactions and becomes counterparty to both sides of the trade, eliminating counterparty 
credit risk by guarantying both sides of the transaction. As a result, traders can liquidate their 
positions (obligations) by merely executing an equal and opposite offsetting transaction 
(selling out a long position or buying back a short). Clearing also transfers funds between 
firms when futures trades are marked to market at the end of each day.  
 
Trading on Margin 
Commodity futures are traded on margin. Only a small percentage, usually about 5 percent 
of the contract’s notional value, is required to establish a position (long or short) in a futures 
market (notional value is the contract size in units multiplied by the price per unit). Margins 
are set by the exchange for each commodity and are raised or lowered from time to time to 
reflect changing market volatility and notional contract values. Brokerage firms may require 
greater margin of their customers but may not require less than what the exchange has set. 
Each exchange will have a margin committee made up of exchange members and support 
personnel that monitors and evaluates the markets and makes margin changes  
as appropriate.  
 
There are two types of margin: initial margin, the amount of money per contract that must 
be present in the account when the position is initiated, and maintenance (variation) margin, 
the minimum amount of money per contract that must be maintained in the account while 
the position is open. For example, a December corn contract had a closing price of $2.84 
1/4 per bushel. The notional value of this contract is $14,212 (5,000 bushels x $2.84 1/4). 
The initial margin requirement set by the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT) is $810 per 
contract, which is 5.69 percent of the notional contract value, while maintenance margin is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1528                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
set at $625 per contract, which is 4.39 percent of the notional contract value. Positions can 
be liquidated without customer authorization in accounts that violate margin requirements.  
 
Trading Basics 
A trader who buys futures contracts (assuming this is not an offsetting transaction) is long 
the market and will profit if prices rise (for example, if you bought a December corn 
contract at $2.70 per bushel and the price rose to $2.80 per bushel, you would have an 
unrealized profit of $500 (.10  cents x 5,000 bushels)). Because open commodity positions 
(transactions that are not offset) are marked to market at the end of the trading day, this 
$500 profit will be credited to your trading a ccount and is available as margin for additional 
contract purchases. This transfer of funds occurs through the clearing corporation of  
the exchange.  
 
The transaction counterpart of the long buyer is the short seller. Using the above example, if 
you sold a December corn contract at $2.70 per bushel and the price rose to $2.80 per 
bushel, you would have an unrealized loss of $500 (.10 cents x 5,000 bushels). Again, open 
commodity positions are marked to market at the end of the trading day, meaning that this 
$500 loss will be debited from your trading account. 
 
Options Primer 
Like commodity futures contracts, options contracts are agreements between counterparties. 
The main difference between these markets is that commodity futures impose obligations on 
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physical delivery of the commodity or to 
agree to cash settlement at contract expiration. Options contracts confer rights, not 
obligations, to the option buyer and impose obligations on the option seller. Importantly, if 
an option is not exercised, it just expires (over 90 percent of exchange-traded options expire 
worthless). In contrast, if a commodity contract is held to expiration, the long gets delivery 
and the short must make delivery. Options can be exchange-traded, over-the-counter (OTC), 
between individual business entities, or between individual persons. Businesses and 
individuals commonly use options in real estate, personal property, and interest rate 
transactions.  
 
Standardized exchange-traded options contracts are known as plain vanilla options. That is, 
there are no embedded features that would affect the basic option contract  
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1529 
(off-exchange or OTC options often have embedded features that can make them complex 
or exotic). Standardized equity options are traded at several exchanges in the United States. 
The most successful is the Chicago Board Options Exchange (CBOE).  
 
Exchange-Traded Options 
Like commodities futures, exchange-traded options are contract markets with central 
clearing that eliminates individual counterparty credit risk and allows offsetting transactions. 
Option contracts are standardized, expire at a future date, are marked to market, call for 
physical delivery, and are derivatives. This is where the similarities to commodity futures 
markets end.  
 
The buyer of an option contract purchases the right, not the obligation, to buy or sell 
something at a specified price (exercise or strike price) by the expiration date of the option 
contract. The object of the option contract (what the option is written on) is called the 
underlying. The value of the underlying is the main (but not only) factor from which the 
option contract derives its value.  
 
There are two kinds of options: calls and puts. A call option is the right but not the 
obligation to purchase the underlying security at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s 
expiration date. A put option is the right but not the obligation to sell the underlying security 
at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s expiration date. In options transactions, the seller 
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer. Option 
buyers pay a premium to option writers for the options they buy. Option writers (sellers) 
collect this premium for the options they write and are obligated to deliver the underlying 
security if the option is exercised.  
 
Exchange-traded equity options are standardized, plain vanilla, American style options. 
American Style options can be exercised at any time by the buyer (European style options 
can only be exercised on the expiration day). For example, IBM call options traded at the 
CBOE are for 100 shares of IBM common stock.  The option writer is obligated to deliver 
100 shares of IBM common stock at the strike price if the option buyer chooses to exercise 
the option.  
 
Relationship of the Underlying Security to an Option 
The value of options is primarily derived from the value of the underlying security. For 
example, XYZ common stock closed today at $88.29 per share and the strike prices of the 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1530                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
October 2008 XYZ calls ranged from $65 per share to $135 per share. The more that the 
share price of XYZ is above a particular strike price the greater the value of that option. The 
stock price of $88 per share is about $23 over  the strike price of the XYZ $65 calls. The 
current premium for XYZ $65 calls is $22.90 per share. A trader who had previously bought 
this call option could sell it back into the market for about $2,290 ($22.90 x 100 shares) or 
could exercise the option and buy the stock at $65 with the market at $88.  
 
Options can be in the money, out of the money, or at the money. A call option is in the 
money when the price of the underlying security exceeds its strike price. Likewise, a put 
option is in the money when the price of the underlying security is less than its strike price. 
Options are at the money when the price of the underlying security is about the same as the 
strike price. All other options are out of the money.  
 
Option Values and Premiums 
There are two values that make up option premiums: intrinsic value and time value.  
To have any intrinsic value an option must be in the money. Out of the money options have 
only time value. From the above example, the XYZ $85 call closed today at a premium of 
$5.70 per share. This call option is $3 in the money because the underlying XYZ stock 
closed above the strike price at $88 per share.  The premium has $3 intrinsic value while the 
remaining $2.70 is time value. 
 
While the concept of intrinsic value is rather straightforward the concept of time value is 
complex and beyond the scope of this writing. It is worth noting, however, that the 
mathematical formula for pricing option time value was first introduced by Fischer Black 
and Myron S. Scholes in 1973. The formula takes six factors into account: underlying price, 
strike price, time to expiration, volatility of the underlying, dividends and interest rates. For 
further information on this and other topics on options, visit the Learning Center on the 
CBOE Web page (www.cboe.com). 
 
Over-the-Counter (OTC) Options 
OTC options are agreements made between private parties. Banks, large brokerage firms, 
insurance companies, and many other businesses are active in the OTC options markets. 
Trillions of dollars in notional value are at stake in the OTC market on a daily basis. 
 
OTC options are not centrally cleared or standardized. These options are usually customized 
by the option writer to fit the needs of the option buyer. Because OTC options are not 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1531 
centrally cleared counterparty, credit risk can be a major concern and risk factor. The option 
is worthless if the option writer cannot perform.  
 
OTC options can be plain vanilla, complex, or exotic. The complex and exotic forms can be 
particularly problematic for market participants, accountants, and auditors and are beyond 
the scope of this writing. 
 
 



:


commod futur exchangetrad option and otc option
there have been numer fraud involv commod futur exchangetrad option
and otc option in decemb 1994 orang counti california becam the largest
municip ever to file for bankruptci thi wa larg caus by riski invest
secur fraud financi transact
11526 2011 fraud examin manual
strategi util otc option that result in trade loss of about 10 billion in more
recent new the catastroph failur of enron wa partial caus by a fraudul hedg
transact util an otc option through a compani he control andrew s fastow
sold worthless option to enron make it appear that the valu of enron invest in
avici system inc wa hedg fastow pocket the premium for the bogu option while
enron appear to have establish a hedg posit protect the valu of their
invest other notabl failur relat to exchangetrad deriv includ bare
plc the 223yearold london merchant bank that help financ the louisiana purchas
and the canadian pacif railwai which collaps as a result of hidden deriv loss
deriv trade is riski busi but a lack of adequ intern control led to mani of
the loss mention abov intern control must be airtight in a firm that engag in
hedg or trade activ us exchangetrad or otc deriv insuffici market
and product knowledg wa also a major factor in these financi debacl
commod futur primer
as mention previous commod futur contract ar agreement between buyer and
seller to make or take deliveri of a commod at a futur date at an agre upon price
commod futur contract ar standard contract specif such as the contract
size deliveri month commod grade locat of deliveri and other detail for each
futur contract ar preset in the contract term price and quantiti ar the onli thing
negoti by the counterparti to a trade in the unit state agricultur industri and
financi futur ar trade on organ exchang known as contract market
the possibl of deliveri keep futur contract in line with their underli cash market
if a contract rise too high in price rel to the cash market trader might sell futur with
the intent of make deliveri thi forc the futur price down and is the reason futur
market reflect the price of their underli cash market some futur contract ar cash
settl the valu of these contract is deriv from an underli index valu when a
futur contract is cash settl trader will often us a calcul fair valu to determin if
the futur ar high or low compar to the underli index if fair valu indic that
futur ar too high a trader might sell futur expect the differ to narrow
futur contract do not have ani intrins valu in and of themselv their valu is deriv
from the underli commod index or secur becaus futur contract deriv their
price from their underli cash market thei ar call deriv there ar other
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11527
deriv market such as exchangetrad option on futur option on secur and
overthecount otc option which will be discuss later in thi section the contract
trade on these market also deriv their valu from an underli commod secur
or index
the principl of offset
on of the featur of commod futur market that make them so liquid and cost
effect is the principl of offset the oblig of the buyer to accept futur deliveri and
the oblig of the seller to make futur deliveri is not with each other but with the
central clear function of the exchang exchang mai have a separ clear
corpor or clear mai be a part of the exchang itself clear match futur
transact and becom counterparti to both side of the trade elimin counterparti
credit risk by guaranti both side of the transact as a result trader can liquid their
posit oblig by mere execut an equal and opposit offset transact
sell out a long posit or bui back a short clear also transfer fund between
firm when futur trade ar mark to market at the end of each dai
trade on margin
commod futur ar trade on margin onli a small percentag usual about 5 percent
of the contract notion valu is requir to establish a posit long or short in a futur
market notion valu is the contract size in unit multipli by the price per unit margin
ar set by the exchang for each commod and ar rais or lower from time to time to
reflect chang market volatil and notion contract valu brokerag firm mai requir
greater margin of their custom but mai not requir less than what the exchang ha set
each exchang will have a margin committe made up of exchang member and support
personnel that monitor and evalu the market and make margin chang
as appropri
there ar two type of margin initi margin the amount of monei per contract that must
be present in the account when the posit is initi and mainten variat margin
the minimum amount of monei per contract that must be maintain in the account while
the posit is open for exampl a decemb corn contract had a close price of 284
14 per bushel the notion valu of thi contract is 14212 5000 bushel x 284 14
the initi margin requir set by the chicago board of trade cbot is 810 per
contract which is 569 percent of the notion contract valu while mainten margin is
secur fraud financi transact
11528 2011 fraud examin manual
set at 625 per contract which is 439 percent of the notion contract valu posit can
be liquid without custom author in account that violat margin requir
trade basic
a trader who bui futur contract assum thi is not an offset transact is long
the market and will profit if price rise for exampl if you bought a decemb corn
contract at 270 per bushel and the price rose to 280 per bushel you would have an
unreal profit of 500 10 cent x 5000 bushel becaus open commod posit
transact that ar not offset ar mark to market at the end of the trade dai thi
500 profit will be credit to your trade a ccount and is avail as margin for addit
contract purchas thi transfer of fund occur through the clear corpor of
the exchang
the transact counterpart of the long buyer is the short seller us the abov exampl if
you sold a decemb corn contract at 270 per bushel and the price rose to 280 per
bushel you would have an unreal loss of 500 10 cent x 5000 bushel again open
commod posit ar mark to market at the end of the trade dai mean that thi
500 loss will be debit from your trade account
option primer
like commod futur contract option contract ar agreement between counterparti
the main differ between these market is that commod futur impos oblig on
both the buyer and the seller to either make or take physic deliveri of the commod or to
agre to cash settlement at contract expir option contract confer right not
oblig to the option buyer and impos oblig on the option seller importantli if
an option is not exercis it just expir over 90 percent of exchangetrad option expir
worthless in contrast if a commod contract is held to expir the long get deliveri
and the short must make deliveri option can be exchangetrad overthecount otc
between individu busi entiti or between individu person busi and
individu commonli us option in real estat person properti and interest rate
transact
standard exchangetrad option contract ar known as plain vanilla option that is
there ar no embed featur that would affect the basic option contract
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11529
offexchang or otc option often have embed featur that can make them complex
or exot standard equiti option ar trade at sever exchang in the unit state
the most success is the chicago board option exchang cboe
exchangetrad option
like commod futur exchangetrad option ar contract market with central
clear that elimin individu counterparti credit risk and allow offset transact
option contract ar standard expir at a futur date ar mark to market call for
physic deliveri and ar deriv thi is where the similar to commod futur
market end
the buyer of an option contract purchas the right not the oblig to bui or sell
someth at a specifi price exercis or strike price by the expir date of the option
contract the object of the option contract what the option is written on is call the
underli the valu of the underli is the main but not onli factor from which the
option contract deriv it valu
there ar two kind of option call and put a call option is the right but not the
oblig to purchas the underli secur at the strike exercis price by the option
expir date a put option is the right but not the oblig to sell the underli secur
at the strike exercis price by the option expir date in option transact the seller
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer option
buyer pai a premium to option writer for the option thei bui option writer seller
collect thi premium for the option thei write and ar oblig to deliv the underli
secur if the option is exercis
exchangetrad equiti option ar standard plain vanilla american style option
american style option can be exercis at ani time by the buyer european style option
can onli be exercis on the expir dai for exampl ibm call option trade at the
cboe ar for 100 share of ibm common stock the option writer is oblig to deliv
100 share of ibm common stock at the strike price if the option buyer choos to exercis
the option
relationship of the underli secur to an option
the valu of option is primarili deriv from the valu of the underli secur for
exampl xyz common stock close todai at 8829 per share and the strike price of the
secur fraud financi transact
11530 2011 fraud examin manual
octob 2008 xyz call rang from 65 per share to 135 per share the more that the
share price of xyz is abov a particular strike price the greater the valu of that option the
stock price of 88 per share is about 23 over the strike price of the xyz 65 call the
current premium for xyz 65 call is 2290 per share a trader who had previous bought
thi call option could sell it back into the market for about 2290 2290 x 100 share or
could exercis the option and bui the stock at 65 with the market at 88
option can be in the monei out of the monei or at the monei a call option is in the
monei when the price of the underli secur exce it strike price likewis a put
option is in the monei when the price of the underli secur is less than it strike price
option ar at the monei when the price of the underli secur is about the same as the
strike price all other option ar out of the monei
option valu and premium
there ar two valu that make up option premium intrins valu and time valu
to have ani intrins valu an option must be in the monei out of the monei option have
onli time valu from the abov exampl the xyz 85 call close todai at a premium of
570 per share thi call option is 3 in the monei becaus the underli xyz stock
close abov the strike price at 88 per share the premium ha 3 intrins valu while the
remain 270 is time valu
while the concept of intrins valu is rather straightforward the concept of time valu is
complex and beyond the scope of thi write it is worth note howev that the
mathemat formula for price option time valu wa first introduc by fischer black
and myron s schole in 1973 the formula take six factor into account underli price
strike price time to expir volatil of the underli dividend and interest rate for
further inform on thi and other topic on option visit the learn center on the
cboe web page wwwcboecom
overthecount otc option
otc option ar agreement made between privat parti bank larg brokerag firm
insur compani and mani other busi ar activ in the otc option market
trillion of dollar in notion valu ar at stake in the otc market on a daili basi
otc option ar not central clear or standard these option ar usual custom
by the option writer to fit the need of the option buyer becaus otc option ar not
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11531
central clear counterparti credit risk can be a major concern and risk factor the option
is worthless if the option writer cannot perform
otc option can be plain vanilla complex or exot the complex and exot form can be
particularli problemat for market particip account and auditor and ar beyond
the scope of thi write
