2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Securities Fraud Schemes 
 
Securities Fraud by Registered Persons and Entities 
Frequent allegations of misconduct by registered individuals or firms fall into one or more of 
the following areas: 
 
Churning  
Churning is the excessive trading of a customer account for the purpose of generating 
commissions. For securities and options there is a commission charged when the trade is 
entered into and when the trade is liquidated. Commodity futures have a round-turn 
commission scheme meaning that the commission covers both the purchase and sale. 
Commissions on commodity futures are not charged until the trade is closed out.  
 
DEFINITION OF EXCESSIVE TRADING ACTIVITY 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) states that to establish churning, a 
complainant must prove that (1) the broker controlled the trading in an account; (2) the 
volume of trading was excessive in light of the complainant’s trading objectives; and (3) the 
broker acted with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the customer’s interests. 
Hinch v. Commonwealth Financial Group, Inc.,  [1996-1998 Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep. 
27,056 at 45,020 (CFTC May 13, 1997); Johnson v. Don Charles & Company, [1990-1992 
Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep.  (CCH) 24,986 (CFTC Jan. 16, 1991).  
 
Two questions arise in churning cases: who had trading authorization over the account and 
when did the account activity and commissions become excessive. If customers are making 
their own trades, they cannot possibly accuse the broker of churning their accounts. But 
brokers or some other people have trading authority (discretion) over the accounts and 
participate in the commissions, a conflict of interest exists and there may be predication for a 
charge of churning.  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1532                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Many of the regulatory definitions of churning are inherently vague and offer little practical 
guidance. Customer trading objectives are simple: make profits and avoid losses. The best 
test to detect churning is to calculate the amount of monthly gross commissions generated 
from the account as a percentage of the average account balance. For example, an active 
trading account with an average daily balance of $10,000 might reasonably generate (on the 
high side) about $500 dollars (5 percent) in gross commissions in an average month. Gross 
commissions would probably increase in months when the markets are experiencing  
greater price volatility and trading has been successful. The CFE should look for the 
following indicators: 
• Did the broker have trading authority (discretion) over the account? 
• Have gross commissions increased during periods of decreasing market volatility?  
• Are the gross commissions for the month in question substantially higher than the 
average monthly gross commissions for this account? 
• Are gross commissions greater than 5 percent of the average account balance? 
• Did commissions consume realized profits and/or aggravate losses?  
• Were numerous trades entered into and exited over short time periods for small gains or 
losses? 
• Was the trading unit (number of contracts per trade) too large for this account 
(overtrading)? 
• Were the trades made for this account recommended by the research department of the 
brokerage and disseminated to other customers?  
• Did unauthorized trading take place?    
 
If the broker had discretionary authority to trade the account and any of the above factors 
are true, further investigation for churning is warranted. Finally, brokerage supervisors are 
required to perform due diligence to ensure that churning and other trading abuses do  
not occur.  
 
Unsuitable Recommendations 
Securities representatives are required to “know their customer.” They must take into 
account the financial profile and level of sophistication of the individual investor. Placing 
clients into unsuitable securities, for example recommending high-risk options to a senior 
citizen with limited assets, is prohibited. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1533 
 EXAMPLE 
 
UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
Litigation Release No. 20438 / January 24, 2008 
People of the State of California v. Daniel William Heath, Denis Timothy O’Brien, John 
William Heath, and Larre Jaye Schlarmann, Superior Court of California, County 
of Riverside, Case No. RIF117775 
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced that on January 10 and 11, 2008 
a jury in Riverside County, California, convicted three men on felony charges involving a 
fraudulent scheme that was the subject of a prior enforcement action brought by the 
Commission, which raised more than $187 mill ion from over 1,800 victims, mostly senior 
citizens and the elderly. Convicted for their role in the scheme were Daniel William Heath, 
51, formerly of Chino Hills, California, Denis Timothy O’Brien, 53, formerly of Yorba 
Linda, California, and Heath’s father, John William Heath, 81, formerly of Covina, 
California. Daniel Heath was found guilty on 400 felony counts, O’Brien on 70 felony 
counts, and John Heath on 52 felony counts. In 2004, the Riverside County District 
Attorney’s Office arrested and charged them with committing securities fraud, elder abuse, 
grand theft, money laundering, tax fraud, and conspiracy, all under California law. Larre 
Jaye Schlarmann, 52, formerly of Carlsbad, California, was also arrested, pleaded guilty to 
securities fraud, elder abuse, money laundering, and tax fraud, and was sentenced to serve 
15 years in state prison. Daniel Heath faces a maximum of 117 years in state prison, 
O’Brien 37 years, and John Heath 28 years.  
 
In April 2004, the Commission filed a compla int against Daniel Heath and his entities, 
and O’Brien, alleging they fraudulently in duced elderly investors through “free lunch” 
seminars to invest in “secured” notes that paid a “guaranteed” return. The court appointed 
a permanent receiver over the Heath entities. Final judgments of permanent injunction and 
other relief were entered against Heath and O’Brien enjoining them from violating the anti-fraud, 
securities registration, and broker-dealer registrations provisions of the federal 
securities laws for their role in the scheme.  The judgments ordered Heath and O’Brien to 
disgorge to the receiver their ill-gotten gains plus prejudgment interest. The Commission then 
instituted administrative proceedings against Heath and O’Brien barring them from 
association with a broker or dealer. Heath and O’Brien consented to the entry of the final 
judgments and administrative orders with out admitting or denying the Commission’s 
allegations and findings. In September 2007, the Commission instituted administrative 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1534                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceedings against Martin S. Duffield, 52, of West Covina, California, and Raul A. 
Jordan, 52, of Pasadena, California, for viol ating the anti-fraud, securities registration, 
and broker-dealer registrations provisions for their role in the scheme. Duffield was barred 
association with any broker or dealer and Jordan was barred from association with any 
broker or dealer, with the right to reapply for association after five (5) years to the 
appropriate self-regulatory organization, or if there is none, to the Commission. Duffield 
and Jordan were ordered to disgorge ill-gotten gains to the receiver plus prejudgment interest. 
Duffield and Jordan consented to  the entry of the orders with out admitting or denying the 
Commission's findings. 
 
Administration of the court-order receivership over the Heath entities will continue. 
 
Failure to Supervise  
Broker-dealer firms are responsible for oversight of their representatives to ensure adherence 
to Rules of Fair Practice and state and federal laws. 
 
Failure to Report Client Complaints 
Investment and advisory firms are required to report client complaints to the SEC, yet may 
neglect to do so, fearing an investigation. 
 
Parking
Parking is the practice of selling a security to one party with the understanding that the seller 
will repurchase the security later at an agreed-upon price. This scheme allows circumvention 
of ownership reporting requirements and net capital rules. 
 
Front Running — Dual Trading 
Front running an order is a type of insider trading. Although it usually will not cause a direct 
loss to the customer, it could, and is a violation of exchange rules. Front running involves 
the use for profit of the privileged knowledge of a customer’s order to buy or sell a large 
amount of a commodity, options, or security that, because of its size, is likely to move the 
market. Back office personnel could have knowledge of such an order and buy or sell for 
their own account ahead of the customer. Because order fillers on the exchange floor are 
allowed to trade for their own account and fill orders for customers (dual trading) they also 
have an opportunity.  
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1535 
Consider the following scenario: an order is received from a hedger to sell 500 December 
cattle futures contracts at the market. If the order filler knows that current market conditions 
are such that this order will move the market significantly lower, it would be very tempting 
to sell a few contracts for himself and profit from the market decline when he executes the 
customer order. Order fillers are required to ope rate in the best interest of the customer and 
“work” the order to get the best price. Howev er, once the trader has established his short 
position, it is really in his own interest to drive the market as far down as possible when 
executing the 500 contract sell order. In this situation, the order filler may not give his best 
efforts and could hurt the customer. 
 
The vast majority of exchange members would never put themselves ahead of a customer, 
but it has happened in the past. In today’s markets with sophisticated surveillance, exchange 
investigative personnel actively guard against this type of activity. The time stamps on the 
customer order, time and sales reports from the exchange, and the account activity of the 
trader would have to be obtained and examined to substantiate any front running allegation. 
This information is easily obtainable. Brokerage compliance personnel should easily detect 
front running by back office personnel by periodically checking their account activity or not 
allowing them to open trading accounts at all. 
 
Bucket Shops 
Bucket shops are fraudulent enterprises that masquerade as licensed brokerage operations. A 
true retail futures brokerage would be required to be registered and meet certain financial 
thresholds. Salespeople would be required to pass the Series Three National Commodity 
Futures Examination and all other personnel would need to be registered as Associated 
Persons. There may also be other registration or licensing requirements depending on the 
type of business that the brokerage engages in. (See 
www.nfa.futures.org/registration/who_has_to_r egister.asp). Bucket shops bypass all these 
requirements and operate like legitimate businesses. 
 
The solution to finding whether or not an individual or firm is legitimate is easy. Go to: 
www.nfa.futures.org/basicnet for commodity futures brokers and firms 
www.finra.org/Investors/ToolsCalculators/BrokerCheck/index.htm for stock, options and 
futures brokers and firms 
www.sec.gov/investor/brokers.htm for securities brokers and firms 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1536                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
You will be able to search files for any firm or individual authorized to do securities, options 
or futures business, their license status and any complaints brought against them. If a firm or 
professional does not appear on one of these pages they are not legitimate.  
 
Excessive Markups 
Excessive markups involve selling at a marked-up price or buying at a marked-down price 
not reasonably related to the prevailing market price. 
 
Misuse or Misappropriation of Customer’s Securities 
This scheme may involve outright theft or using the securities in improper ways, for 
example, as collateral for loans or to conduct other securities transactions (e.g., margin 
trading). 
 
Unauthorized Trading 
Unless otherwise agreed to in writing, only the customer named on the trading account can 
authorize trades. Any losses accruing to the customer account because of an unauthorized 
trade, whether made by mistake or intentionally, are the responsibility of the brokerage firm 
and must be reimbursed to the customer. Gains from unauthorized trades also belong to the 
customer. This prevents brokers from executing unauthorized trades, claiming error, and 
taking any profits that may occur. The only entries to the brokerage company error account 
should be losses; profits in an error account should be investigated. Customers must report 
unauthorized trades to the management of the brokerage firm as soon as detected. Silence 
would imply ratification of the transaction. 
 
Systematically Trading Accounts Against Each Other 
Systematically trading accounts against each other usually occurs between investment pools. 
The scheme involves someone with trading authority simultaneously establishing opposite 
market positions in two separate investment pools that he controls. A person who has 
trading authority and other controls over the pool may receive a monthly management fee of 
about 1.5 percent of the pool balance, a percentage of any of the pool’s gains, perhaps 10 
percent per quarter, and a portion or all of the commissions on trades. The conflicts of 
interest in such a business arrangement are obvious. It is in the interest of the pool operator 
to maintain account balances a high as possible, trade the accounts for commissions and to 
have at least some profits. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1537 
Assume that a pool operator established two limited partnerships for trading commodities, 
that he was general partner of both partnerships, and that he was to be compensated as 
previously described. The general partner, who has trading authority, then buys 100 
contracts of December Corn for Pool A, establishing a long market position, and at the 
same time sells 100 contracts of December Corn for Pool B, establishing a short market 
position. (If these transactions occurred in the same account they would offset each other.) 
 
Over time one of the pools will suffer a loss while the other will enjoy a gain. For the general 
partner things haven’t changed much. The amount of equity in the two pools combined will 
be about the same with the loss in one pool being offset by the gain in the other pool. This 
preserves the basis for the general partner’s management fee while the profitable pool will 
owe him a percentage of the gain.  
 
In the long run, one of the investment pools will dissolve because of trading losses while the 
other will enjoy handsome profits. This then takes on some of the characteristics of a Ponzi 
scheme when the pool operator creates a new limited partnership, advertises his success 
from the results of the profitable pool, and participants in the successful pool tell their 
friends. The trick here is to ensure that participants in the original two pools don’t know 
each other.  
 
Supervisors and compliance managers of brokerages should be on the lookout for this type 
of activity. They can do little, however, if the general partner maintains the trading accounts 
at two separate brokerages. The CFE will need to acquire the trading records of all pools run 
by a pool operator in order to establish if such a trading scheme has occurred. The 
comparison of market positions over time is simple and the information is easily obtainable 
from the brokerages once it is discovered who they are.  
 
The general partner would have committed a material breach of contract in that he failed in 
his fiduciary duties to the limited partners. There are also numerous violations of federal 
regulatory and SRO rules that prohibit this type of trading scheme. 
 
Block Order Schemes 
When several different accounts are combined on the same order it is called a block order. 
For example, a broker may wish to execute the same buy order for 10 of his customers. To 
accomplish this he may write an order ticket such as: “For account 12345 and others, buy 
100 contracts of December cattle at the market.” The justification for this type of order is 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1538                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that time is of the essence. If the market is volatile, customers will need their order executed 
as quickly as possible. Writing 10 separate order tickets for each account and calling the 
orders to the trading floor separately would take too much time. By combining all the orders 
on one ticket and providing one account number, time is saved and the other account 
numbers and quantities can be added to the order ticket when the executed order (fill) is 
reported back to the broker. 
 
The potential for abuse is obvious. Prices move rapidly in volatile markets and the accounts 
the order has been executed for have not all been made known. The time from when the 
block order is placed and when the fill is reported back to the broker can take many minutes. 
On some busy days it can take an hour or more. During this time the market is moving and 
the executed order will either be in a loss or gain position by the time it is reported back. 
This is where fraud can occur. 
 
For example, assume that 100 contracts of December cattle were bought at 80.00 (cents per 
pound) and that when the fill is reported thirty minutes later the market is at 81.00. This 
favorable change in market price (100 points) is equivalent to $400 profit per contract or 
$40,000 profit for the entire order. The broker then gives out the “other” account numbers 
to the floor clerk to complete the order with 55 contracts going to a favored account and 5 
contracts going to the other nine accounts. The broker then immediately sells 55 December 
cattle contracts for the favored account realizing a $22,000 profit. Of course, if the market 
had moved lower by the time the fill was reported the favored account would not have been 
added to the order or the loss taken would have been minimal.  
 
Proving such a scheme is easy. The CFE will need to obtain 1) the monthly brokerage recap 
of the salesman, 2) copies of all order tickets written by the salesman for the time period in 
question (brokerages must keep the hard copies for several years), 3) a copy of the telephone 
audio recording of the placement of the order and reported fill from the trading floor (all 
calls to the trading floor are recorded and archived), and 4) copies of the “daily equity 
statements” provided to the salesman by the brokerage firm detailing account numbers, 
account names, open positions and the cash value of all accounts represented by the 
salesman. A block order scheme will easily be detected by analyzing this information. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1539 
Market Manipulation 
Market manipulation consists of a series of transactions designed to artificially raise or lower 
price or to give the appearance of trading activity for the purpose of inducing others to buy 
or sell. This is especially common with penny stocks or micro-cap stocks. Penny stocks are 
low-priced (usually less than $5), speculative securities that are registered but do not meet the 
listing requirements of an exchange. Micro-cap just means the stocks of companies with very 
small market capitalization. Once the price has been artificially inflated the stock is sold to 
unsuspecting victims. 
 
Insider Trading 
Under the legal theory of misappropriation, the use of non-public information to profit from 
purchase or sale of securities may violate the insiders’ fiduciary duty to their company or 
shareholders. Although not all courts accept this argument, criminal charges are not unusual 
in cases of this nature. Ivan Boesky and Michael Milken, indicted for insider trading in the 
late 1980s, both served time in prison.  
  
EXAMPLE 
A California psychotherapist, pleaded guilty to securities fraud after federal officials accused 
him of making a nice profit after trading on some inside information he learned during a 
counseling session with a client. 
 
According to federal officials, the psychotherapist bought common stock in Lockheed Corp. 
hours after his client — a company executive undergoing marriage counseling — mentioned 
the secret and ultimately successful merger talks between Lockheed and Martin Marietta 
Corp. 
 
Under a legal doctrine known as the “misappropriation theory,” he was deemed to have 
violated securities laws because he stole information from a person who had assumed his 
trust and discretion, and then used the in formation to trade on the stock market. 
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
In 2000, the SEC adopted rules concerning public disclosure of information. Regulation FD 
(Fair Disclosure) was promulgated to eliminate “selective” disclosure by companies to 
certain groups (such as brokers and analysts) before such information was made available to 
the public. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1540                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Regulation states that if a company, or someone on its behalf, discloses “material non-
 public” information to a particular group (primarily market securities professionals), it must 
make a public disclosure of the information. The timing of the disclosure depends on 
whether the disclosure was intentional or inadvertent. If the disclosure was intentional, then 
company must make the disclosure simultaneously. If the disclosure was inadvertent, then 
the company must make the disclosure “promptly.” 
 
The SEC provides three options for proper dissemination: 
1. File the information with the SEC on a Form 8-K.  
2. Disseminate the information through a press release.  
3. Disseminate the information through any other method or combination of methods that 
are reasonably designed to provide broad public distribution of the information, such as 
an announcement at a press conference open to the public.  
 
Regulation FD only applies to material communications between company executives or 
authorized spokespersons to analysts, institutional investors, and holders of the company’s 
stock. Regulation FD also applies only to senior executives and excludes communications 
with the media, with ratings agencies, and with customers conducted in the normal course of 
business. Information is considered “material” if there is a substantial likelihood that a 
reasonable shareholder would consider it important in making an investment decision, or if 
it would have significantly altered the total mix of information available. 
 
INSIDER TRADING RULES 
Rule 10b-5, promulgated under section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, 
prohibits any false statements or other fraudulent activity in connection with the purchase or 
sale of any security, including insider trading. It provides the main basis for the SEC to 
investigate possible security fraud claims. Rule 10b-5 contains civil and administrative 
remedies (such as the power to initiate actions to enjoin further violations) enforced by the 
SEC as well as criminal sanctions enforced by the Department of Justice. Specifically, rule 
10b-5 makes it unlawful for anybody to directly or indirectly conduct operations of business 
that would deceive another person concerning transactions involving securities. Although 
the text of the Securities Exchange Act does not provide for a private cause of action for 
rule 10b-5 violations, the Supreme Court found an implied right, which typically requires the 
plaintiff to prove (1) a material misstatement or omission; (2) intentional fraud or deceit by 
the party charged with the violation; (3) relia nce on the misrepresentation or omission in the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1541 
purchase or sale of a security; and (4) econom ic loss caused by the purchase or sale of  
the security.  
 
However, 10b-5 claims do have certain limitations. For example, there is no private cause of 
action against those who merely aided and abetted the primary violators, and in Stoneridge 
Investment Partners, LLC v. Scientific-Atlanta, Inc., the Court held that there is no private cause 
of action against third parties who neither make alleged misstatements nor engage in 
deceptive conduct on which investors relied. 
 
In Stoneridge, a group of investors in Charter Communications, Inc. accused two Charter 
suppliers of entering in a business scheme with Charter, which allowed Charter to issue 
fraudulent financial statements. In the alleged scheme, Charter gave its equipment vendor 
above-normal payments for T.V. set-top boxes and the supplier then gave back the extra 
payments as advertising fees. Charter then fraudulently accounted the returned payments as 
revenue. The Court ruled that the Rule 10b-5 does not extend to third parties (aiders or 
abettors) who do not make alleged misstatements and do not engage in deceptive conduct 
on which investors relied. There was no basis for finding that the group of investors did not 
rely on anything the suppliers said or did. The investors could not have relied upon the 
suppliers’ deceptive acts for two reasons: (1) Charter’s suppliers did not take part in 
preparing or distributing the fraudulent statements; and (2) the suppliers did not make any 
misstatements relied upon by the public or violate any duty to disclose. As a result, the Court 
held that the group of investors could not show reliance on any of the suppliers’ actions.  
 
The interesting thing about the Stoneridge decision is that it cannot be broadly read to say that 
secondary actors (lawyers, accountants, and bankers) are free from liability under Rule 10b-5. 
The Court held that deceptive conduct can provide the basis for securities fraud liability if 
plaintiffs can establish that they relied on that conduct. Unlike the relationship between the 
investors and suppliers in Stoneridge, lawyers and accountants often serve as advisers, which 
could be considered as taking part in activities that investors could rely upon.  
 
The SEC also recently issued Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b5-2 to supplement section 10(b) of 
the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5. Rule 10b5-1 and Rule 10b5-2 deal with 
unsettled issues that have arisen under Rule 10b-5. 
 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1542                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rule 10b5-1 addresses the issue of when insider trading liability arises in connection with a 
trader’s “use” or “knowing possession” of mater ial non-public information. Specifically, rule 
10b5-1 prohibits the purchase or sale of a security “on the basis of” material, non-public 
information. However, the Rule also sets forth an affirmative defense for traders if they can 
show that such trades were made pursuant to a preexisting, written 10b5-1 trading plan.  
 
Recently, the SEC indicated that it intends to scrutinize plans contemplated by Rule 10b5-1 
more critically. This increased scrutiny likely resulted from the publication of a 2006 study by 
Alan Jagolizer, an assistant professor at the Stanford University Graduate School of 
Business, which suggested that on average, sales under Rule 10b5-1 plans were generating 
“abnormal trade returns” and that such plans seemed to outperform the market.  
 
Rule 10b5-2 addresses the issue of when a breach of a family or other non-business 
relationship may give rise to liability under the misappropriation theory of insider trading. 
Under the misappropriation theory, as defined by the Supreme Court case in United States v. 
O’Hagan, 521 U.S. 642 (1997), a person is liable for securities fraud if he: 
• Misappropriates confidential information, 
• For the purpose of securities trading, 
• In breach of a duty owed to the sources, and 
• Trades based on the misappropriated information. 
 
Rule 10b5-2 seeks to provide further guidance regarding what types of relationships create a 
“duty” not to use the information received. For example, if a person agrees to keep the 
information in confidence, a duty of trust or confidence will exist. Similarly, if two persons 
have a “history, pattern, or practice of sharing confidences,” such that the recipient 
reasonably should know that the other expects that the inside information will remain 
confidential, a duty of trust or confidence will exist. 
 
Subsection (b)(3) also creates a presumption that any person who receives inside information 
from his spouse, parent, child, or sibling will owe that other person a duty of trust or 
confidence. 
 
Disclosures (Misrepresentations and Omissions) 
Securities laws require that the investor receive full and fair disclosure of all material 
information. Giving the investor or prospective investor false or misleading information is 
clearly a misrepresentation. An omission occurs when the issuer, in connection with the 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1543 
offer or sale of securities, omits a material fact necessary in order to make the statements 
made not misleading. Making misrepresentations to the investor or failing to inform the 
investor of certain facts (omissions) is a violation of both state and federal law only if the 
misrepresentation or omission is material.  
 
It is important to show the materiality of misrepresentations or omissions. Even if 
representations made, for example in a prospectus, are clearly false, it is still necessary to 
show materiality. In a 1988 decision, the Supreme Court stated that a fact is material “if its 
disclosure would change the total mix of facts available and there is a substantial likelihood 
that a reasonable shareholder would consider the facts important to her investment 
decision.”  See, Basic Inc. v Levinson, 485 U.S. 224 (1988). 
 
As a general rule, the examiner or investigator needs to determine the answer to the 
following question: Would a reasonable investor wish to know this information in order to 
make an informed decision? If the answer is “yes,” then this information, or the lack thereof, 
has a high likelihood of being deemed material. (If an actual investor acted based on the 
misrepresentation, that clearly strengthens the case, but it is not essential that the false or 
misleading statement influenced an investor, merely that a reasonable investor could have 
been so influenced.) 
 
The issuer of a biotechnology stock falsely claiming that the Food and Drug Administration 
has approved their new cancer drug would be an example of a misrepresentation that is 
clearly material to any prospective investor. Similarly, if the Chairman of the company had 
recently been released from prison after serving time for securities fraud, this fact should 
feature prominently in any offering document. Failure to disclose this fact would obviously 
constitute the omission of a material fact.    
 
The SEC has adopted a so-called “safe harbor” provision whereby certain forward-looking 
statements and projections will not be held to be fraudulent. Issuers will not be held liable if 
these type of statements were believed true at the time and were accompanied by appropriate 
cautionary language. 
   
Note also that federal and state laws usually prohibit the promoter from stating that the 
offering has government approval of some kind. For example, even if the offering is 
registered, the promoter cannot state that it is “SEC approved.” 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1544                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Securities Fraud by Unregistered Persons 
In conducting investigations or examinations relating to alleged violations of the securities 
laws, the fraud examiner should always begin by seeking the answer to these crucial 
questions:  
• Is the security registered? If not, does it meet an exemption? 
• Is the person offering or selling the security registered? If not, is the transaction exempt? 
• Are there indicators of fraud present? 
 
Exemptions 
Examples of exemptions under the 1933 Act include securities issued by the U.S. 
Government and those issued by state or local governments. Registration is also not required 
for limited offerings of securities issued pursuant to Regulation D of the Act. 
 
Issuance of securities undertaken pursuant to Rules 501 through 508 of “Reg D” is fairly 
complex, but for these purposes the essential elements are as follows:   
• Rule 501 defines “accredited investors” to include banks, insurance companies, certain 
charities, and individuals with a net worth exceeding $1 million or annual income of 
more than $200,000 ($300,000 including spouse).  
• Rule 504 allows an issuer to sell up to $1 million in securities in a 12-month period to 
any number of purchasers. Rule 504 also allows general solicitation and advertising. 
• Rule 505 increases the limit to $5 million, reduces the maximum number of non-
 accredited investors to 35, and does not allow general solicitation or advertising. 
• Rule 506 allows the issuance of any amount of securities to any number of accredited 
and up to 35 non-accredited but sophisticated investors. Again no general solicitation or 
advertising is allowed.  
 
The most relied upon exemption from registration where we are likely to see fraud is the so-called
“private placement” exemption. In most states, this exemption is available where the 
security is sold to a small number of people and there is no general solicitation. In Florida, 
for example, there must be no more than 35 non-accredited investors in a 12-month period, 
they must receive full and fair disclosure of material information, and there is a prohibition 
on general solicitation or advertising. It is common to find that one or more of the 
conditions necessary for the claimed exemption are not present and/or that the offering  
is fraudulent. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1545 
Backdating Stock Options 
As a supplement to salary, companies frequently offer employees stock options, which grant 
the recipient the privilege to purchase a share of the company’s stock at a future date for a 
specific price, called the strike price. A strike price is the value of a share at a particular date. 
Generally, the strike price is set at the price of the underlying stock on the day the option is 
granted; therefore the option becomes valuable only with future increases in the stock price.  
 
In this way, companies grant stock options as an incentive for employees to boost company 
performance and thus raise the stock price. However, the practice of backdating stock 
options gives the employee a chance to profit by purchasing stock at past low prices, 
providing an immediate payoff. Backdating stock options occurs when a company alters the 
date of the grant to a time when the stock was trading at a lower price in the interest of 
making the option instantly valuable and further increasing the employee’s gain if the stock 
price continues to rise.  
 
For example, on June 1, 2008, Company XYZ grants its CEO a stock option that provides 
the executive the right to purchase 100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 2009 for the 
strike price. Per its usual policy, the strike price is set at the price of the company stock on 
the date of the option grant. On June 1, 2008  (the grant date), XYZ stock was trading at $40 
per share. Therefore, if the stock price increases to $45 per share by January 1, 2009, the 
CEO could exercise the option and purchase the shares for $40 per share, then sell them 
immediately on the market for $45 per share, resulting in a gain of $5 per share. However, 
the company has recently experienced a dramatic increase in its share price. On May 24, 
2008, the stock was trading for $15 per share.  To provide the CEO with an opportunity to 
exploit the increase in share price, even though it has already occurred, the company chooses 
to backdate the stock options to make it appear as if they were granted on May 24, 2008. 
Because the strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date, the strike 
price is effectively changed to $15 per share. As a result, the CEO now has the option to buy 
100 shares of XYZ stock on January 1, 2009 for $15 per share. Thus, the CEO has 
immediately gained $25 per share (the difference between the stock price on the actual grant 
date of June 1 and the stated grant date of May 24) based solely on the manipulation of the 
grant date used.  
 
Backdating stock options came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) when academic research revealed a pattern of stock prices descending 
just prior to many reported dates of option grants, then ascending immediately afterwards. 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1546                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Backdating is not necessarily illegal, but can be if not handled appropriately. In order to be 
legal, the practice must be explicitly reported to shareholders and the government. Failure to 
do so may constitute securities fraud.  
 
In August of 2002, certain provisions laid out under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act took effect, 
requiring companies to report stock options grants within two days. These rules greatly 
reduced the time companies had to choose a favorable grant date; companies were 
previously allowed weeks or months before they were required to report stock options 
grants. Consequently, the apparent pattern of backdating nearly disappeared around this 
time. However, reports of actual practices in stock options and the recorded data remain 
inconsistent in many cases because not all companies adhere to Sarbanes-Oxley.  
 
Additionally, the revelation of the prevalence of backdating has caused concern that 
companies may not have recorded and disclosed the option grants on the financial 
statements in an accurate manner. In response to the issue, the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (PCAOB) issued a practice alert to prepare auditors for the possibility of 
financial misstatements due to backdating stock options. To keep a tight rope on the 
possibility of this type of illegal activity, auditors should assess the information obtained 
from the audit to determine the need for further procedures. 
 
 



:


secur fraud scheme
secur fraud by regist person and entiti
frequent alleg of misconduct by regist individu or firm fall into on or more of
the follow area
churn
churn is the excess trade of a custom account for the purpos of gener
commiss for secur and option there is a commiss charg when the trade is
enter into and when the trade is liquid commod futur have a roundturn
commiss scheme mean that the commiss cover both the purchas and sale
commiss on commod futur ar not charg until the trade is close out
definit of excess trade activ
the commod futur trade commiss cftc state that to establish churn a
complain must prove that 1 the broker control the trade in an account 2 the
volum of trade wa excess in light of the complain trade object and 3 the
broker act with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the custom interest
hinch v commonwealth financi group inc 19961998 transfer binder comm fut l rep
27056 at 45020 cftc mai 13 1997 johnson v don charl compani 19901992
transfer binder comm fut l rep cch 24986 cftc jan 16 1991
two question aris in churn case who had trade author over the account and
when did the account activ and commiss becom excess if custom ar make
their own trade thei cannot possibl accus the broker of churn their account but
broker or some other peopl have trade author discret over the account and
particip in the commiss a conflict of interest exist and there mai be predic for a
charg of churn
secur fraud financi transact
11532 2011 fraud examin manual
mani of the regulatori definit of churn ar inher vagu and offer littl practic
guidanc custom trade object ar simpl make profit and avoid loss the best
test to detect churn is to calcul the amount of monthli gross commiss gener
from the account as a percentag of the averag account balanc for exampl an activ
trade account with an averag daili balanc of 10000 might reason gener on the
high side about 500 dollar 5 percent in gross commiss in an averag month gross
commiss would probabl increas in month when the market ar experienc
greater price volatil and trade ha been success the cfe should look for the
follow indic
did the broker have trade author discret over the account
have gross commiss increas dure period of decreas market volatil
ar the gross commiss for the month in question substanti higher than the
averag monthli gross commiss for thi account
ar gross commiss greater than 5 percent of the averag account balanc
did commiss consum realiz profit andor aggrav loss
were numer trade enter into and exit over short time period for small gain or
loss
wa the trade unit number of contract per trade too larg for thi account
overtrad
were the trade made for thi account recommend by the research depart of the
brokerag and dissemin to other custom
did unauthor trade take place
if the broker had discretionari author to trade the account and ani of the abov factor
ar true further investig for churn is warrant final brokerag supervisor ar
requir to perform due dilig to ensur that churn and other trade abus do
not occur
unsuit recommend
secur repres ar requir to know their custom thei must take into
account the financi profil and level of sophist of the individu investor place
client into unsuit secur for exampl recommend highrisk option to a senior
citizen with limit asset is prohibit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11533
exampl
unit state secur and exchang commiss
litig releas no 20438 januari 24 2008
peopl of the state of california v daniel william heath deni timothi obrien john
william heath and larr jay schlarmann superior court of california counti
of riversid case no rif117775
the secur and exchang commiss announc that on januari 10 and 11 2008
a juri in riversid counti california convict three men on feloni charg involv a
fraudul scheme that wa the subject of a prior enforc action brought by the
commiss which rais more than 187 mill ion from over 1800 victim mostli senior
citizen and the elderli convict for their role in the scheme were daniel william heath
51 formerli of chino hill california deni timothi obrien 53 formerli of yorba
linda california and heath father john william heath 81 formerli of covina
california daniel heath wa found guilti on 400 feloni count obrien on 70 feloni
count and john heath on 52 feloni count in 2004 the riversid counti district
attornei offic arrest and charg them with commit secur fraud elder abus
grand theft monei launder tax fraud and conspiraci all under california law larr
jay schlarmann 52 formerli of carlsbad california wa also arrest plead guilti to
secur fraud elder abus monei launder and tax fraud and wa sentenc to serv
15 year in state prison daniel heath face a maximum of 117 year in state prison
obrien 37 year and john heath 28 year
in april 2004 the commiss file a compla int against daniel heath and hi entiti
and obrien alleg thei fraudul in duce elderli investor through free lunch
seminar to invest in secur note that paid a guarante return the court appoint
a perman receiv over the heath entiti final judgment of perman injunct and
other relief were enter against heath and obrien enjoin them from violat the antifraud
secur registr and brokerdeal registr provis of the feder
secur law for their role in the scheme the judgment order heath and obrien to
disgorg to the receiv their illgotten gain plu prejudg interest the commiss then
institut administr proceed against heath and obrien bar them from
associ with a broker or dealer heath and obrien consent to the entri of the final
judgment and administr order with out admit or deni the commiss
alleg and find in septemb 2007 the commiss institut administr
secur fraud financi transact
11534 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed against martin s duffield 52 of west covina california and raul a
jordan 52 of pasadena california for viol at the antifraud secur registr
and brokerdeal registr provis for their role in the scheme duffield wa bar
associ with ani broker or dealer and jordan wa bar from associ with ani
broker or dealer with the right to reappli for associ after five 5 year to the
appropri selfregulatori organ or if there is none to the commiss duffield
and jordan were order to disgorg illgotten gain to the receiv plu prejudg interest
duffield and jordan consent to the entri of the order with out admit or deni the
commiss find
administr of the courtord receivership over the heath entiti will continu
failur to supervis
brokerdeal firm ar respons for oversight of their repres to ensur adher
to rule of fair practic and state and feder law
failur to report client complaint
invest and advisori firm ar requir to report client complaint to the sec yet mai
neglect to do so fear an investig
park
park is the practic of sell a secur to on parti with the understand that the seller
will repurchas the secur later at an agreedupon price thi scheme allow circumvent
of ownership report requir and net capit rule
front run dual trade
front run an order is a type of insid trade although it usual will not caus a direct
loss to the custom it could and is a violat of exchang rule front run involv
the us for profit of the privileg knowledg of a custom order to bui or sell a larg
amount of a commod option or secur that becaus of it size is like to move the
market back offic personnel could have knowledg of such an order and bui or sell for
their own account ahead of the custom becaus order filler on the exchang floor ar
allow to trade for their own account and fill order for custom dual trade thei also
have an opportun
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11535
consid the follow scenario an order is receiv from a hedger to sell 500 decemb
cattl futur contract at the market if the order filler know that current market condit
ar such that thi order will move the market significantli lower it would be veri tempt
to sell a few contract for himself and profit from the market declin when he execut the
custom order order filler ar requir to op rate in the best interest of the custom and
work the order to get the best price howev er onc the trader ha establish hi short
posit it is realli in hi own interest to drive the market as far down as possibl when
execut the 500 contract sell order in thi situat the order filler mai not give hi best
effort and could hurt the custom
the vast major of exchang member would never put themselv ahead of a custom
but it ha happen in the past in todai market with sophist surveil exchang
investig personnel activ guard against thi type of activ the time stamp on the
custom order time and sale report from the exchang and the account activ of the
trader would have to be obtain and examin to substanti ani front run alleg
thi inform is easili obtain brokerag complianc personnel should easili detect
front run by back offic personnel by period check their account activ or not
allow them to open trade account at all
bucket shop
bucket shop ar fraudul enterpris that masquerad as licens brokerag oper a
true retail futur brokerag would be requir to be regist and meet certain financi
threshold salespeopl would be requir to pass the seri three nation commod
futur examin and all other personnel would need to be regist as associ
person there mai also be other registr or licens requir depend on the
type of busi that the brokerag engag in see
wwwnfafuturesorgregistrationwhohastor egisterasp bucket shop bypass all these
requir and oper like legitim busi
the solut to find whether or not an individu or firm is legitim is easi go to
wwwnfafuturesorgbasicnet for commod futur broker and firm
wwwfinraorginvestorstoolscalculatorsbrokercheckindexhtm for stock option and
futur broker and firm
wwwsecgovinvestorbrokershtm for secur broker and firm
secur fraud financi transact
11536 2011 fraud examin manual
you will be abl to search file for ani firm or individu author to do secur option
or futur busi their licens statu and ani complaint brought against them if a firm or
profession doe not appear on on of these page thei ar not legitim
excess markup
excess markup involv sell at a markedup price or bui at a markeddown price
not reason relat to the prevail market price
misus or misappropri of custom secur
thi scheme mai involv outright theft or us the secur in improp wai for
exampl as collater for loan or to conduct other secur transact eg margin
trade
unauthor trade
unless otherwis agre to in write onli the custom name on the trade account can
author trade ani loss accru to the custom account becaus of an unauthor
trade whether made by mistak or intention ar the respons of the brokerag firm
and must be reimburs to the custom gain from unauthor trade also belong to the
custom thi prevent broker from execut unauthor trade claim error and
take ani profit that mai occur the onli entri to the brokerag compani error account
should be loss profit in an error account should be investig custom must report
unauthor trade to the manag of the brokerag firm as soon as detect silenc
would impli ratif of the transact
systemat trade account against each other
systemat trade account against each other usual occur between invest pool
the scheme involv someon with trade author simultan establish opposit
market posit in two separ invest pool that he control a person who ha
trade author and other control over the pool mai receiv a monthli manag fee of
about 15 percent of the pool balanc a percentag of ani of the pool gain perhap 10
percent per quarter and a portion or all of the commiss on trade the conflict of
interest in such a busi arrang ar obviou it is in the interest of the pool oper
to maintain account balanc a high as possibl trade the account for commiss and to
have at least some profit
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11537
assum that a pool oper establish two limit partnership for trade commod
that he wa gener partner of both partnership and that he wa to be compens as
previous describ the gener partner who ha trade author then bui 100
contract of decemb corn for pool a establish a long market posit and at the
same time sell 100 contract of decemb corn for pool b establish a short market
posit if these transact occur in the same account thei would offset each other
over time on of the pool will suffer a loss while the other will enjoi a gain for the gener
partner thing havent chang much the amount of equiti in the two pool combin will
be about the same with the loss in on pool be offset by the gain in the other pool thi
preserv the basi for the gener partner manag fee while the profit pool will
ow him a percentag of the gain
in the long run on of the invest pool will dissolv becaus of trade loss while the
other will enjoi handsom profit thi then take on some of the characterist of a ponzi
scheme when the pool oper creat a new limit partnership advertis hi success
from the result of the profit pool and particip in the success pool tell their
friend the trick here is to ensur that particip in the origin two pool dont know
each other
supervisor and complianc manag of brokerag should be on the lookout for thi type
of activ thei can do littl howev if the gener partner maintain the trade account
at two separ brokerag the cfe will need to acquir the trade record of all pool run
by a pool oper in order to establish if such a trade scheme ha occur the
comparison of market posit over time is simpl and the inform is easili obtain
from the brokerag onc it is discov who thei ar
the gener partner would have commit a materi breach of contract in that he fail in
hi fiduciari duti to the limit partner there ar also numer violat of feder
regulatori and sro rule that prohibit thi type of trade scheme
block order scheme
when sever differ account ar combin on the same order it is call a block order
for exampl a broker mai wish to execut the same bui order for 10 of hi custom to
accomplish thi he mai write an order ticket such as for account 12345 and other bui
100 contract of decemb cattl at the market the justif for thi type of order is
secur fraud financi transact
11538 2011 fraud examin manual
that time is of the essenc if the market is volatil custom will need their order execut
as quickli as possibl write 10 separ order ticket for each account and call the
order to the trade floor separ would take too much time by combin all the order
on on ticket and provid on account number time is save and the other account
number and quantiti can be ad to the order ticket when the execut order fill is
report back to the broker
the potenti for abus is obviou price move rapidli in volatil market and the account
the order ha been execut for have not all been made known the time from when the
block order is place and when the fill is report back to the broker can take mani minut
on some busi dai it can take an hour or more dure thi time the market is move and
the execut order will either be in a loss or gain posit by the time it is report back
thi is where fraud can occur
for exampl assum that 100 contract of decemb cattl were bought at 8000 cent per
pound and that when the fill is report thirti minut later the market is at 8100 thi
favor chang in market price 100 point is equival to 400 profit per contract or
40000 profit for the entir order the broker then give out the other account number
to the floor clerk to complet the order with 55 contract go to a favor account and 5
contract go to the other nine account the broker then immedi sell 55 decemb
cattl contract for the favor account realiz a 22000 profit of cours if the market
had move lower by the time the fill wa report the favor account would not have been
ad to the order or the loss taken would have been minim
prove such a scheme is easi the cfe will need to obtain 1 the monthli brokerag recap
of the salesman 2 copi of all order ticket written by the salesman for the time period in
question brokerag must keep the hard copi for sever year 3 a copi of the telephon
audio record of the placement of the order and report fill from the trade floor all
call to the trade floor ar record and archiv and 4 copi of the daili equiti
statement provid to the salesman by the brokerag firm detail account number
account name open posit and the cash valu of all account repres by the
salesman a block order scheme will easili be detect by analyz thi inform
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11539
market manipul
market manipul consist of a seri of transact design to artifici rais or lower
price or to give the appear of trade activ for the purpos of induc other to bui
or sell thi is especi common with penni stock or microcap stock penni stock ar
lowpric usual less than 5 specul secur that ar regist but do not meet the
list requir of an exchang microcap just mean the stock of compani with veri
small market capit onc the price ha been artifici inflat the stock is sold to
unsuspect victim
insid trade
under the legal theori of misappropri the us of nonpubl inform to profit from
purchas or sale of secur mai violat the insid fiduciari duti to their compani or
sharehold although not all court accept thi argument crimin charg ar not unusu
in case of thi natur ivan boeski and michael milken indict for insid trade in the
late 1980 both serv time in prison
exampl
a california psychotherapist plead guilti to secur fraud after feder offici accus
him of make a nice profit after trade on some insid inform he learn dure a
counsel session with a client
accord to feder offici the psychotherapist bought common stock in lockhe corp
hour after hi client a compani execut undergo marriag counsel mention
the secret and ultim success merger talk between lockhe and martin marietta
corp
under a legal doctrin known as the misappropri theori he wa deem to have
violat secur law becaus he stole inform from a person who had assum hi
trust and discret and then us the in format to trade on the stock market
public disclosur requir
in 2000 the sec adopt rule concern public disclosur of inform regul fd
fair disclosur wa promulg to elimin select disclosur by compani to
certain group such as broker and analyst befor such inform wa made avail to
the public
secur fraud financi transact
11540 2011 fraud examin manual
the regul state that if a compani or someon on it behalf disclos materi non
public inform to a particular group primarili market secur profession it must
make a public disclosur of the inform the time of the disclosur depend on
whether the disclosur wa intent or inadvert if the disclosur wa intent then
compani must make the disclosur simultan if the disclosur wa inadvert then
the compani must make the disclosur promptli
the sec provid three option for proper dissemin
1 file the inform with the sec on a form 8k
2 dissemin the inform through a press releas
3 dissemin the inform through ani other method or combin of method that
ar reason design to provid broad public distribut of the inform such as
an announc at a press confer open to the public
regul fd onli appli to materi commun between compani execut or
author spokesperson to analyst institut investor and holder of the compani
stock regul fd also appli onli to senior execut and exclud commun
with the media with rate agenc and with custom conduct in the normal cours of
busi inform is consid materi if there is a substanti likelihood that a
reason sharehold would consid it import in make an invest decis or if
it would have significantli alter the total mix of inform avail
insid trade rule
rule 10b5 promulg under section 10b of the secur exchang act of 1934
prohibit ani fals statement or other fraudul activ in connect with the purchas or
sale of ani secur includ insid trade it provid the main basi for the sec to
investig possibl secur fraud claim rule 10b5 contain civil and administr
remedi such as the power to initi action to enjoin further violat enforc by the
sec as well as crimin sanction enforc by the depart of justic specif rule
10b5 make it unlaw for anybodi to directli or indirectli conduct oper of busi
that would deceiv anoth person concern transact involv secur although
the text of the secur exchang act doe not provid for a privat caus of action for
rule 10b5 violat the suprem court found an impli right which typic requir the
plaintiff to prove 1 a materi misstat or omiss 2 intent fraud or deceit by
the parti charg with the violat 3 relia nce on the misrepresent or omiss in the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11541
purchas or sale of a secur and 4 econom ic loss caus by the purchas or sale of
the secur
howev 10b5 claim do have certain limit for exampl there is no privat caus of
action against those who mere aid and abet the primari violat and in stoneridg
invest partner llc v scientificatlanta inc the court held that there is no privat caus
of action against third parti who neither make alleg misstat nor engag in
decept conduct on which investor reli
in stoneridg a group of investor in charter commun inc accus two charter
supplier of enter in a busi scheme with charter which allow charter to issu
fraudul financi statement in the alleg scheme charter gave it equip vendor
abovenorm payment for tv settop box and the supplier then gave back the extra
payment as advertis fee charter then fraudul account the return payment as
revenu the court rule that the rule 10b5 doe not extend to third parti aider or
abettor who do not make alleg misstat and do not engag in decept conduct
on which investor reli there wa no basi for find that the group of investor did not
reli on anyth the supplier said or did the investor could not have reli upon the
supplier decept act for two reason 1 charter supplier did not take part in
prepar or distribut the fraudul statement and 2 the supplier did not make ani
misstat reli upon by the public or violat ani duti to disclos as a result the court
held that the group of investor could not show relianc on ani of the supplier action
the interest thing about the stoneridg decis is that it cannot be broadli read to sai that
secondari actor lawyer account and banker ar free from liabil under rule 10b5
the court held that decept conduct can provid the basi for secur fraud liabil if
plaintiff can establish that thei reli on that conduct unlik the relationship between the
investor and supplier in stoneridg lawyer and account often serv as advis which
could be consid as take part in activ that investor could reli upon
the sec also recent issu rule 10b51 and rule 10b52 to supplement section 10b of
the secur exchang act of 1934 and rule 10b5 rule 10b51 and rule 10b52 deal with
unsettl issu that have arisen under rule 10b5
secur fraud financi transact
11542 2011 fraud examin manual
rule 10b51 address the issu of when insid trade liabil aris in connect with a
trader us or know possess of mater ial nonpubl inform specif rule
10b51 prohibit the purchas or sale of a secur on the basi of materi nonpubl
inform howev the rule also set forth an affirm defens for trader if thei can
show that such trade were made pursuant to a preexist written 10b51 trade plan
recent the sec indic that it intend to scrutin plan contempl by rule 10b51
more critic thi increas scrutini like result from the public of a 2006 studi by
alan jagol an assist professor at the stanford univers graduat school of
busi which suggest that on averag sale under rule 10b51 plan were gener
abnorm trade return and that such plan seem to outperform the market
rule 10b52 address the issu of when a breach of a famili or other nonbusi
relationship mai give rise to liabil under the misappropri theori of insid trade
under the misappropri theori as defin by the suprem court case in unit state v
ohagan 521 us 642 1997 a person is liabl for secur fraud if he
misappropri confidenti inform
for the purpos of secur trade
in breach of a duti ow to the sourc and
trade base on the misappropri inform
rule 10b52 seek to provid further guidanc regard what type of relationship creat a
duti not to us the inform receiv for exampl if a person agre to keep the
inform in confid a duti of trust or confid will exist similarli if two person
have a histori pattern or practic of share confid such that the recipi
reason should know that the other expect that the insid inform will remain
confidenti a duti of trust or confid will exist
subsect b3 also creat a presumpt that ani person who receiv insid inform
from hi spous parent child or sibl will ow that other person a duti of trust or
confid
disclosur misrepresent and omiss
secur law requir that the investor receiv full and fair disclosur of all materi
inform give the investor or prospect investor fals or mislead inform is
clearli a misrepresent an omiss occur when the issuer in connect with the
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11543
offer or sale of secur omit a materi fact necessari in order to make the statement
made not mislead make misrepresent to the investor or fail to inform the
investor of certain fact omiss is a violat of both state and feder law onli if the
misrepresent or omiss is materi
it is import to show the materi of misrepresent or omiss even if
represent made for exampl in a prospectu ar clearli fals it is still necessari to
show materi in a 1988 decis the suprem court state that a fact is materi if it
disclosur would chang the total mix of fact avail and there is a substanti likelihood
that a reason sharehold would consid the fact import to her invest
decis see basic inc v levinson 485 us 224 1988
as a gener rule the examin or investig need to determin the answer to the
follow question would a reason investor wish to know thi inform in order to
make an inform decis if the answer is ye then thi inform or the lack thereof
ha a high likelihood of be deem materi if an actual investor act base on the
misrepresent that clearli strengthen the case but it is not essenti that the fals or
mislead statement influenc an investor mere that a reason investor could have
been so influenc
the issuer of a biotechnolog stock fals claim that the food and drug administr
ha approv their new cancer drug would be an exampl of a misrepresent that is
clearli materi to ani prospect investor similarli if the chairman of the compani had
recent been releas from prison after serv time for secur fraud thi fact should
featur promin in ani offer document failur to disclos thi fact would obvious
constitut the omiss of a materi fact
the sec ha adopt a socal safe harbor provis wherebi certain forwardlook
statement and project will not be held to be fraudul issuer will not be held liabl if
these type of statement were believ true at the time and were accompani by appropri
cautionari languag
note also that feder and state law usual prohibit the promot from state that the
offer ha govern approv of some kind for exampl even if the offer is
regist the promot cannot state that it is sec approv
secur fraud financi transact
11544 2011 fraud examin manual
secur fraud by unregist person
in conduct investig or examin relat to alleg violat of the secur
law the fraud examin should alwai begin by seek the answer to these crucial
question
is the secur regist if not doe it meet an exempt
is the person offer or sell the secur regist if not is the transact exempt
ar there indic of fraud present
exempt
exampl of exempt under the 1933 act includ secur issu by the us
govern and those issu by state or local govern registr is also not requir
for limit offer of secur issu pursuant to regul d of the act
issuanc of secur undertaken pursuant to rule 501 through 508 of reg d is fairli
complex but for these purpos the essenti element ar as follow
rule 501 defin accredit investor to includ bank insur compani certain
chariti and individu with a net worth exceed 1 million or annual incom of
more than 200000 300000 includ spous
rule 504 allow an issuer to sell up to 1 million in secur in a 12month period to
ani number of purchas rule 504 also allow gener solicit and advertis
rule 505 increas the limit to 5 million reduc the maximum number of non
accredit investor to 35 and doe not allow gener solicit or advertis
rule 506 allow the issuanc of ani amount of secur to ani number of accredit
and up to 35 nonaccredit but sophist investor again no gener solicit or
advertis is allow
the most reli upon exempt from registr where we ar like to see fraud is the socal
privat placement exempt in most state thi exempt is avail where the
secur is sold to a small number of peopl and there is no gener solicit in florida
for exampl there must be no more than 35 nonaccredit investor in a 12month period
thei must receiv full and fair disclosur of materi inform and there is a prohibit
on gener solicit or advertis it is common to find that on or more of the
condit necessari for the claim exempt ar not present andor that the offer
is fraudul
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11545
backdat stock option
as a supplement to salari compani frequent offer employe stock option which grant
the recipi the privileg to purchas a share of the compani stock at a futur date for a
specif price call the strike price a strike price is the valu of a share at a particular date
gener the strike price is set at the price of the underli stock on the dai the option is
grant therefor the option becom valuabl onli with futur increas in the stock price
in thi wai compani grant stock option as an incent for employe to boost compani
perform and thu rais the stock price howev the practic of backdat stock
option give the employe a chanc to profit by purchas stock at past low price
provid an immedi payoff backdat stock option occur when a compani alter the
date of the grant to a time when the stock wa trade at a lower price in the interest of
make the option instantli valuabl and further increas the employe gain if the stock
price continu to rise
for exampl on june 1 2008 compani xyz grant it ceo a stock option that provid
the execut the right to purchas 100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 2009 for the
strike price per it usual polici the strike price is set at the price of the compani stock on
the date of the option grant on june 1 2008 the grant date xyz stock wa trade at 40
per share therefor if the stock price increas to 45 per share by januari 1 2009 the
ceo could exercis the option and purchas the share for 40 per share then sell them
immedi on the market for 45 per share result in a gain of 5 per share howev
the compani ha recent experienc a dramat increas in it share price on mai 24
2008 the stock wa trade for 15 per share to provid the ceo with an opportun to
exploit the increas in share price even though it ha alreadi occur the compani choos
to backdat the stock option to make it appear as if thei were grant on mai 24 2008
becaus the strike price is set at the price of the stock on the option grant date the strike
price is effect chang to 15 per share as a result the ceo now ha the option to bui
100 share of xyz stock on januari 1 2009 for 15 per share thu the ceo ha
immedi gain 25 per share the differ between the stock price on the actual grant
date of june 1 and the state grant date of mai 24 base sole on the manipul of the
grant date us
backdat stock option came to the attent of the us secur and exchang
commiss sec when academ research reveal a pattern of stock price descend
just prior to mani report date of option grant then ascend immedi afterward
secur fraud financi transact
11546 2011 fraud examin manual
backdat is not necessarili illeg but can be if not handl appropri in order to be
legal the practic must be explicitli report to sharehold and the govern failur to
do so mai constitut secur fraud
in august of 2002 certain provis laid out under the sarbanesoxlei act took effect
requir compani to report stock option grant within two dai these rule greatli
reduc the time compani had to choos a favor grant date compani were
previous allow week or month befor thei were requir to report stock option
grant consequ the appar pattern of backdat nearli disappear around thi
time howev report of actual practic in stock option and the record data remain
inconsist in mani case becaus not all compani adher to sarbanesoxlei
addition the revel of the preval of backdat ha caus concern that
compani mai not have record and disclos the option grant on the financi
statement in an accur manner in respons to the issu the public compani account
oversight board pcaob issu a practic alert to prepar auditor for the possibl of
financi misstat due to backdat stock option to keep a tight rope on the
possibl of thi type of illeg activ auditor should assess the inform obtain
from the audit to determin the need for further procedur
