2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Churning


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Churning  
Churning is the excessive trading of a customer account for the purpose of generating 
commissions. For securities and options there is a commission charged when the trade is 
entered into and when the trade is liquidated. Commodity futures have a round-turn 
commission scheme meaning that the commission covers both the purchase and sale. 
Commissions on commodity futures are not charged until the trade is closed out.  
 
DEFINITION OF EXCESSIVE TRADING ACTIVITY 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) states that to establish churning, a 
complainant must prove that (1) the broker controlled the trading in an account; (2) the 
volume of trading was excessive in light of the complainant’s trading objectives; and (3) the 
broker acted with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the customer’s interests. 
Hinch v. Commonwealth Financial Group, Inc.,  [1996-1998 Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep. 
27,056 at 45,020 (CFTC May 13, 1997); Johnson v. Don Charles & Company, [1990-1992 
Transfer Binder] Comm. Fut. L. Rep.  (CCH) 24,986 (CFTC Jan. 16, 1991).  
 
Two questions arise in churning cases: who had trading authorization over the account and 
when did the account activity and commissions become excessive. If customers are making 
their own trades, they cannot possibly accuse the broker of churning their accounts. But 
brokers or some other people have trading authority (discretion) over the accounts and 
participate in the commissions, a conflict of interest exists and there may be predication for a 
charge of churning.  
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1532                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Many of the regulatory definitions of churning are inherently vague and offer little practical 
guidance. Customer trading objectives are simple: make profits and avoid losses. The best 
test to detect churning is to calculate the amount of monthly gross commissions generated 
from the account as a percentage of the average account balance. For example, an active 
trading account with an average daily balance of $10,000 might reasonably generate (on the 
high side) about $500 dollars (5 percent) in gross commissions in an average month. Gross 
commissions would probably increase in months when the markets are experiencing  
greater price volatility and trading has been successful. The CFE should look for the 
following indicators: 
• Did the broker have trading authority (discretion) over the account? 
• Have gross commissions increased during periods of decreasing market volatility?  
• Are the gross commissions for the month in question substantially higher than the 
average monthly gross commissions for this account? 
• Are gross commissions greater than 5 percent of the average account balance? 
• Did commissions consume realized profits and/or aggravate losses?  
• Were numerous trades entered into and exited over short time periods for small gains or 
losses? 
• Was the trading unit (number of contracts per trade) too large for this account 
(overtrading)? 
• Were the trades made for this account recommended by the research department of the 
brokerage and disseminated to other customers?  
• Did unauthorized trading take place?    
 
If the broker had discretionary authority to trade the account and any of the above factors 
are true, further investigation for churning is warranted. Finally, brokerage supervisors are 
required to perform due diligence to ensure that churning and other trading abuses do  
not occur.  
 



:


churn
churn is the excess trade of a custom account for the purpos of gener
commiss for secur and option there is a commiss charg when the trade is
enter into and when the trade is liquid commod futur have a roundturn
commiss scheme mean that the commiss cover both the purchas and sale
commiss on commod futur ar not charg until the trade is close out
definit of excess trade activ
the commod futur trade commiss cftc state that to establish churn a
complain must prove that 1 the broker control the trade in an account 2 the
volum of trade wa excess in light of the complain trade object and 3 the
broker act with intent to defraud or with reckless disregard for the custom interest
hinch v commonwealth financi group inc 19961998 transfer binder comm fut l rep
27056 at 45020 cftc mai 13 1997 johnson v don charl compani 19901992
transfer binder comm fut l rep cch 24986 cftc jan 16 1991
two question aris in churn case who had trade author over the account and
when did the account activ and commiss becom excess if custom ar make
their own trade thei cannot possibl accus the broker of churn their account but
broker or some other peopl have trade author discret over the account and
particip in the commiss a conflict of interest exist and there mai be predic for a
charg of churn
secur fraud financi transact
11532 2011 fraud examin manual
mani of the regulatori definit of churn ar inher vagu and offer littl practic
guidanc custom trade object ar simpl make profit and avoid loss the best
test to detect churn is to calcul the amount of monthli gross commiss gener
from the account as a percentag of the averag account balanc for exampl an activ
trade account with an averag daili balanc of 10000 might reason gener on the
high side about 500 dollar 5 percent in gross commiss in an averag month gross
commiss would probabl increas in month when the market ar experienc
greater price volatil and trade ha been success the cfe should look for the
follow indic
did the broker have trade author discret over the account
have gross commiss increas dure period of decreas market volatil
ar the gross commiss for the month in question substanti higher than the
averag monthli gross commiss for thi account
ar gross commiss greater than 5 percent of the averag account balanc
did commiss consum realiz profit andor aggrav loss
were numer trade enter into and exit over short time period for small gain or
loss
wa the trade unit number of contract per trade too larg for thi account
overtrad
were the trade made for thi account recommend by the research depart of the
brokerag and dissemin to other custom
did unauthor trade take place
if the broker had discretionari author to trade the account and ani of the abov factor
ar true further investig for churn is warrant final brokerag supervisor ar
requir to perform due dilig to ensur that churn and other trade abus do
not occur
