2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Exemptions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Exemptions 
Examples of exemptions under the 1933 Act include securities issued by the U.S. 
Government and those issued by state or local governments. Registration is also not required 
for limited offerings of securities issued pursuant to Regulation D of the Act. 
 
Issuance of securities undertaken pursuant to Rules 501 through 508 of “Reg D” is fairly 
complex, but for these purposes the essential elements are as follows:   
• Rule 501 defines “accredited investors” to include banks, insurance companies, certain 
charities, and individuals with a net worth exceeding $1 million or annual income of 
more than $200,000 ($300,000 including spouse).  
• Rule 504 allows an issuer to sell up to $1 million in securities in a 12-month period to 
any number of purchasers. Rule 504 also allows general solicitation and advertising. 
• Rule 505 increases the limit to $5 million, reduces the maximum number of non-
 accredited investors to 35, and does not allow general solicitation or advertising. 
• Rule 506 allows the issuance of any amount of securities to any number of accredited 
and up to 35 non-accredited but sophisticated investors. Again no general solicitation or 
advertising is allowed.  
 
The most relied upon exemption from registration where we are likely to see fraud is the so-called
“private placement” exemption. In most states, this exemption is available where the 
security is sold to a small number of people and there is no general solicitation. In Florida, 
for example, there must be no more than 35 non-accredited investors in a 12-month period, 
they must receive full and fair disclosure of material information, and there is a prohibition 
on general solicitation or advertising. It is common to find that one or more of the 
conditions necessary for the claimed exemption are not present and/or that the offering  
is fraudulent. 
 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1545 



:


exempt
exampl of exempt under the 1933 act includ secur issu by the us
govern and those issu by state or local govern registr is also not requir
for limit offer of secur issu pursuant to regul d of the act
issuanc of secur undertaken pursuant to rule 501 through 508 of reg d is fairli
complex but for these purpos the essenti element ar as follow
rule 501 defin accredit investor to includ bank insur compani certain
chariti and individu with a net worth exceed 1 million or annual incom of
more than 200000 300000 includ spous
rule 504 allow an issuer to sell up to 1 million in secur in a 12month period to
ani number of purchas rule 504 also allow gener solicit and advertis
rule 505 increas the limit to 5 million reduc the maximum number of non
accredit investor to 35 and doe not allow gener solicit or advertis
rule 506 allow the issuanc of ani amount of secur to ani number of accredit
and up to 35 nonaccredit but sophist investor again no gener solicit or
advertis is allow
the most reli upon exempt from registr where we ar like to see fraud is the socal
privat placement exempt in most state thi exempt is avail where the
secur is sold to a small number of peopl and there is no gener solicit in florida
for exampl there must be no more than 35 nonaccredit investor in a 12month period
thei must receiv full and fair disclosur of materi inform and there is a prohibit
on gener solicit or advertis it is common to find that on or more of the
condit necessari for the claim exempt ar not present andor that the offer
is fraudul
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11545
