2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud and the Internet


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Securities Fraud and the Internet 
Of course, the very technology that gives us access to almost limitless information also gives 
the criminal greater opportunity to commit crime. Another factor that works in favor of the 
online scam artist is that there has traditionally been a culture of trust and benevolence on 
the Internet.  
 
Using the Internet to promote fraudulent investment schemes is relatively easy and cheap. 
There is the potential to reach hundreds of thousands of people using equipment and 
software that are very inexpensive. There is enough competition between providers of 
Internet access that the cost of maintaining a home page on the Web is very low. 
 
The Internet is already being used to solicit investors. Many illegal pyramid schemes have 
professional-looking websites, for example. Use of e-mail and the Internet also makes it 
easier for crooks to conceal their identities and operate anonymously from other countries.  
 
Securities laws are based on geographic boundaries; on the Internet there are no boundaries. 
With the proliferation of “cyber cash” and va rious ways of exchanging payment for goods 
and services over the Internet, the fraud examiner can expect to see a huge rise in financial 
fraud committed online. Particularly prevalent online are the so called “pump-and-dump” 
schemes in which promoters use Internet newsletters and bulletin boards to hype stocks they 
bought for little or no money so they can sell on a rising market. 
 
Same Old Frauds, New Medium 
Many of the fraudulent schemes proliferating in cyberspace are not new; rather, they are 
recycled and repackaged to appeal to a new generation of gullible consumers. 
 
Newsletters 
In this context, a newsletter is not an independent, objective publication discussing the 
merits of a particular securities offering. Such objective analysis does exist, but, more often 
than not, the slick marketing document is a far cry from the independent analysis that it 
purports to be. In reality, the company publishing the newsletter is often paid to hype a 
particular stock by the promoter. Consequently, there is a serious danger of 
misrepresentation to the investor. Usually the cozy relationship between the stock promoter 
and the newsletter publisher is not disclosed to the prospective investor. Neither is the fact 
that the promoter pays to have his offering receive prominent and flattering treatment. 
 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1550                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The newsletter may take the form of an actual document mailed out to subscribers who may 
or may not pay for the privilege. Often, the information is imparted via a professional 
website designed to motivate investors to act on the great opportunity being offered.  
 
Usually, information will be gathered on those who subscribe to such publications or view 
the website. This data is rich with free leads to securities representatives or others who 
promote the securities being hyped in the newsletter. The identity of investors who have 
shown some type of interest in a particular offering covered in the publication is a valuable 
source of new business.  
 
Online Trading 
A recent legal opinion has allowed a bulletin board to be used to buy and sell securities 
without registration. This bypassing of federal registration requirements may make the 
raising of venture capital easier, but it will reduce consumer protection and potentially create 
a regulatory nightmare. 
 
Greater utilization of the Internet to promote both legitimate and fraudulent securities 
offerings will increasingly challenge the investigator or examiner. The fraud examiner will 
continue to face jurisdictional as well as technical issues as the Internet becomes the medium 
of choice for the financial criminal. 
 
[Editor’s Note: The Association would like to thank Chris Hancock, CFE, for his assistance in preparing 
this chapter. Mr. Hancock is the investigations manager for the State of Florida Department of Banking and 
Finance, Northwest Florida Region, and specializes in the investigation of financial crime with an emphasis 
on securities fraud. 
 
We would also like to thank Richard J. Bobel, CFE, MBA, CPA, who authored the material on 
commodities, options, and derivatives. Mr. Bobel is a former commodity broker and college/university faculty 
member who specialized in derivati ve markets and worked for many years as a research economist for the 
Chicago Board of Trade where he designed commodity  futures and options contracts. Richard was a 
contributing author to the CBOT Commodity Trading Manual  and the CBOT Speculation 
Workbook. He can contacted at 847-828-7417 or at RJB@RJBCPA.com] 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1601 



:


secur fraud and the internet
of cours the veri technolog that give us access to almost limitless inform also give
the crimin greater opportun to commit crime anoth factor that work in favor of the
onlin scam artist is that there ha tradition been a cultur of trust and benevol on
the internet
us the internet to promot fraudul invest scheme is rel easi and cheap
there is the potenti to reach hundr of thousand of peopl us equip and
softwar that ar veri inexpens there is enough competit between provid of
internet access that the cost of maintain a home page on the web is veri low
the internet is alreadi be us to solicit investor mani illeg pyramid scheme have
professionallook websit for exampl us of email and the internet also make it
easier for crook to conceal their ident and oper anonym from other countri
secur law ar base on geograph boundari on the internet there ar no boundari
with the prolifer of cyber cash and va riou wai of exchang payment for good
and servic over the internet the fraud examin can expect to see a huge rise in financi
fraud commit onlin particularli preval onlin ar the so call pumpanddump
scheme in which promot us internet newslett and bulletin board to hype stock thei
bought for littl or no monei so thei can sell on a rise market
same old fraud new medium
mani of the fraudul scheme prolifer in cyberspac ar not new rather thei ar
recycl and repackag to appeal to a new gener of gullibl consum
newslett
in thi context a newslett is not an independ object public discuss the
merit of a particular secur offer such object analysi doe exist but more often
than not the slick market document is a far cry from the independ analysi that it
purport to be in realiti the compani publish the newslett is often paid to hype a
particular stock by the promot consequ there is a seriou danger of
misrepresent to the investor usual the cozi relationship between the stock promot
and the newslett publish is not disclos to the prospect investor neither is the fact
that the promot pai to have hi offer receiv promin and flatter treatment
secur fraud financi transact
11550 2011 fraud examin manual
the newslett mai take the form of an actual document mail out to subscrib who mai
or mai not pai for the privileg often the inform is impart via a profession
websit design to motiv investor to act on the great opportun be offer
usual inform will be gather on those who subscrib to such public or view
the websit thi data is rich with free lead to secur repres or other who
promot the secur be hype in the newslett the ident of investor who have
shown some type of interest in a particular offer cover in the public is a valuabl
sourc of new busi
onlin trade
a recent legal opinion ha allow a bulletin board to be us to bui and sell secur
without registr thi bypass of feder registr requir mai make the
rais of ventur capit easier but it will reduc consum protect and potenti creat
a regulatori nightmar
greater util of the internet to promot both legitim and fraudul secur
offer will increasingli challeng the investig or examin the fraud examin will
continu to face jurisdict as well as technic issu as the internet becom the medium
of choic for the financi crimin
editor note the associ would like to thank chri hancock cfe for hi assist in prepar
thi chapter mr hancock is the investig manag for the state of florida depart of bank and
financ northwest florida region and special in the investig of financi crime with an emphasi
on secur fraud
we would also like to thank richard j bobel cfe mba cpa who author the materi on
commod option and deriv mr bobel is a former commod broker and collegeunivers faculti
member who special in derivati ve market and work for mani year as a research economist for the
chicago board of trade where he design commod futur and option contract richard wa a
contribut author to the cbot commod trade manual and the cbot specul
workbook he can contact at 8478287417 or at rjbrjbcpacom
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11601
