2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Theft of Checks Received Through the Mail


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Theft of Checks Received Through the Mail 
Checks received through the mail are a frequent target of employees seeking illicit gains. 
Theft of incoming checks usually occurs when a single employee is in charge of opening the 
mail and recording the receipt of payments. This employee simply steals one or more 
incoming checks instead of posting them to customer accounts. (See “Theft of Incoming 
Checks” flowchart.) When the task of receiving and recording incoming payments is left to a 
single person, it is all too easy for that employee to make off with an occasional check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A mailroom employee stole over $2 million in government checks arriving through the mail. 
This employee simply identified and removed envelopes delivered from a government agency 
known to send checks to the company. Using a group of accomplices acting under the names 
of fictitious persons and companies, this indi vidual was able to launder the checks and 
divide the proceeds with his cronies. 
 
The theft of checks is not usually complicated, but it is sometimes more difficult to conceal a 
check theft scheme than other forms of skimming. If the stolen checks were payments on 
the victim company’s receivables, then these payments were expected. As receivables become 
past due, the victim company will send notices of nonpayment to its customers. A customer 
is likely to complain when he receives a second bill for a payment he has already made. In 
addition, the cashed check will serve as evidence that the customer made his payment. The 
methods used to conceal check theft schemes will be discussed later in this section. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.410                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.411 



:


theft of check receiv through the mail
check receiv through the mail ar a frequent target of employe seek illicit gain
theft of incom check usual occur when a singl employe is in charg of open the
mail and record the receipt of payment thi employe simpli steal on or more
incom check instead of post them to custom account see theft of incom
check flowchart when the task of receiv and record incom payment is left to a
singl person it is all too easi for that employe to make off with an occasion check
exampl
a mailroom employe stole over 2 million in govern check arriv through the mail
thi employe simpli identifi and remov envelop deliv from a govern agenc
known to send check to the compani us a group of accomplic act under the name
of fictiti person and compani thi indi vidual wa abl to launder the check and
divid the proce with hi croni
the theft of check is not usual complic but it is sometim more difficult to conceal a
check theft scheme than other form of skim if the stolen check were payment on
the victim compani receiv then these payment were expect as receiv becom
past due the victim compani will send notic of nonpay to it custom a custom
is like to complain when he receiv a second bill for a payment he ha alreadi made in
addit the cash check will serv as evid that the custom made hi payment the
method us to conceal check theft scheme will be discuss later in thi section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1410 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1411
