2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Cash Larceny/Other Larceny of Sales and Receivables


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Other Larceny of Sales and Receivables 
Not all receipts arrive via the cash register. Employees can just as easily steal money received 
at other points. One of the more common methods is to take checks received through the 
mail, post the payments to the accounting system, but steal the checks. (See “Other Cash 
Larceny” flowchart.) Obviously, this type of scheme leaves the cash account out of balance. 
From a perpetrator’s perspective, it would make  much more sense to take checks that have 
not yet been posted to customer accounts. Often, this type of cash larceny scheme is 
committed by an employee who claims to only be “borrowing” the funds for a short while—
 one of the classic rationalizations in occupational fraud schemes.  
 
Those employees who have total control of a company’s accounting system can overcome 
the problem of out-of-balance accounts. It is common, especially in small businesses, for a 
single person to control all of a company’s deposits and ledgers. These employees can steal 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.424                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
incoming cash that has already been posted, then conceal the crime by making unsupported 
entries in the victim organization’s books. Poor separation of duties is very often the 
weakness that allows cash larceny schemes to go undetected.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee posted customer payments to the accounts receivable journal but stole the cash 
received. This resulted in an imbalance in the victim company’s cash account. But the 
perpetrator had control over the company’s deposits and all its ledgers. This allowed her to 
conceal her crime by making unsupported entr ies in the company’s books that produced a 
fictitious balance between receipts and ledgers.  
 
In circumstances in which payments are stolen but nonetheless posted to the cash receipts 
journal, reversing entries are sometimes used to balance the victim company’s accounts. The 
incoming payment is initially credited to the customer’s account, but the entry is later 
reversed with an unauthorized adjustment such as a “courtesy discount.” 
 
A less elegant way to hide a crime is to simply destroy all records that might prove that the 
perpetrator has been stealing. This “slash and burn” concealment technique does not 
prevent the victim company from realizing that it has been robbed, but it may help conceal 
the identity of the thief.  
 



:


other larceni of sale and receiv
not all receipt arriv via the cash regist employe can just as easili steal monei receiv
at other point on of the more common method is to take check receiv through the
mail post the payment to the account system but steal the check see other cash
larceni flowchart obvious thi type of scheme leav the cash account out of balanc
from a perpetr perspect it would make much more sens to take check that have
not yet been post to custom account often thi type of cash larceni scheme is
commit by an employe who claim to onli be borrow the fund for a short while
on of the classic ration in occup fraud scheme
those employe who have total control of a compani account system can overcom
the problem of outofbal account it is common especi in small busi for a
singl person to control all of a compani deposit and ledger these employe can steal
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1424 2011 fraud examin manual
incom cash that ha alreadi been post then conceal the crime by make unsupport
entri in the victim organ book poor separ of duti is veri often the
weak that allow cash larceni scheme to go undetect
exampl
an employe post custom payment to the account receiv journal but stole the cash
receiv thi result in an imbal in the victim compani cash account but the
perpetr had control over the compani deposit and all it ledger thi allow her to
conceal her crime by make unsupport entr i in the compani book that produc a
fictiti balanc between receipt and ledger
in circumst in which payment ar stolen but nonetheless post to the cash receipt
journal revers entri ar sometim us to balanc the victim compani account the
incom payment is initi credit to the custom account but the entri is later
revers with an unauthor adjust such as a courtesi discount
a less eleg wai to hide a crime is to simpli destroi all record that might prove that the
perpetr ha been steal thi slash and burn conceal techniqu doe not
prevent the victim compani from realiz that it ha been rob but it mai help conceal
the ident of the thief
