2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
Management, auditors, and fraud examiners all have a responsibility with respect to the 
prevention and detection of fraud. This section of the Fraud Examiners’ Manual describes 
the regulations and best practices guidance for management, internal and external auditors, 
and fraud examiners in carrying out their respective anti-fraud responsibilities. 
 
 
Legislation and Best Practices 
An organization’s board of directors and senior management generally set the code of 
conduct for the company. This code of conduct is often referred to as the company’s “ethic” 
and is the standard by which all employees are expected to conduct themselves. If the 
company’s ethic is one of high integrity, it is anticipated that the employees will tend to be 
more honest. If, on the other hand, the ethic is one of corruption, the employees will view it 
as a license to be corrupt. “Ethical leadership has to come from inside, and from the top. 
Ethical considerations have got to be on senior management’s agenda. And they have to set 
the tone by example, not by sending memos,” says J. Gregory Dees, a professor at Harvard 
Business School. 
 
An unimpeachable company ethic does not, in and of itself, ensure that financial statement 
fraud will not occur. Other measures are required for management to discharge its 
responsibilities to prevent and detect fraudulent financial reporting. 
 
The Treadway Commission 
The National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting, more commonly referred to 
as the Treadway Commission, was formed in the United States in 1985 to better define the 
responsibilities of the auditor in detecting and preventing fraud. The professional auditing 
organizations — the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, The Institute of 
Internal Auditors, and the American Accounting Association, among others — established 
the Treadway Commission to underwrite a study and make recommendations. In an effort 
to curb fraudulent financial reporting, the Treadway Commission offered four 
recommendations that, when combined with other measures, might help reduce the 
probability of fraudulent financial reporting. These recommendations are addressed to the 
board of directors’ audit committee. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.202                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Mandatory Independent Audit Committee 
The board of directors oversees the conduct of management. The Treadway Commission 
recommended that each board of directors have an audit committee composed of outside 
directors. 
 
Written Charter 
The Treadway Commission also suggested that companies develop a written charter setting 
forth the duties and responsibilities of the audit committee. The board of directors should 
periodically review, modify, and approve this written charter. 
 
Resources and Authority 
According to the Treadway Commission, the existence of an audit committee and a written 
charter is not enough. The committee also must have adequate resources and authority to 
carry out its responsibilities. 
 
Informed, Vigilant, and Effective Audit Committees 
The audit committee should be composed of members who are informed, vigilant, and 
effective. 
 
The COSO Report 
In addition, in 1987, the Treadway Commission recommended that management of publicly 
held companies include with its management reports an acknowledgement of responsibility 
for internal controls and an assessment of its effectiveness in meeting those controls. The 
Treadway Commission formed the Committee on Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) to 
actualize its recommendations. In 1992, COSO issued Internal Control—Integrated Framework  
(followed by an addendum), which provided the following definition: 
 
Internal Control is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the 
achievement of objectives in the following categories:  
a)  reliability of financial reporting,  
b)  effectiveness and efficiency  of operations, and  
c) compliance with applicable laws and regulations. 
 
COSO also identified, for management, five interrelated components of internal control: 
  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.203 
• The control environment  sets the tone of an organization, influencing the control 
consciousness of the organization and providing a foundation for all other control 
components. 
• Risk assessment  is an entity’s identification and assessment of risks relevant to achieving 
control objectives. 
• Control activities  are an entity’s control policies and procedures. 
• Information and communication  is the exchange of information in a way that allows 
employees to carry out their responsibilities. 
• Monitoring  is the process that assesses the control environment over time.  
 
These components combined form an integrated system of controls. 
 
COSO Guidance for Smaller Public Companies 
In 2006, COSO issued a report titled Internal Control over Financial Reporting— Guidance for 
Smaller Public Companies, which provides guidance for small companies on implementing cost-
 effective internal controls over financial reporting as required under Sarbanes-Oxley Section 
404. While acknowledging that smaller public companies often face unique and 
disproportionate challenges in applying sound internal control practices, COSO noted that 
the benefits of good internal control outweigh the costs and add significant value to an 
organization. The guidance is split between three volumes and contains 20 principles related 
to the Internal Control—Integrated Framework, as well as 75 attributes related to these principles.  
 
The report outlines several methods small companies can utilize to establish and enhance 
cost-effective internal controls, such as widening and directing control from the top, 
emphasizing effective oversight on the part of the board of directors, compensating for 
limited segregation of duties, leveraging the abilities of commercially available information 
technology, and using management’s monitoring activities to offset shortcomings in other 
control areas. The report also discusses ways to achieve further efficiencies in designing, 
implementing, and assessing controls, including focusing on risk, adjusting documentation 
policies to fit the needs of the organization, and viewing internal control as an integrated 
process.  
 
More information on the COSO reports can be found at www.coso.org.  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.204                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
On July 30, 2002, President Bush signed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. This law significantly 
changed the laws of corporate governance and the rules and regulations under which 
accounting firms and corporations must operate. Additionally, certain provisions 
considerably increased the responsibilities of management and the accounting profession 
with regard to fraud. Since the enactment of Sarbanes-Oxley, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) has issued numerous SEC Releases that support and expand the Act’s 
requirements. Below is a summary of some of the most important provisions of Sarbanes-
 Oxley and the corresponding SEC rules that re late to fraud detection and prevention. More 
information about Sarbanes-Oxley can be found in the chapter entitled “The Law Related to 
Fraud” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, signed in July 2010, 
allows small public companies (those with less than $75 million in market cap) a permanent 
exemption from section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. 
 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
Title I of Sarbanes-Oxley establishes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB), whose purpose is: 
 
“to oversee the audit of public companies that are subject to the securities laws, and 
related matters, in order to protect the inte rests of investors and further the public 
interest in the preparation of informative,  accurate, and independent audit reports for 
companies the securities of which are sold to, and held by and for, public investors.”  
[Section 101] 
 
In short, the Board is charged with overseeing public company audits, setting audit 
standards, and investigating acts of noncompliance by auditors or audit firms. The Board is 
appointed and overseen by the Securities and Exchange Commission. It is made up of five 
persons, two who are or have been Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) and three who have 
never been CPAs. The Act lists the Board’s duties, which include: 
• Registering public accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies. 
• Establishing or adopting auditing, quality control, ethics, independence, and other 
standards relating to audits of publicly traded companies. 
• Inspecting registered public accounting firms. 
• Investigating registered public accounting firms and their employees, conducting 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.205 
disciplinary hearings, and imposing sanctions where justified. 
• Performing such other duties as are necessary to promote high professional standards 
among registered accounting firms, to improve the quality of audit services offered by 
those firms, and to protect investors. 
• Enforcing compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the rules of the Board, professional 
standards, and securities laws relating to public company audits. 
 
Registration with the Board 
Public accounting firms must register with the PCAOB in order to legally prepare or issue an 
audit report on a publicly traded company. In order to become registered, accounting firms 
must disclose, among other things, the names of all public companies they audited in the 
preceding year, the names of all public companies they expect to audit in the current year, 
and the annual fees they received from each of their public audit clients for audit, 
accounting, and non-audit services.  
 
Auditing, Quality Control, and Independence Standards and Rules 
Section 103 of the Act requires the Board to establish standards for auditing, quality control, 
ethics, independence, and other issues relating to audits of publicly traded companies. 
Although the Act places the responsibility on the Board to establish audit standards, it also 
sets forth certain rules that the Board is required to include in those auditing standards. 
These rules include the following:  
• Audit work papers must be maintained for at least seven years. 
• Auditing firms must include a concurring or second partner review and approval of audit 
reports, and concurring approval in the issuance of the audit report by a qualified person 
other than the person in charge of the audit. 
• All audit reports must describe the scope of testing of the company’s internal control 
structure and must present the auditor’s findings from the testing, including an 
evaluation of whether the internal control structure is acceptable, a description of 
material weaknesses in internal controls, and any material noncompliance with controls.  
 
Inspections of Registered Public Accounting Firms 
The Act also authorizes the Board to conduct regular inspections of public accounting firms 
to assess their degree of compliance with laws, rules, and professional standards regarding 
audits. Inspections are to be conducted once a year for firms that regularly audit more than 
100 public companies and at least once every three years for firms that regularly audit 
between 1 and 100 public companies.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.206                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Investigations and Disciplinary Proceedings 
The Board has the authority to investigate registered public accounting firms (or their 
employees) for potential violations of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, professional standards, any 
rules established by the Board, or any securities laws relating to the preparation and issuance 
of audit reports. During an investigation, the Board has the power to compel testimony and 
document production.  
 
The Board also has the power to issue sanctions for violations or for non-cooperation with 
an investigation. Sanctions can include temporary or permanent suspension of a firm’s 
registration with the Board (which would mean the firm could no longer legally audit 
publicly traded companies), temporary or permanent suspension of a person’s right to be 
associated with a registered public accounting firm, prohibition from auditing public 
companies, and civil monetary penalties of up to $750,000 for an individual and up to 
$15,000,000 for a firm.  
 
Officers and Directors 
The Act includes several responsibilities for the officers and directors of public companies. 
 
Certification Obligations
The Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of public companies must 
personally certify annual and quarterly SEC filings.  
 
Section 302 of the Act requires that the CEO and CFO personally certify the following: 
• They have personally reviewed the report.  
• Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the report misleading. 
• Based on their knowledge, the financial statements and information in the report fairly 
present, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the 
company.  
• They are responsible for establishing and maintaining internal controls and have 
designed such controls to ensure that material information relating to the company and 
its consolidated subsidiaries is made known to them; they have evaluated the 
effectiveness of internal controls within 90 days prior to the report; and they have 
presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of those controls in the report. 
• They have disclosed to their auditors and the audit committee any significant deficiencies 
in the controls that could adversely affect the company’s ability to record, process, 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.207 
summarize, and report financial data, and they have identified for their auditors any 
material weaknesses in internal controls. Further, they have disclosed to their auditors 
any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other employees who 
have a significant role in the company’s internal controls. 
• They have indicated in their report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls since the filing of  the last report, including any corrective 
actions with respect to previously identified significant deficiencies and material 
weaknesses. 
 
Internal Controls 
Under Section 404 of the Act, and SEC Release Nos. 33-8238 and 34-47986, management’s 
responsibility pertaining to the company’s internal control over financial reporting has been 
increased substantially.  
 
DEFINING INTERNAL CONTROL 
Internal control over financial reporting (ICOFR) is defined as: 
 
“ A process designed … to provide reasonable assurance re garding the reliability of financial reporting and the 
preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles….” 
 
Additionally, ICOFR is deemed to include all policies and procedures that: 
• “Pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly 
reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the [company]; 
• Provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit 
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the [company] are being made only in 
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the [company]; and 
• Provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use or disposition of the [company ’s] assets that could have a material effect 
on the financial statements.” 
 
Examples of internal controls covered by Section 404 and the related Releases and Standards 
include, but are not limited to: 
  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.208                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Controls over initiating, authorizing, recording, processing, reconciling, and reporting 
significant account balances, transactions, and disclosures included in the financial 
statements. 
• Controls related to the prevention, identification, and detection of fraud. 
• Controls related to initiating and processing of non-routing and non-systematic 
transactions. 
• Controls related to the selection and application of appropriate accounting policies.  
 
MANAGEMENT’S REPORT ON INTERNAL CONTROL 
The provisions of Section 404 require management to acknowledge its responsibility for the 
ICOFR of the company and to assess the operating effectiveness of those controls. As a 
result, public companies must issue an additional internal control report within their annual 
report containing: 
• A statement of management’s responsibility for establishing and maintaining adequate 
ICOFR; 
• A statement identifying the framework that management used in conducting the 
assessment of the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR; 
• Management’s assessment of the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR as of the end of 
the company’s most recent fiscal year, including disclosure of any material weaknesses 
identified in the company’s ICOFR and an explicit statement as to whether the ICOFR 
is effective; and 
• A statement that the company’s independent auditor has issued an attestation report 
covering management’s assessment of the company’s ICOFR. The auditor’s attestation 
report must also be filed with the annual report.  
 
MANAGEMENT’S ASSESSMENT OF INTERNAL CONTROL 
In performing the ICOFR assessment, management must choose a suitable internal control 
framework against which to evaluate the design and effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR. 
The most commonly used model in the United States is the Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework established by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the 
Treadway Commission, which provides five components of effective internal controls: 
• Control Environment 
• Control Activities 
• Risk Assessment 
• Information and Communication 
• Monitoring 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.209 
The COSO framework is discussed in more detail in the “Fraud Prevention Programs” 
chapter in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
Further detail on the Internal Control—Integrated Framework is also available at the COSO 
website (http://www.coso.org). 
  
Additionally, management must: 
• Determine which internal controls to test in performing the assessment, considering the 
significance of each control, both individually and in the aggregate; 
• Evaluate whether the failure of a control could result in a misstatement to the financial 
statements, the likelihood and magnitude of any resulting misstatement, and whether 
other controls are in place to mitigate this occurrence; 
• Determine which locations or business units to include in the assessment, if applicable; 
• Evaluate the design and operating effectiveness of the internal controls using the internal 
control framework chosen as a guide; 
• Evaluate the probability of occurrence and the size of potential misstatements resulting 
from the internal control deficiencies identified and determine whether they, either 
individually or in the aggregate, constitute material weaknesses (any deficiency where the 
likelihood of potential misstatement is more than remote) or significant deficiencies (any 
deficiency where the likelihood of potential misstatement is more than remote and the 
magnitude is more than inconsequential); 
• Provide sufficient documentation to support the assessment of ICOFR, including 
documenting the design of the internal controls and the results of management’s testing 
and evaluation; and 
• Communicate the assessment findings to the independent auditor and any other 
applicable parties. 
 
Recognizing that each company differs with regard to internal control structure, the rules 
state that the nature of the testing performed by management will depend on the specific 
circumstances of the company and the significance of the control being tested. However, the 
rules also assert that inquiries alone are generally not a sufficient basis for management’s 
assessment.  
 
In July 2007, the SEC issued guidance specifically  addressed to management about fulfilling 
their responsibilities pertaining to reporting on internal control over financial reporting. The 
guidance emphasizes a top-down, risk-based approach to management’s evaluation of 
ICOFR, and explicitly states that an evaluation performed in compliance with the guidance is 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.210                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
one way that management can satisfy the internal control requirements established by 
Sarbanes-Oxley. In providing direction to assist companies’ management in evaluation and 
assessment of the ICOFR, the Guidance addresses the following topics: 
• Identifying Financial Reporting Risks and Controls 
• Evaluating Evidence of the Operating Effectiveness of ICOFR 
• Reporting Considerations 
 
The full text of the SEC interpretive guidance can be found at 
http://www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33-8810.pdf.  
 
Code of Ethics 
As required by Section 406 of the Act and SEC Release No. 33-8177, public companies must 
disclose in their annual report whether they have adopted a code of ethics for senior 
financial officers, and if they have not, they must explain their reasoning.  
 
DEFINING “CODE OF ETHICS” 
The rules define a “code of ethics” as a set of written standards that are designed to deter 
wrongdoing and to promote: 
• Honest and ethical conduct, including the ethical treatment of actual or apparent 
conflicts of interest between personal and professional interests; 
• Full, fair, accurate, timely, and understandable disclosure in all documents filed with the 
SEC and all other public communications; 
• Compliance with all applicable governmental laws, rules, and regulations; 
• The prompt reporting to the appropriate person or persons within the company of 
violations of the code; and 
• Accountability for adherence to the code. 
 
The SEC believes that the establishment of provisions beyond this definitional outline is 
best left to the discretion of the company. Therefore, the rules do not specify any detailed 
requirements, particular language, compliance procedures, or sanctions for violations that 
must be included in the code of ethics. The SEC does, however, explicitly encourage the 
adoption of codes that are broader and more comprehensive than necessary to meet the 
disclosure requirements. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.211 
SENIOR FINANCIAL OFFICERS 
The senior financial officers that must be covered by the company’s code of ethics include 
the principal executive officer, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer or 
controller, and persons performing similar functions. While the rules state that a company 
must have a specialized code of ethics that applies to senior financial officers, the company 
does not need to adopt a separate code of ethics for these officers. However, if it does not, 
the company’s general code of ethics should ex pressly state that it applies to all senior 
financial officers.  
 
DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
In addition to the disclosure of the existence of the code of ethics in the annual report, the 
rules require that companies make publicly available the portions of their code of ethics that 
address the ethical considerations contained within the definition of “code of ethics” and 
that apply to the senior financial officers. To do so, the SEC permits companies to employ 
one of three alternative methods: 
• Filing the code of ethics that applies to the senior financial officers as an exhibit in the 
company’s annual report; 
• Posting the code of ethics that is relevant to the senior financial officers on its website, 
and disclosing the Internet address and the fact that the code is posted in this manner 
within the annual report; or 
• Providing a copy of the code of ethics to any person upon request, and without charge, 
provided the annual report contains an undertaking to do so and an explanation of how 
a person can make such a request.  
 
Public companies must also make known, either on a Form 8-K or on their website, any 
changes in and any waivers of the code of ethics relating to the senior financial officers. The 
nature of the change or waiver must be disclosed within five business days of its occurrence 
and, if disclosed on a website, must remain posted for 12 months.  
 
EXAMPLES OF CODES OF ETHICS 
The following are some examples of organizations that have adopted codes of ethics that 
meet the SEC’s guidelines. Additionally, the ACFE’s sample code of ethics is contained in 
the “Fraud Prevention Programs” chapter in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section 
of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
• FEI (http://investor.fei.com/documentdisplay.cfm?DocumentID=2453)) 
• ExxonMobil 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.212                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
(http://www.exxonmobil.com/corporate/about_operations_sbc_ethics.aspx)) 
•  (http://media.corporate-ir.net/media_files/nys/nmg.a/reports/nmg_coefp.pdf) 
• McDonald’s ( http://www.mcdonalds.com/corp/invest/gov/officer_ethics.html) 
 
Audit Committee 
The audit committee of a company is a committee established by the board of directors for 
the purpose of overseeing the accounting, financial reporting, and auditing processes. 
Sections 301 and 407 of the Act and SEC Release Nos. 33-8177, 33-8220, 34-47235, and 34-
 47654 set out specific requirements for audit committees of public companies.  
 
Composition of the Audit Committee 
INDEPENDENCE 
Each member of the audit committee must be a member of the board of directors and must 
be “independent,” as evaluated by two criteria: 
• Fees—Audit committee members may only be compensated for their services on the 
board and any board committee. They cannot be paid by the company, or any of its 
subsidiaries, for any other consulting or advisory work, including indirect payments 
made by the company to a party related to the committee member. Audit committee 
members may receive any fixed retirement benefits they are entitled to for prior service 
with the company without violating this provision, as long as the benefits are not 
contingent upon the member’s continued service. 
• Affiliation—Audit committee members cannot be “affiliated persons” of the company 
or any other company related to it. This precludes executive officers, 
director/employees, general partners, and managing members of the company, or its 
parent, subsidiary, or sister company, from serving on the audit committee. There is a 
safe harbor provision that excludes members from being considered an affiliated person 
as long as they are not an executive officer of the company or any of its subsidiaries, and 
they are not a shareholder of 10 percent or more of any class of voting stock of the 
company or any of its subsidiaries. 
 
The SEC permits three exemptions from the independence standards. The first provides a 
one-year phase-in period for public non-investment companies, whereby there must be at 
least one fully independent member when the company goes public, a majority of 
independent members within 90 days, and a fully independent committee within one year. 
The second exemption allows a committee member to simultaneously sit on the board of 
directors of the company and of an affiliated company (i.e., a parent, subsidiary, or sister 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.213 
company) without being considered an affiliated person, provided the member otherwise 
meets the independence criteria. The final exemption exists to provide a number of 
accommodations for “foreign private issuers,” or listed companies that are incorporated 
outside of the United States. The SEC has stated that beyond these three exemptions, no 
additional exemptions will be granted, nor will it consider exemptions or waivers for 
particular relationships on a case-by-case basis. 
 
FINANCIAL EXPERT 
The board of directors must include a disclosure in the company’s annual report stating 
whether or not there is at least one member of its audit committee that qualifies as an “audit 
committee financial expert.” If there is, the company must also include the name of the 
expert, and whether the expert is independent from management. If there is not, an 
explanation must be given as to why the committee does not have such an expert. 
Additionally, the board is permitted, but not required, to disclose that it has more than one 
audit committee financial expert on its audit committee. 
 
To qualify as an “audit committee financial expert,” an individual must possess: 
• An understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and of financial 
statements; 
• The ability to evaluate the application of accounting principles used in the accounting for 
estimates, accruals, and reserves; 
• Experience in preparing, auditing, analyzing, or evaluating financial statements 
containing accounting issues that are “gene rally comparable” to those expected to be 
raised in the company’s financial statements, or experience supervising someone engaged 
in such activities; 
• An understanding of internal controls and financial reporting procedures; and 
• An understanding of the functions of an audit committee. 
 
The rules state that the audit committee financial expert must have acquired these attributes 
through education and experience from serving as or actively supervising a principal 
financial officer, principal accounting officer, controller, public accountant or auditor, or 
other similar position, or through the oversight or assessment of companies or public 
accountants regarding the preparation, audit, or evaluation of financial statements. The SEC 
also recognizes that individuals that do not meet any of these requirements but have “other 
relevant experience” may qualify as an audit committee financial expert. However, any board 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.214                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of directors that qualifies an expert under this category is required to provide a brief listing 
of that person’s experience with the disclosure in the annual report.  
 
In determining whether an individual qualifies as an audit committee financial expert, the 
board of directors should consider all relevant facts and circumstances including, but not 
limited to, certain qualitative factors, such as the level of the person’s accounting or financial 
education, whether the person is a CPA, whether the person has previously served as a CFO 
or controller of a public company, the person’s past or current membership on other audit 
committees, and any other relevant qualifications or experience that would assist in 
understanding and evaluating the company’s financial statements. The SEC emphasizes that 
such factors are merely examples and should be considered only as part of an evaluation of 
the person’s knowledge and experience as a whole. 
 
To dissuade hesitancy to serve as an audit committee financial expert, the SEC has expressly 
stated that the duties, obligations, and liability of the member serving as the expert are no 
greater than the duties, obligations, and liability of all other members of the audit committee. 
Similarly, the designation of an audit committee member as a financial expert does not 
change the duties, obligations, or liability of any other board or audit committee members.  
 
Responsibilities Relating to External Auditors 
The audit committee has sole responsibility for hiring, paying, retaining, overseeing, and, if 
necessary, firing the company’s outside auditors, as well as the ultimate authority to approve 
all audit engagement fees and terms. As a result, the external auditors must report directly to 
the audit committee. The committee is also charged with resolving any disputes that arise 
between the external auditors and management regarding financial reporting issues. 
 
All audit and permitted non-audit services, other than de minimis services, provided by the 
external auditor must be pre-approved by the audit committee. The audit committee can 
accomplish this either by approving all services separately prior to each engagement or by 
establishing a detailed set of pre-approval policies and procedures covering all engagements, 
as long as the audit committee is informed on a timely basis of each service and the 
responsibility of pre-approval cannot be shifted to management. If the committee chooses 
to implement a set of pre-approval policies and procedures, then either a clear description or 
copy of those policies and procedures must be included with the company’s proxy 
statement. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.215 
Procedures for Handling Complaints 
The audit committee is required to establish procedures (e.g., a hotline) for receiving, 
retaining, and dealing with complaints, including confidential or anonymous employee tips, 
regarding irregularities in the company’s accounting methods, internal controls, or auditing 
matters.  
 
The SEC does not require any specific procedures for handling complaints, but rather allows 
the audit committee to determine the most appropriate procedures for the company’s 
circumstances. Included in this flexibility is the ability of the audit committee to defer the 
receipt and screening of the complaints to another party, such as a messaging service. 
However, when complaints are received by a party outside of the audit committee, the 
procedures should dictate that the tips are ultimately directed to the audit committee for 
resolution. Further, the procedures should be designed such that management is not 
exclusively responsible for receiving and screening the complaints, to prevent unscrupulous 
managers from mishandling complaints or retaliating against employee complainants. 
Ultimately, the enactment of formal procedures should encourage the disclosure of concerns 
and promote proper conduct throughout the organization. The established procedures 
should also allow the audit committee to be alerted to potential problems before serious 
consequences arise. 
 
Authority to Engage Outside Advisors 
In certain situations, audit committees may want to consult experts other than those hired by 
management, especially when faced with possible conflicts of management interests. The 
rules provide that audit committees are allowed to engage any outside advisors, such as 
experts in specific accounting issues, that may be necessary to properly carry out their duties.  
 
Funding 
The audit committee is entitled to receive appropriate funding from the company for: 
• Fees paid to the external auditors for performance of any audit, review, or attestation 
engagements; 
• Payments to any outside advisors retained by the audit committee; and 
• Any administrative expenses necessary for the audit committee to carry out its duties. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.216                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
External Auditors 
Reports to the Audit Committee 
Auditors must report directly to the audit committee—not management—and must make 
timely reports on the following: 
• All critical accounting policies and practices used; 
• Alternative GAAP methods that were discussed with management, the ramifications of 
the use of those alternative treatments, and the treatment preferred by the auditors; and 
• Any other material written communications between the auditors and management, such 
as any management letter or the schedule of unadjusted audit differences. 
 
Report over Internal Controls 
Auditors must also now attest to and issue a report on management’s assessment of internal 
control over financial reporting under Section 404 of Sarbanes-Oxley. This requirement is 
covered in more detail in the previous section on PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5 — An 
Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated with  An Audit of Financial 
Statements. 
 
Whistleblower Protection 
In addition to requiring the audit committee to establish procedures to handle employee tips 
and complaints, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act includes two provisions that create broad 
protections for corporate whistleblowers.  
 
Civil Liability 
Section 806 of the Act creates a civil liability for an employer who, out of retaliation, fires, 
demotes, suspends, threatens, harasses, or discriminates against an employee who provided 
information or otherwise assisted in an investigation of fraudulent activity. Employees are 
also protected against retaliation for filing, testifying, participating, or otherwise assisting in a 
proceeding filed or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws and 
regulations. Employees that were retaliated against in such a manner are entitled to 
compensatory damages under Section 806, including reinstatement with back pay and 
interest and compensation for legal fees. It should be noted, however, that this provision 
does not provide protection to all whistleblowers as it only covers employees of publicly 
traded companies.  
 
Financial Transactions Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.217 
Criminal Sanctions 
Section 1107 of the Act establishes criminal sanctions for anyone who intentionally retaliates 
against another party for providing information regarding an alleged Federal offense to a law 
enforcement officer. Punishments for violating the provision include fines of up to $250,000 
and up to 10 years in prison for individuals and fines of up to $500,000 for corporations. 
Unlike the civil liability, the protection provided under Section 1107 applies to all individuals, 
regardless of where they work.  
 
The whistleblower protection provisions are discussed in more detail in the “Law Related to 
Fraud” chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Civil and Criminal Penalties for Noncompliance 
Depending on which particular provision of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is violated, the penalties 
can be severe. In addition to creating additional criminal offenses (e.g., the whistleblower 
retaliation crime discussed above), it increases the jail term for existing crimes such as mail 
fraud and wire fraud from five to twenty years. It also makes it a crime to destroy documents 
and requires auditors of public companies to keep work papers for at least five years. 
 
The Act also authorizes the SEC to freeze questioned assets during an investigation. 
Additionally, section 304 of the Act requires that if a public company is required to prepare 
an accounting restatement due to misconduct that results in material non-compliance with 
any financial reporting requirement, the CEO and CFO shall reimburse the company for:  
• Any bonuses or other incentive-based or equity-based compensation that they received 
during the 12-month period following the first public issuance or filing (whichever is 
earlier) of a financial document embodying such financial reporting requirement; and 
• Profits on the sale of company securities during such 12-month period. 
 
Private Securities Litigation Reform Act  
The Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995 drastically changed the procedures and 
proof required in securities fraud cases. It also included additional responsibilities for 
independent auditors of public companies. Under the Act, each audit of the financial 
statements of a public company must include the following: 
• Procedures designed to provide reasonable assurance of detecting illegal acts that would 
have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts. 
• Procedures designed to identify related-party transactions that are material to the 
financial statements or otherwise require disclosure therein. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.218                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• An evaluation of whether there is substantial doubt about the ability of the issuer to 
continue as a going concern during the ensuing fiscal year. 
 
The term illegal act is defined to mean any act or omission “that violates any law, rule, or 
regulation having the force of law.” 
 
Additionally, if in the course of an audit, an auditor “detects or otherwise becomes aware 
that an illegal act (whether or not perceived to have a material effect on the financial 
statements of the issuer) has or might have occurred,” the auditor must then: 
• Determine and consider the possible effect of the illegal act on the financial statements 
of the company, including any contingent monetary effects such as fines, penalties, and 
damages; 
• Inform the appropriate level of management “as soon as practicable”; and 
• Assure that the audit committee (or the board of directors in the absence of an audit 
committee) is adequately informed of the illegal acts that have been detected unless such 
acts are “clearly inconsequential.” 
 
The Reform Act provides further that the auditor must take notice of what, if any, action is 
taken by the company in response. If the auditor concludes that the illegal act has a material 
effect on the financial statements of the company, the auditor must then determine: 
• Whether senior management has taken “tim ely and appropriate remedial actions,” and 
• Whether the failure to take remedial action is “reasonably expected to warrant departure 
from a standard report of the auditor, when made, or warrant resignation from the audit 
engagement.”  
 
If the auditor concludes that senior management has failed to appropriately address the 
situation, he must report his conclusions to the board of directors. If the board receives such 
a report, the board is then required to notify the SEC within one business day and send a 
copy of the SEC notice to the auditor. If the auditor does not receive a copy of this notice 
before the one-day deadline, then the auditor is required to furnish the SEC with a copy of 
his report to the board. 
 
The auditor is provided with some protection, however. The Act expressly provides that the 
auditor cannot be liable in a private action for any statements contained in the auditor’s 
report to the SEC.  
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.219 
Management 
Ultimately, management is responsible for the prevention and detection of fraud within an 
organization. It is management’s job to ensure the proper internal controls are in place to 
prevent fraud, as well as to detect it. Although management may not execute all of the 
controls—as the performance of internal cont rol functions are generally spread across 
individuals throughout the entire organization, including individual contributors, 
management, and even the Board of Directors—management is also responsible for 
monitoring and remediating internal controls to ensure they are effectively designed and 
operating to prevent and detect fraud. 
 
As mentioned above, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 includes several requirements of 
management in public companies. Also discussed above, COSO provided several guidelines 
for management’s prevention and detection of fraud through the internal control 
environment. 
 
Although preparing the financial statements is the responsibility of management, fraud is 
also frequently investigated by members of management or by people under the direction 
and control of management. This can present potential conflicts.   
 
Document Retention Policies 
Management of an organization should ensure that the organization has a proper and 
effective document retention policy (DRP) in place. When establishing a document retention 
policy, it is imperative that the organization consider all federal and state laws and 
regulations regarding record-keeping requirements. Industries such as health care, banking, 
and auditing contain trade-specific rules for documenting and retaining records. 
Furthermore, companies should continuously check for legal updates concerning these 
requirements. To have a document retention policy that ignores pertinent record-keeping 
requirements could lead to statutory violations. 
 
An effective document retention policy requires that a company (1) establish retention 
protocols before it foresees litigation or official investigation; (2) develop, review, and/or 
amend a policy for compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations; (3) 
ensure the reasonableness of the policy according to the company’s business practices; (4) 
provide a concise explanation of what is to be destroyed and when; (5) provide adequate 
protocols for management of electronic documents; and (6) clearly set forth when the policy 
should be immobilized due to a pending investigation or foreseeable litigation.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.220                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Because industries vary significantly in the types of documents produced, received, and 
distributed, courts lean toward a subjective “reasonableness” standard in determining 
whether a particular policy is adequate. Thus, each company must develop a policy that is 
specifically tailored to its business practices. A company may find it helpful to refer to 
retention policies of other companies for guidance, but should avoid duplicating such 
policies. By establishing individual business policies and compartmentalizing low-value and 
high-value documents, companies can gain quick access to internal documents. 
 
A properly planned and executed document retention policy will do little good if individuals 
within the company are unaware of it. Not only must employees be aware of the policy, they 
must also understand what is to be destroyed and when. 
 
While electronic communication continues to soar, companies struggle to catch up with its 
agility. It is vital that companies include protocols for preserving and destroying electronic 
documents. Companies with information technology (IT) departments should develop 
procedures for handling electronic data. Company counsels, executives, and managers 
should be aware of how electronic data is stored and destroyed. For example, an e-mail 
deleted by an employee may remain in a company’s computer systems until an administrator 
permanently deletes it. Such situations must be recognized and addressed when designing a 
document retention policy. 
 
What Documents Should Be Kept?   
One of the first steps in establishing a document retention policy is to identify the types of 
documents that need to be retained or destroyed. It is important to remember that every 
organization is different; thus, an organization may require the retention of documents that 
are not provided for in this text. All types of documents produced by an organization must 
be initially accounted for. This includes tangible and electronic documents, and is never 
limited to financial documents. Accounting records, corporate tax records, bank records, 
employment records, various workplace records (including in-house e-mails and client 
correspondence), and legal records must be considered when constructing a DRP for a 
particular organization.  
 
A sample document retention policy that contains a list of records to be taken into account 
when determining retention protocol is included at the end of this chapter. A company 
should check with its local counsel regarding specific state statutes requiring different 
periods. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.221 
Other factors to consider in identifying documents include member/constituent 
expectations, IRS regulations, business taxable income regulations, standards under 
Sarbanes-Oxley, and internal factors (e.g., changes in Board of Directors, Board resolutions, 
patents, and copyrights). 
 
Records typically generated by a company that reflect or materially relate to professional 
services must also be identified in the DRP. For example, accounting and auditing firms 
should mention the retention and destruction of documents that make up client files, such as 
client billing and payment records, correspondence, and time records. 
 
Document Storage 
In this electronic age, most companies are backing up documents via electronic media rather 
than filling file cabinets. Storage expense scares small businesses. Document storage 
companies are available for storing tangible and electronic documents, but can be costly. 
Hard drive back-up appears to be the most cost efficient means of storage, but it requires 
companies to have the computer gusto to withstand large amounts of information.  
 
Most importantly, documents must remain safe (for confidentiality and destruction 
purposes) and be easily accessible in the event of potential litigation and legal requests for 
documents. 
 
Document Destruction 
An organization must cease destruction of documents when faced with potential litigation or 
when a legal document request is pending or imminent. Destruction under a valid DRP will 
be ineffective if documents are not actually destroyed before a potential litigation trigger 
occurs. Thus, it is imperative that the DRP provides for complete destruction of documents 
that can be validly expunged during the proper periods under the policy. Documents should 
be destroyed by shredding or by some other means that will render them unreadable. 
Similarly, a protocol for the destruction of electronic data should be in place to ensure that 
documents to be destroyed are actually destroyed. The deletion of e-mails or other files on 
one’s computer does not mean that such records are removed from evidence.  
 
DRP Managers 
Finally, in order to properly execute a DRP, someone with detailed knowledge of the DRP 
should be in charge of the policy and should ensure that employees understand and follow it 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.222                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
as designed. This individual should be a senior-level employee with the power to enforce the 
policy. A DRP manager is responsible for: 
• Implementing the DRP; 
• Ensuring that employees understand and follow the DRP’s purpose; 
• Providing oversight on actual retention and destruction of documents;  
• Ensuring proper storage of documents; 
• Periodically following-up with counsel to ensure proper retention periods are in place;  
• Suspending the destruction of documents upon foreseeable litigation; and 
• Informing corporate officers, directors, and employees of changes in relation to the 
DRP. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, and other rules and 
regulations either require or strongly encourage the implementation of one or more fraud 
prevention programs. In most instances, management is responsible for the institution of 
such programs. 
 
These programs, as well as further details regarding management’s responsibility for fraud, 
are discussed in detail in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud 
Examiners  Manual. 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners, external auditors, and internal auditors also play key roles in the 
detection and deterrence of fraudulent financial reporting. Following is a discussion of their 
professional responsibilities. 
 
 
External Auditors 
Changes in the auditing landscape, primarily those stemming from the passage of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, have led to a dichotomy of standards for external auditors. Auditors of 
public companies — companies registered with the SEC—must adhere to the auditing rules 
promulgated by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). Conversely, 
for audits of non-SEC-registered entities, the generally accepted auditing standards laid out 
by the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board (ASB) apply. It should be noted, however, that 
the PCAOB adopted all of the ASB’s standards already in existence on April 16, 2003 (i.e., 
all standards issued through Statement on Auditing Standard (SAS) No. 101) as interim 
standards applicable to auditors of public companies, unless and until such standards are 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.223 
superseded or amended by the PCAOB. Therefore, the discussion below on AU Section 
316, which codifies SAS No. 99, applies to all external auditors; whereas, AU sections 314 
and 339, which respectively codify SAS Nos. 109 and 103, apply to audits of non-public 
entities only. Likewise, the PCAOB standards discussed apply only to auditors of SEC-
 registered companies.  
 
AU Section 316 — Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit (Source: SAS Nos. 99 and 113) 
In 1996, the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board issued SAS No. 82, Consideration of Fraud in a 
Financial Statement Audit, in response to questions and criticisms of the auditing and 
accounting profession’s lack of adequate addre ssing of the subject of fraud. Following the 
high-profile financial frauds that occurred in 2001 and 2002, the ASB replaced SAS No. 82 
with SAS No. 99, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, to give expanded 
guidance to auditors for detecting material fraud. Per the AICPA, the standard was part of 
an effort to “restore investor confidence in U.S. capital markets and re-establish audited 
financial statements as a clear picture window into Corporate America.” The standard 
became effective for audits of financial statements for periods beginning on or after 
December 15, 2002, and is codified in AU section 316, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial 
Statement Audit. 
 
AU section 110, Responsibilities and Functions of the Independent Auditor,  states, “The auditor has 
a responsibility to plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether 
the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether caused by error or fraud.” 
The purpose of AU section 316 is to “establis h standards and provide guidance to auditors 
in fulfilling that responsibility.”  
 
AU section 316 is divided into 10 main sections: 
• Description and characteristics of fraud 
• Importance of exercising professional skepticism 
• Discussion among engagement personnel regarding risk of material misstatement due to 
fraud 
• Obtaining information needed to identify risks of material misstatements due to fraud 
• Identifying risks that may result in material misstatements due to fraud 
• Assessing the identified risks after taking into account an evaluation of the entity’s 
programs and controls 
• Responding to the results of the assessment 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.224                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluating audit evidence 
• Communicating about fraud to management, the audit committee, and others 
• Documenting the auditor’s consideration of fraud 
 
Following is a brief description of each of these sections. Practitioners in this area should 
review AU section 316 in its entirety for more detailed information. A copy of the entire 
standard can be obtained from the AICPA (www.aicpa.org). 
 
Description and Characteristics of Fraud 
AU section 316 emphasizes that while auditors do not make legal determinations about the 
existence of fraud, they should be interested in all acts that result in material misstatements 
of the financial statements. Such misstatements can be the result of either fraud or error, 
depending on whether the misstatements are intentional or unintentional.  
 
Two types of misstatements are considered relevant for audit purposes: 
• Misstatements arising from fraudulent financial reporting 
• Misstatements arising from misappropriation of assets 
 
MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING 
This category is defined as intentional misstatements or omissions of amounts or disclosures 
in financial statements that are “designed to deceive financial statement users.”   
 
Fraudulent financial reporting may be accomplished by: 
• Manipulating, falsifying, or altering acco unting records or supporting documents; 
• Misrepresenting or intentionally omitting events, transactions, or other significant 
information; or  
• Intentionally misapplying accounting principles relating to amounts, classification, 
manner of presentation, or disclosure. 
 
MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM MISAPPROPRIATION OF ASSETS 
Also referred to as theft or defalcation, this category includes the theft of an entity’s assets 
where the effect of the theft causes the financial statements, in all material respects, not to be 
in conformity with GAAP. 
 
AU section 316 goes on to remind the auditor that, by definition, fraud often is concealed, 
and management is in a position to perpetrate fraud more easily because it is in a position of 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.225 
being able to directly or indirectly manipulate accounting records. Auditors cannot obtain 
absolute assurance that material misstatements are not present, but auditors should be aware 
of the possibility that fraud might be concealed and that employees might be in collusion 
with each other or outside vendors. If auditors notice records or activities that seem unusual, 
then they should at least consider the possibility that fraud might have occurred. 
 
Importance of Exercising Professional Skepticism 
AU section 230, Due Professional Care in the Performance of Work, states that due professional 
care requires the auditor to exercise professional skepticism. Because of the characteristics of 
fraud, the auditor should conduct the audit “w ith a mindset that recognizes the possibility 
that a material misstatement due to fraud could be present.” AU section 230 also requires an 
“ongoing questioning” of whether information the auditor obtains could suggest a material 
misstatement due to fraud. 
 
Discussion Among Engagement Personnel Regarding Risk of Material Misstatement Due to Fraud 
Prior to or in conjunction with the information-gathering procedures discussed below, the 
members of the audit team should discuss the potential for material misstatements due to 
fraud. 
 
The discussion should include “brainstorming” among the audit team members about the 
following: 
• How and where they believe the entity’s financial statements might be susceptible to 
fraud; 
• How management could perpetrate or conceal fraud; and  
• How assets of the entity could be misappropriated. 
 
This discussion should also include a consideration of known external and internal factors 
affecting the entity that might: 
• Create incentives/pressures for management and others to commit fraud; 
• Provide the opportunity for fraud to be perpetrated; and 
• Indicate a culture or environment that enables management and others to rationalize 
committing fraud. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.226                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, the discussion should emphasize the need to maintain “a questioning mind” in 
gathering and evaluating evidence throughout the audit and to obtain additional information 
if necessary. 
 
Obtaining Information Needed to Identify Risks of Material Misstatements Due to Fraud 
AU section 314, Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the Risks of Material 
Misstatement, provides guidance on how the auditor obtains knowledge about the entity and 
its environment, including its internal control. As part of that process, the auditor should 
perform the following procedures to obtain information to use in identifying the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud: 
• Make inquiries of management and others within the entity to obtain their views on the 
risks of fraud and how those risks are addressed; 
• Consider any unusual or unexpected relationships that have been identified in 
performing analytical procedures in planning the audit; 
• Consider whether one or more fraud risk factors exist; and 
• Consider other information that may be helpful in the identification of risks of material 
misstatement due to fraud. 
 
MAKING INQUIRIES OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS WITHIN THE ENTITY TO OBTAIN THEIR VIEWS ABOUT THE RISKS OF FRAUD AND HOW THOSE RISKS ARE ADDRESSED 
This step involves asking management about a number of issues, including: 
• Whether management has knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud; 
• Management’s understanding of the risks of fraud; 
• Programs and controls the entity has established to help prevent, deter, or detect fraud; 
and 
• Whether and how management communicates to employees its views on business 
practices and ethical behavior. 
 
The auditor should also question the audit committee directly about its views concerning the 
risks of fraud and whether the committee has knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud. The 
same should be done with the company’s internal audit department.  
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.227 
Additionally, the auditor may need to conduct similar inquiries of the entity’s other 
personnel if the auditor believes they may have additional information about the risks of 
fraud. 
 
CONSIDERING THE RESULTS OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES PERFORMED IN PLANNING THE AUDIT  
AU section 329, Analytical Procedures, requires that analytical procedures be performed in 
planning the audit with the objective of identifying the existence of unusual transactions or 
events, and amounts, ratios, and trends that might indicate matters “that have financial 
statement and audit planning implications.” If  the results of these procedures yield unusual 
or unexpected relationships, the auditor should consider the results in identifying the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud. 
 
CONSIDERING FRAUD RISK FACTORS 
As discussed above, even though fraud is concealed, the auditor may identify events or 
conditions that indicate incentives or pressures to commit fraud, opportunities to carry out 
fraud, or attitudes and rationalizations to justify fraudulent conduct. These events and 
conditions are referred to as “fraud risk factors.” The auditor should consider whether one 
or more fraud risk factors are present and should be considered in identifying and assessing 
the risks of material misstatement due to fraud. However, the auditor should be careful not 
to create a laundry list of factors that are only given cursory consideration. The Appendix to 
AU section 316 contains a list of examples of fraud risk factors. 
 
CONSIDERING OTHER INFORMATION THAT MIGHT BE HELPFUL IN IDENTIFYING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD 
Finally, the auditor should consider any other information that might be helpful in 
identifying the risks of material misstatement due to fraud. 
 
Identifying Risks that May Result in Material Misstatements Due to Fraud 
After gathering the information as discussed above, the auditor should consider the 
information in the context of the three conditions present when fraud occurs—
 incentives/pressures, opportunities, and attitudes/rationalizations. 
 
The auditor should consider: 
• The type of risk that may exist, i.e., whether it involves fraudulent financial reporting or 
misappropriation of assets; 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.228                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The significance  of the risk, i.e., whether it is of a magnitude that could result in a possible 
material misstatement; 
• The likelihood  of the risk, i.e., the likelihood that it will result in a material misstatement; 
and 
• The pervasiveness of the risk, i.e., whether the potential risk is pervasive to the financial 
statement as a whole or is specifically related to a particular assertion, account, or class of 
transactions. 
 
Assessing the Identified Risks After Taking into Account an Evaluation of the Entity’s Programs and Controls 
AU section 314 requires the auditor to obtain an understanding of each of the five 
components of internal controls sufficient to plan the audit. As part of this requirement, the 
auditor should evaluate whether the entity’s prog rams and controls that address identified 
risks of fraud have been suitably designed and placed in operation. These programs and 
controls may involve: 
• Specific controls designed to mitigate specific risks of fraud (e.g., controls to prevent 
misappropriation of particular, susceptible assets), and  
• Broader programs designed to prevent, deter, and detect fraud (e.g., ethics policies). 
 
Exhibit I of AU section 316 provides examples of programs and controls an entity might 
implement to create a culture of honesty and to prevent fraud (see also the chapter on 
“Fraud Prevention Programs” in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual ). 
 
Responding to the Results of the Assessment 
Once the auditor has gathered the information and assessed the risk of fraud, he must 
determine what impact the assessment will have on how the audit is conducted. For 
example, the auditor may need to design additional or different audit procedures to obtain 
more reliable evidence in support of account balances, transactions, etc., or to obtain 
additional corroboration of management’s expl anations and representations concerning 
material matters (e.g., third-party confirmation, documentation from independent sources, 
use of a specialist, and analytical procedures). 
 
OVERALL RESPONSES TO THE RISK OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT 
Judgments about the risk of material misstatem ent due to fraud have an overall effect on 
how the audit is conducted in several ways: 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.229 
• Assignment of personnel and supervision. The auditor may need to consult with 
specialists in a particular field. 
• Accounting principles. The auditor should consider management’s selection and 
application of significant accounting principles, particularly those related to subjective 
measurements and complex transactions. 
• Predictability of auditing procedures. The auditor should incorporate an “element of 
unpredictability” in the selection of auditing procedures to be performed, such as using 
differing sampling methods, and performing procedures at different locations or at 
locations on an unannounced basis. 
 
RESPONSES INVOLVING THE NATURE, TIMING, AND EXTENT OF PROCEDURES TO BE PERFORMED TO ADDRESS THE IDENTIFIED RISKS 
This section notes that the auditing procedures performed in response to identified risks will 
vary depending on the type of risks identified. Such procedures may involve both 
substantive tests and tests of the operating effectiveness of the entity’s internal controls. 
However, because management may have the ability to override controls that may otherwise 
appear to be operating effectively, it is unlikely that the audit risk can be reduced 
appropriately by performing only tests of controls. 
  
Therefore, the auditor’s response to specifically identified risks of fraud should include the 
following: 
• Changing the nature  of the auditing procedures to obtain more reliable or additional 
corroborative information by, for example, consulting independent sources or 
conducting physical inspections; 
• Changing the timing  of substantive tests by, for example, conducting substantive tests at 
or near the end of a reporting period; and 
• Ensuring the extent  of the procedures reflects the assessment of the risk of fraud by, for 
example, increasing sample sizes or performing analytical procedures at a more detailed 
level. 
 
EXAMPLES OF RESPONSES TO IDENTIFIED RISKS OF MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING  
AU section 316 provides a number of examples of responses the auditor may take in regard 
to risks of misstatements arising from both fraudulent financial reporting and asset 
misappropriation. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.230                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some of the examples of testing auditors may perform to address the risk of fraudulent 
financial reporting include: 
• Revenue recognition—Performing substantive analytical procedures relating to revenue 
using disaggregated data (for example, comparing revenue reported by month and by 
product line during the current reporting period with comparable prior periods); 
confirming with customers relevant contract terms; or questioning staff about shipments 
near the end of a period. 
• Inventory quantities—Examining inventory records to identify locations or items that 
require specific attention during or after the physical inventory count; performing a more 
rigorous examination of the count, such as examining contents of boxed items; and 
conducting additional testing of count sheets, tags, or other records. 
• Management estimates—Developing or engaging  a specialist to develop an independent 
estimate for comparison to management’s estimate and gathering further information to 
help evaluate the reasonableness of management’s estimates and underlying assumptions. 
 
EXAMPLES OF RESPONSES TO IDENTIFIED RISKS OF MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM MISAPPROPRIATIONS OF ASSETS 
If the auditor identifies a risk of material misstatement due to fraud relating to 
misappropriation of assets, the auditor may wish to include additional procedures. For 
example, if a particular asset is highly susceptible to misappropriation, the auditor may wish 
to conduct further testing of the controls to prevent and detect such misappropriation. 
 
RESPONSES TO FURTHER ADDRESS RISK OF MANAGEMENT OVERRIDE OF CONTROLS 
Because management is in a unique position to override existing controls, if such a risk is 
identified, the auditor may need to perform additional procedures to further address the risk 
of management override of controls. 
 
EXAMINING JOURNAL ENTRIES AND OTHER ADJUSTMENTS FOR EVIDENCE OF POSSIBLE MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD  
Material misstatements of financial statements often involve recording inappropriate or 
unauthorized journal entries, or making adjustments to amounts reported in the financial 
statements that are not reflected in journal entries (e.g., consolidating adjustments or 
reclassifications). Therefore, the auditor should design procedures to test the appropriateness 
of journal entries recorded in the general ledger and of other adjustments (e.g., entries 
posted directly to financial statement drafts). 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.231 
REVIEWING ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES FOR BIASES THAT COULD RESULT IN MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD  
In preparing financial statements, management is responsible for making a number of 
judgments or assumptions that affect significant accounting estimates. Fraudulent financial 
reporting is often accomplished through intentional misstatement of these estimates. In 
performing the audit, the auditor should consider whether the differences between estimates 
supported by the audit evidence and the estimates included in the financial statements 
indicate a possible bias on the part of management. If so, the auditor should perform a 
retrospective review of significant accounting estimates of the prior year. This review should 
provide the auditor with additional information about whether management may have a bias 
in presenting the current-year estimates. 
 
EVALUATING THE BUSINESS RATIONALE FOR SIGNIFICANT UNUSUAL TRANSACTIONS  
During the course of the audit, the auditor may become aware of significant transactions that 
are outside the normal course of the entity’s business or appear unusual given the auditor’s 
understanding of the entity’s operations. The auditor should gain an understanding of the 
business rationale for these transactions and whether the rationale (or lack thereof) suggests 
the transactions may have been entered into to engage in fraudulent financial reporting or to 
conceal misappropriation of assets. 
Some questions the auditor should consider include: 
• Are the transactions overly complex? 
• Has management discussed the transactions with the board of directors and audit 
committee? 
• Has management placed more emphasis on the need for a particular accounting 
treatment than on the underlying economics of the particular transaction? 
• Do the transactions involve unconsolidated, unrelated parties (including special purposes 
entities), or parties that do not have the substance or financial strength to support the 
transaction? 
 
Evaluating Audit Evidence 
ASSESSING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD THROUGHOUT THE AUDIT 
During the performance of the audit, the auditor may identify conditions that either change 
or support a judgment regarding the assessment of risks. Examples include: 
• Discrepancies in the accounting records (e.g., transactions that are not recorded, 
unsupported or unauthorized balances or transactions, or last minute adjustments). 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.232                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Conflicting or missing evidential matter (e.g., missing or altered documents or records, 
unexplained items on reconciliations, or missing inventory). 
• Problematic or unusual relationships between the auditor and management (e.g., denial 
of access to records, facilities, employees, or customers; complaints by management 
about the conduct of the audit team; unusual delays in providing information; or 
unwillingness to add or revise disclosures). 
 
EVALUATING WHETHER ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES PERFORMED INDICATE A PREVIOUSLY UNRECOGNIZED RISK OF FRAUD 
Analytical procedures performed during the audit may result in identifying unusual or 
unexpected relationships that should be considered in assessing the risk of material 
misstatement due to fraud. Determining whether a particular trend or relationship is a risk of 
fraud requires professional judgment. Unusual relationships involving year-end revenue and 
income often are particularly relevant and might include (1) uncharacteristically large 
amounts of income reported in the last week or two of the reporting period from unusual 
transactions and (2) income that is inconsistent with trends in cash flow from operations. 
 
Analytical procedures are useful because management or employees generally are unable to 
manipulate all the information necessary to produce normal or expected relationships. AU 
section 316 provides several examples, including the following: 
• The relationship of net income to cash flows from operations may appear unusual 
because management recorded fictitious revenues and receivables, but was unable to 
manipulate cash. 
• Changes in inventory, accounts payable, sales, or costs of sales from the prior period to 
the current period may be inconsistent, indicating a possible theft of inventory because 
the employee was unable to manipulate all of the related accounts. 
• An unexpected or unexplained relationship between sales volume as determined from 
the accounting records and production statistics maintained by operations personnel 
(which are more difficult for management to manipulate) may indicate a possible 
misstatement of sales. 
 
EVALUATING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT AT OR NEAR THE COMPLETION OF FIELDWORK 
At or near the completion of fieldwork, the auditor should evaluate whether the accumulated 
results of auditing procedures and other observations affect the assessment of risk of 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.233 
material misstatements due to fraud made earlier. Such an evaluation might identify whether 
there is a need to perform further audit procedures.  
 
RESPONDING TO MISSTATEMENTS THAT MAY BE THE RESULT OF FRAUD 
If the auditor believes that misstatements are or may be the result of fraud, but the effect of 
the misstatements is not material to the financial statements, the auditor nevertheless should 
evaluate their implications. The auditor should be especially concerned with any implications 
pertaining to the “organizational position” of the person involved as they may require a 
reevaluation of the assessment of the risk of material misstatement. For example, in the 
event of theft of cash from a small petty cash fund, the amount of the theft generally would 
not be of significance to the auditor; however, if the theft was perpetrated by higher-level 
management, then it might be indicative of a more pervasive problem such as  
management integrity. 
 
If the auditor believes that a misstatement is or may be the result of fraud, and either has 
determined that the effect of the misstatement is material to the financial statements, or has 
been unable to evaluate whether the effect is material, the auditor should: 
• Attempt to obtain additional evidence to determine whether material fraud occurred and 
its effect on the financial statements; 
• Consider the implications for other aspects of the audit; 
• Discuss the matter and the approach for further investigation with an appropriate level 
of management that is at least one level above those involved, and with senior 
management and the audit committee; and 
• If appropriate, suggest the client consult with legal counsel. 
 
Communicating About Possible Fraud to Management, the Audit Committee, and Others 
AU section 316 states, “Whenever an auditor has determined that there is evidence that 
fraud may exist, the matter should be brought to the attention of an appropriate level of 
management.” It is considered appropriate to do  so even if the matter might be considered 
inconsequential. Fraud involving senior management and fraud (by anyone) that causes a 
material misstatement should be reported directly to those charged with governance. 
 
If the auditor has identified risks of material misstatement due to fraud that have continuing 
control implications, the auditor should consider whether these risks should be 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.234                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
communicated to those charged with governance. Conversely, the auditor should consider 
whether the absence of controls to deter, detect, or prevent fraud should be reported.  
 
The disclosure of possible fraud to parties other than the client’s senior management and 
those charged with governance is ordinarily not part of the auditor’s responsibilities and may 
be precluded by the auditor’s legal or ethical obligations of confidentiality, unless the matter 
is reflected in the auditor’s report. 
 
However, AU section 316 points out that there may be a duty to disclose the information to 
outside parties in the following circumstances: 
• To comply with certain legal and regulatory requirements (e.g., SEC rules); 
• To inform successor auditors pursuant to AU section 315, Communications Between 
Predecessor and Successor Auditors; 
• In response to a subpoena; and 
• To a funding agency or other specified agency in accordance with the requirements for 
audits of entities that receive governmental financial assistance. 
 
Documenting the Auditor’s Consideration of Fraud 
AU section 316 concludes by requiring that auditors document the following: 
• Discussion among engagement personnel regarding the susceptibility of the entity’s 
financial statements to material misstatement due to fraud (including how and when the 
discussion occurred, the team members who participated, and the subject matter 
discussed); 
• Procedures performed to obtain information necessary to identify and assess the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud; 
• Specific risks of material misstatement due to fraud that were identified and the auditor’s 
response to those risks; 
• The reasons supporting the auditor’s conclusion, if the auditor has not identified 
improper revenue recognition as a risk; 
• The results of the procedures performed to further address the risk of management 
override of controls; 
• Other conditions and analytical relationships that caused the auditor to believe that 
additional auditing procedures or other responses were required to address such risks; 
and  
• The nature of the communication about fraud made to management, those charged with 
governance, or others. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.235 
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5—An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting that Is Integrated with an Audit of Financial Statements  
In May 2007, the PCAOB adopted Auditing Standard No. 5, An Audit of Internal Control Over 
Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With An Audit of Financial Statements, as a replacement to 
Auditing Standard No. 2, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Performed in 
Conjunction With an Audit of Financial Statements,  the previous standard governing audits of 
internal control over financial reporting (ICO FR) as mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
The auditing standard was intended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of internal 
control audits, while also reducing unnecessary costs, especially for smaller public 
companies. Auditing Standard No. 5 supersedes Auditing Standard No. 2 for all audits of 
ICOFR for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2007.  
 
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that management must assess and report 
on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR,  and the external auditor must attest to 
management’s internal control assessment. Auditing Standard No. 5 lays out the 
requirements and provides guidance for auditors who are engaged to perform an audit of 
management’s assessment of the internal controls that is integrated with an audit of the 
financial statements.  
 
Following is a descriptive summary of some of the requirements laid out in the standard. 
Practitioners in this area should review Auditing Standard No. 5 in its entirety for more 
detailed information. A copy of the entire standard can be obtained from the PCAOB 
(www.pcaobus.org). 
 
Performing an ICOFR Audit 
INTEGRATING THE INTERNAL CONTROL AUDIT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDIT 
Auditing Standard No. 5 states that although the objectives of financial statement audits and 
audits of ICOFR are not identical, the two au dits should be integrated, with the auditor 
planning and performing the work to achieve the objectives of both audits. The auditor 
should design and perform the tests of controls in a manner that yields sufficient evidence to 
support both the auditor’s opinion at year-end and the auditor’s control risk assessment for 
the financial statement audit. 
 
PLANNING THE AUDIT 
When planning an integrated audit of ICOFR and the financial statements, the auditor must: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.236                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluate whether the following matters are important to the financial statements and to 
ICOFR and, if so, how they w ill affect the audit procedures: 
? Knowledge of the company’s ICOFR obtained during other engagements; 
? Information about the company’s industry, including financial reporting practices, 
economic conditions, laws and regulations, and technological changes;  
? Information about the company’s business activities, organization, operating 
characteristics, and capital structure;  
? The existence and extent of any recent changes in the company, its operations, or its 
ICOFR;  
? The auditor’s preliminary judgments about materiality, risk, and other factors relating 
to the determination of material weaknesses;  
? Any control deficiencies previously communicated to the audit committee, board of 
directors, or company management;  
? Legal or regulatory issues of which the company is aware;  
? The type and extent of evidence related to the effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR; 
? Preliminary judgments about the effectiveness of ICOFR;  
? Public information about the company related to the evaluation of the likelihood of 
material misstatements in the company’s financial statements and the effectiveness of 
the company’s ICOFR; 
? Knowledge about the risks related to the company that were considered as part of 
the auditor’s client acceptance and retention evaluation; and 
? The relative complexity of the company’s operations. 
• Assess the risk that material weaknesses exist in areas of the company’s ICOFR in order 
to determine which accounts, disclosures, and assertions are significant and relevant to 
the audit, which controls to test, and what evidence is necessary for a given control. In 
forming this assessment, the complexity of the organization, business unit, or process 
will play an important role. 
• Focus the audit attention on those areas of the company’s ICOFR that are assessed to 
have the highest risk that a material weakness exists. The auditor should keep in mind 
that the risk a company’s ICOFR will fail to  prevent or detect a misstatement caused by 
fraud usually is higher than the risk of failure to prevent or detect errors. 
• Scale the audit appropriately based on the ways the company meets its control 
objectives, with attention given to the size and complexity of the company, its business 
processes, and its business units.  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.237 
• Evaluate the extent to which he will use the work of others to reduce his own audit 
work. 
• Use the same materiality considerations used in planning the audit of the company’s 
financial statements. 
 
USING A TOP-DOWN APPROACH 
In an audit of ICOFR, auditors should implement a top-down approach. According to 
Auditing Standard No. 5, a top-down approach “begins at the financial statement level and 
with the auditor’s understanding of the over all risks to internal control over financial 
reporting. The auditor then focuses on entity-level controls and works down to significant 
accounts and disclosures and their relevant assertions.” (Paragraph 21) This approach 
focuses auditors on those accounts, disclosures, and assertions that are most likely to result 
in material misstatement of the company’s financial statements. The standard makes explicit 
mention, however, that this approach describes the auditor’s thought process when 
identifying risks and the controls to test, rather than the order in which the auditor should 
perform the audit procedures.  
 
TESTING CONTROLS 
The auditor should test both the design and operating effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR. In testing the design effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine 
whether the controls, if operated as prescribed, satisfy the company’s control objectives and 
can effectively prevent or detect errors or fraud that could result in material misstatements. 
This testing may include inquiry of staff members, observation of operations, and 
examination of relevant documentation. 
 
In testing the operating effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine whether 
the control is operating as designed, as well as whether the person operating the control has 
the appropriate authority and competence to perform the control effectively. An auditor may 
test the operations of the controls through inquiry of staff members, observation of 
operations, examination of relevant documentation, and re-performance of the control. 
 
Fraud Considerations 
As part of an audit of ICOFR, the auditor must specifically evaluate (1) the controls enacted 
to address the risk of management override of other controls and (2) whether the company’s 
internal controls adequately address the risk of material misstatement due to fraud. These 
controls include:  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.238                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Controls over significant unusual transactions;  
• Controls over journal entries and adjustments made during the end of the period 
financial reporting process;  
• Controls over related party transactions; 
• Controls related to significant management estimates; and 
• Controls that mitigate the motivations for, and pressures on, management to engage in 
inappropriate earnings management and financial statement fraud. 
 
Further, if the auditor discovers any deficiencies in these controls, the auditor should address 
the deficiencies when responding to the risks of material misstatement during the financial 
statement audit. 
 
Forming an Opinion on the Effectiveness of ICOFR 
In forming an opinion on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR, the auditor must 
evaluate evidence from all sources. This includes not only the auditor’s tests of controls, but 
also any misstatements detected during the financial statement audit, as well as any identified 
control deficiencies. The auditor should also review any reports issued during the year by the 
internal audit function that pertain to ICOFR and should evaluate any deficiencies  
identified therein.  
 
The auditor must also evaluate management’s assessment of ICOFR, included in its annual 
reports filed with the SEC, to ensure that all required elements in management’s report are 
complete and properly presented. 
 
At the close of the integrated audit, the auditor may choose to issue a single report 
containing both an opinion on the company’s financial statements and an opinion on 
ICOFR, or to issue a separate report for each opinion.  
 
Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 15—An Examination of an 
Entity’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements  
Non-public entities may wish to have auditors examine the internal controls over financial 
reporting as a matter of best practice or to comply with lender or regulatory requirements. 
The Auditing Standards Board issued Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements 
(SSAE) No. 15, An Examination of an Entity ’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is 
Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements, as guidance to auditors of non-public 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.239 
organizations when undertaking this type of engagement alongside an audit of the financial 
statements. SSAE No. 15 converges the standards for these engagements for auditors of 
non-public companies with those provided for auditors of public companies in PCAOB 
Auditing Standard No. 5. More information about SSAE No. 15 is available at 
www.AICPA.org.  
 
Risk-Based Audit Approach 
The PCAOB and the AICPA have issued standards that indicate both organizations’ 
emphasis on using a risk-based approach to auditing. This approach involves beginning the 
audit process with a risk assessment and selecting the particular areas of focus based upon 
the level of risk to the organization. In a risk-based approach, auditors focus their resources 
on the areas of highest concern as opposed to auditing areas on a rotational basis or other 
method of selecting audit areas. This works well for both internal and external audits, and 
also works well at both the macro (e.g., overall financial statements or the organization as a 
whole) and micro (e.g., accounts payable) levels.  
 
As the risk of fraud is significant in most organizations, it is normally a major factor in the 
risk assessment process. Focusing audit resources on the areas with the highest risk of fraud 
gives auditors a significantly higher probability of detecting fraud if/when it occurs. 
 
The standards go into effect for fiscal periods beginning on or after December 15, 2010.   
 
The PCAOB standards include: 
• AS No. 8 — Audit Risk 
• AS No. 9 — Audit Planning 
• AS No. 10 — Supervision of the Audit Engagement 
• AS No. 11 — Consideration of Materiality in Planning and Performing the Audit 
• AS No. 12 — Identifying and Assessing Risks of Ma terial Misstatement 
• AS No. 13 — The Auditor’s Responses to  the Risks of Material Misstatement 
• AS No. 14 — Evaluating Audit Results 
• AS No. 15 — Audit Evidence 
 
• The AICPA standards include: 
• AU section 326—Audit Evidence 
• AU section 312—Materiality in Planning and Performing an Audit 
• AU section 312—Evaluation of Misstatements Identified During an Audit 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.240                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• AU section 311—Planning an Audit 
• AU section 314—Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the 
Risks of Mat erial Misstatement 
• AU section 318—Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks and 
Evaluating the Audit Evidence Obtained 
 
The specific details of the standards can be found at the PCAOB website at 
www.pcaobus.org and at the AICPA website at www.aicpa.org 
 
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3—Audit Documentation  
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3, Audit Documentation, provides general guidance on the 
content and extent of the documentation public company auditors should prepare when 
conducting audits of financial statements, audits of internal control over financial reporting, 
and reviews of interim financial information.  
 
Audit documentation includes all memoranda, confirmations, correspondence, schedules, 
audit programs, and letters of representation prepared and obtained during the audit 
engagement. This documentation “should be prepared in sufficient detail to provide a clear 
understanding of its purpose and source, and the conclusions reached.” Additionally, 
because the documentation serves as the foundation for the representations in the auditor’s 
report, the standard asserts that it should: 
• Demonstrate that the engagement was conducted in compliance with the standards of 
the PCAOB,  
• Support the basis for the auditor’s conclusions concerning all relevant financial 
statement assertions, and  
• Demonstrate that the underlying accounting records agree to or reconcile with the 
financial statements.  
 
To meet these requirements, the standard states that audit documentation should “contain 
sufficient information to enable an experienced auditor, having no previous connection with 
the engagement: 
• To understand the nature, timing, extent, and results of the procedures performed, 
evidence obtained, and conclusions reached, and 
• To determine who performed the work and the date such work was completed as well as 
the person who reviewed the work and the date of such review.” 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.241 
The standard also requires auditors to retain audit documentation for seven years from the 
date the auditors’ report is released or, if no report is issued, from the date the audit work is 
substantially completed.  
 
The full text of the auditing standard, which also includes guidance about documentation of 
specific matters and subsequent changes to audit documentation, can be found on the 
PCAOB’s website (www.pcaobus.org).  
 
AU Section 339—Audit Documentation (Source: SAS No. 103) 
The ASB counterpart to PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3 appears in the form of SAS No. 
103, Audit Documentation. SAS No. 103 supersedes SAS No. 96, Audit Documentation, as the 
guidance on audit documentation that applies to auditors of non-public entities. The 
standard is codified in AU section 339.  
 
In developing AU section 339, the ASB considered the provisions of PCAOB Auditing 
Standard No. 3; consequently, the requirements of the two standards are similar in many 
respects. Specifically, AU section 339 does the following:  
• Changes the date of the auditor’s report from the final day of fieldwork to the date on or 
after which the auditor obtained sufficient evidence to support the audit opinion;  
• Requires the audit documentation to be sufficient such that an experienced auditor with 
no previous connection to the audit could understand the work performed, the evidence 
obtained, and the conclusions reached;  
• Requires documentation of departures from generally accepted auditing standards, along 
with the justification and alternative procedures used; 
• Provides that oral explanations may be used to clarify or explain audit documentation, 
but alone are insufficient support for audit work; 
• Requires specific documentation of matters that the auditor identified as contradictory or 
inconsistent with the final audit conclusions, as well as how the auditor addressed such 
findings;  
• Instructs the auditor to assemble all of the audit documentation into the audit file within 
60 days following the audit report release date; 
• States that after 60 days following the audit report release date, workpapers may not be 
deleted, and all additions must be noted as such; and 
• Specifies a minimum retention period for audit documentation of five years from the 
report release date.  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.242                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internal Auditor Responsibilities 
Internal auditors play a key role in helping organizations prevent and detect fraudulent 
activity. Because of their proximity to and understanding of the inner workings of the 
organization, internal auditors are in a unique position to uncover potential unscrupulous 
acts. In fact, the ACFE’s 2010 Report to the Nations on  Occupational Fraud and Abuse  shows that 
the internal audit function plays a vital role in detecting occupational frauds, accounting for 
the detection of 13.9 percent of the 1,843 cases included in the study. 
 
As part of its International Professional Practices Framework  (IPPF), The Institute of Internal 
Auditors (IIA) has developed the International Standards for the Professional Practice of Internal 
Auditing. This section includes those IIA standards that pertain to the internal auditor’s 
responsibilities for preventing, detecting, and assessing the risk of fraud within an 
organization. More detail on these and all other IIA standards can be found at the IIA’s 
website (www.theiia.org).    
 
Standard 1210—Proficiency 
Internal auditors must possess the knowledge, skills, and other competencies needed to 
perform their individual responsibilities. The internal audit activity collectively must possess 
or obtain the knowledge, skills, and other competencies needed to perform its 
responsibilities.  
 
1210.A2 
Internal auditors must have sufficient knowledge to evaluate the risk of fraud and the 
manner in which it is managed by the organization, but are not expected to have the 
expertise of a person whose primary responsibility is detecting and investigating fraud. 
 
Standard 1220—Due Professional Care 
Internal auditors must apply the care and skill expected of a reasonably prudent and 
competent internal auditor. Due professional care does not imply infallibility. 
 
1220.A1   
Internal auditors must exercise due professional care by considering the: 
• Extent of work needed to achieve the engagement’s objectives;  
• Relative complexity, materiality, or significance of matters to which assurance procedures 
are applied;  
• Adequacy and effectiveness of governance, risk management, and control processes;  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.243 
• Probability of significant errors, fraud, or noncompliance; and     
• Cost of assurance in relation to potential benefits.  
 
1220.A3    
Internal auditors must be alert to the significant risks that might affect objectives, operations, 
or resources. However, assurance procedures alone, even when performed with due 
professional care, do not guarantee that all significant risks will be identified.  
 
Standard 2060—Reporting to Senior Management and the Board 
The chief audit executive must report periodically to senior management and the board on 
the internal audit activity’s purpose, authority, responsibility, and performance relative to its 
plan. Reporting must also include significant risk exposures and control issues, including 
fraud risks, governance issues, and other matters needed or requested by senior management 
and the board. 
 
Standard 2110—Governance
The internal audit activity must assess and make appropriate recommendations for 
improving the governance process in its accomplishment of the following objectives: 
• Promoting appropriate ethics and values within the organization; 
• Ensuring effective organizational performance management and accountability; 
• Communicating risk and control information to appropriate areas of the organization; 
and 
• Coordinating the activities of and communicating information among the board, external 
and internal auditors, and management.  
 
2110.A1    
The internal audit activity must evaluate the design, implementation, and effectiveness of the 
organization’s ethics-related objectives, programs, and activities. 
 
Standard 2120—Risk Management 
The internal audit activity must evaluate the effectiveness and contribute to the 
improvement of risk management processes. 
 
2120.A1 
The internal audit activity must evaluate risk exposures relating to the organization's 
governance, operations, and information systems regarding the: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.244                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Reliability and integrity of financial and operational information;  
• Effectiveness and efficiency of operations; 
• Safeguarding of assets; and  
• Compliance with laws, regulations, and contracts.   
 
2120.A2 
The internal audit activity must evaluate the potential for the occurrence of fraud and how 
the organization manages fraud risk. 
 
Standard 2130—Control 
The internal audit activity must assist the organization in maintaining effective controls by 
evaluating their effectiveness and efficiency and by promoting continuous improvement. 
 
2130.A1 
The internal audit activity must evaluate the adequacy and effectiveness of controls in 
responding to risks within the organization’s governance, operations, and information 
systems regarding the: 
• Reliability and integrity of financial and operational information; 
• Effectiveness and efficiency of operations; 
• Safeguarding of assets; and  
• Compliance with laws, regulations, and contracts. 
 
Standard 2210—Engagement Objectives 
Objectives must be established for each engagement. 
 
2210.A1 
Internal auditors must conduct a preliminary assessment of the risks relevant to the activity 
under review. Engagement objectives must reflect the results of this assessment. 
 
2210.A2 
Internal auditors must consider the probability of significant errors, fraud, noncompliance, 
and other exposures when developing the engagement objectives. 
     
IIA's IPPF—Practice Guide: Internal Auditing and Fraud  
To help auditors comply with their responsibilities pertaining to fraud, the IIA, in December 
of 2009, released IPPF—Practice Guide: Internal Auditing and Fraud  (Practice Guide). Although 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.245 
not mandatory, the guidance included in the Practice Guide is strongly recommended. 
Specifically, the Practice Guide addresses fraud awareness; potential fraud indicators; roles 
and responsibilities for fraud prevention and detection; the internal auditor’s role during 
audit engagements; fraud risk assessment; fraud prevention and detection; fraud 
investigation; and forming an opinion on internal controls related to fraud. The Practice 
Guide also includes an appendix that lists IPPF Practice Advisories that pertain to fraud. 
Following is a discussion of selected topics from the Practice Guide. The complete guide is 
available from the IIA’s website (www.theiia.org). 
 
Internal Audit's Role in Fighting Fraud 
Fighting fraud in an organization requires the combined efforts of many different 
departments, including internal audit. Internal auditors assist in the prevention and detection 
of fraud by evaluating the adequacy and effectiveness of internal controls, assisting 
management in establishing effective fraud prevention measures, proactively auditing for 
fraud, and investigating suspected fraud. Specifically, the Practice Guide states that in 
conducting audit engagements, the internal auditor should: 
• Consider fraud risks in the assessment of internal control design and determination of 
audit steps to perform.  
• Have sufficient knowledge of fraud to identify red flags indicating fraud may have been 
committed. 
• Be alert to opportunities that could allow fraud, such as control deficiencies. 
• Evaluate whether management is actively retaining responsibility for oversight of the 
fraud risk management program, whether timely and sufficient corrective measures have 
been taken with respect to any noted control deficiencies or weaknesses, and whether 
the plan for monitoring the program continues to be adequate for the program’s ongoing 
success. 
• Evaluate the indicators of fraud and decide whether any further action is necessary or 
whether an investigation should be recommended. 
• Recommend investigation when appropriate.  
 
The role internal audit plays in fraud investigations varies by organization. Internal audit may 
have primary responsibility for fraud investigations, may serve as a resource for the 
investigations, or may have no involvement at all in the investigations. For internal auditors 
who find themselves involved in fraud investigations, the Practice Guide discusses the 
investigation process, the role of the internal auditor, conducting the investigation, reporting 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.246                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the investigation, resolution and communication of fraud incidents, and analysis of lessons 
learned. 
 
The Practice Guide also emphasizes that internal auditors must exercise professional 
skepticism — an attitude that includes a questioning mind and a critical assessment of audit 
evidence — in all audit work. By exercising professional skepticism and focusing on the 
effectiveness of internal controls, auditors increase the likelihood that they will uncover 
possible fraudulent activity. 
 
Other Roles and Responsibilities for Fraud Prevention and Detection 
Other typical roles and responsibilities for fraud detection and prevention outlined in the 
Practice Guide include the following: 
 
Board of directors — The board of directors is responsible for effective and responsible 
corporate fraud governance and is tasked with overseeing management’s actions to manage 
fraud risks. 
 
Audit committee — The audit committee’s role is to evaluate management’s identification of 
fraud risks and the implementation of anti-fraud measures, and to provide the tone at the 
top that fraud will not be accepted in any form. The audit committee is also responsible for 
overseeing controls to prevent or detect management fraud. 
 
Management — Management is responsible for overseeing the activities of employees, 
assessing the vulnerability of the entity to fraud, and establishing and maintaining an 
effective internal control system at a reasonable cost. 
 
Legal counsel — Legal counsel advises the organization on legal matters pertaining to fraud. 
 
External auditors — External auditors have a responsibility to comply with professional 
standards and to plan and perform the audit of the organization’s financial statements to 
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material 
misstatements, whether caused by error or fraud. (For more information on the external 
auditor’s responsibilities for fraud, see the previous section “External Auditors.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.247 
Loss prevention manager—The loss prevention manager deals with crimes, disasters, 
accidents, waste, and other business risks, and usually works closely with internal auditors to 
identify areas of weak internal controls within the organization. 
 
Fraud investigators — Fraud investigators are responsible for detecting and investigating 
fraud, and recovering assets. 
 
Other employees — All employees have a responsibility to report suspicious activity to a 
hotline, the internal audit department, or management. 
 
 
GAO Auditing Standards  
Standards for government auditors are fundamentally based on the generally accepted 
auditing standards (GAAS) set for auditors of public companies. However, for audits of 
government organizations, programs, activities, functions, and funds, the requirements of 
Government Auditing Standards, also known as the Yellow Book, go beyond GAAS. (The 
following discussion of the Yellow Book standards is based upon the July 2007 revision of 
the standards. For more information, please see the full text of the GAO standards, available 
at www.gao.gov.) 
 
Purpose and Applicability 
The Yellow Book provides generally a ccepted government auditing standards (GAGAS) that 
form a framework of guidance for auditors of government entities and entities that receive 
government awards. Audits performed using Yellow Book standards provide information 
that is used for oversight, accountability, and improvement of government programs and 
operations. By following the requirements and guidance contained in GAGAS, auditors 
perform their duties in a way that can lead to improved government management, better 
decision making and oversight, effective and efficient operations, and accountability for 
resources and results. 
 
The use of GAGAS standards is frequently required under specific laws, regulations, 
contracts, grant agreements, or policies. However, many auditors and organizations may 
voluntarily choose to adhere to the standards as well. As such, the standards in the Yellow 
Book apply to audits and attestation engagements of government entities, programs, 
activities, and functions, and of government assistance administered by contractors, 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.248                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
nonprofit entities, and other nongovernmental entities when the use of GAGAS is required 
or is voluntarily followed. 
 
Ethical Principles in Government Auditing 
Management 
According to the Yellow Book, management is re sponsible for setting the ethical tone of the 
organization by: 
• Maintaining and demonstrating an ethical culture;  
• Clearly communicating expectations about acceptable behavior to employees; and 
• Creating an environment that reinforces and encourages ethical behavior throughout the 
organization.  
 
Auditors 
The Yellow Book stresses the importance of the auditors’ ethical responsibilities while 
conducting government audits, emphasizing that the public expects auditors in the 
government sector to conduct their professional work in accordance with ethical principles. 
To underscore this responsibility, GAGAS lay out five specific, overarching ethical 
principles that must guide the work of all auditors performing government audit 
engagements. 
 
THE PUBLIC INTEREST 
Serving the public interest and honoring the public trust are crucial components of the 
auditor’s responsibilities when performing en gagements in the government environment. 
GAGAS define the public interest as “the collective well-being of the community of people 
and entities the auditors serve.” 
 
INTEGRITY 
To strengthen the public confidence in the government, auditors must maintain the highest 
level of integrity when discharging their professional duties during a GAGAS engagement. 
This involves conducting the audit with an attitude that is “objective, fact-based, 
nonpartisan, and nonideological with regard to audited entities and users of the auditors’ 
reports.” Specifically, auditors are instructed to: 
• Ensure that all communications regarding the audit are honest, candid, and constructive;  
• Make decisions that are consistent with the public interest of the program or activity 
under audit; and 
  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.249 
• Place priority on their responsibilities to the public interest in resolving any conflicting 
pressures that may arise during the audit engagement. 
 
OBJECTIVITY 
The auditor’s credibility in performing an audit of a governmental entity is based upon his 
ability to remain objective. GAGAS state that objectivity includes: 
• Being independent in fact and appearance; 
• Maintaining an attitude of impartiality; 
• Having intellectual honesty; and  
• Being free of conflicts of interest. 
 
PROPER USE OF GOVERNMENT INFORMATION, RESOURCES, AND POSITION 
During an audit of a governmental entity, the auditor must use all government information, 
resources, and positions for official purposes only. Auditors must not use their access to 
these assets for personal gain, in illegal manners, or to the detriment of the legitimate 
interests of the audited entity. 
 
PROFESSIONAL BEHAVIOR 
In conducting an audit or attestation engagement for a governmental entity, auditors must 
behave in a professional manner. This includes: 
• Complying with laws and regulations; 
• Avoiding any conduct that may discredit the auditors’ work; and 
• Putting forth an honest effort in performing their duties and professional services. 
 
Types of Government Audit Engagements 
The Yellow Book describes and promulgates standards for two types of audits that 
government and non-government audit organizations conduct: financial audits and 
performance audits. The Yellow Book also contains standards covering attestation 
engagements, such as examinations and reviews, and other non-audit services performed on 
government organizations and programs.  
 
Financial Audits 
Financial audits are defined as those audits that “provide an independent assessment of 
whether an entity’s reported financial condition, results, and use of resources are presented 
fairly in accordance with recognized criteria.” In addition to traditional financial statement 
audits, the Yellow Book also includes in this category those engagements for: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.250                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Reporting on internal control, compliance with laws and regulations, and provisions of 
contracts and grant agreements as they relate to financial transactions, systems,  
and processes. 
• Providing special reports for specified elements, accounts, or items of a  
financial statement; 
• Reviewing interim financial information; 
• Issuing letters for underwriters or other requesting parties; 
• Reporting on the processing of transactions by service organizations; and 
• Auditing compliance with regulations relating to federal award expenditures and other 
governmental financial assistance in conjunction with or as a by-product of a financial 
statement audit. 
 
Performance Audits 
Performance audits are described in the Yellow Book as audits that “provide assurance or 
conclusions based on an evaluation of sufficient, appropriate evidence against stated criteria, 
such as specific requirements, measures, or defined business practices.” The objectives of 
these audits can vary, and may include the assessment of program economy, efficiency, or 
effectiveness; internal control; compliance; and prospective analyses. Additionally, a 
performance audit may cover more than one of these objectives.  
 
Attestation Engagements 
Attestation engagements can cover financial or non-financial information. These 
engagements involve expressing a specified level of assurance about the subject matter or 
assertion related to the subject matter depending on the users’ needs. There are three types 
of attestation engagements: 
• Examination, which involves expressing an opinion on “whether the subject matter is 
based on (or in conformity with) the criteria in all material respects or the assertion is 
presented (or fairly stated), in all material respects, based on the criteria.” 
• Review, consisting of expression of a conclusion about “whether any information came 
to the auditors’ attention that indicates that the subject matter is not based on (or not 
in conformity with) the criteria or the assertion is not presented (or not fairly stated) in 
all material respects based on the criteria.” 
• Agreed-upon procedures engagement, which involves performing specific procedures on 
the subject matter. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.251 
Audit Standards 
The Yellow Book sets out three types of government audit standards: general standards, field 
work standards, and reporting standards. The general standards apply to both financial and 
performance audits. However, GAGAS provide a separate set of field work and reporting 
standards for each type of government audit. Additionally, the Yellow Book provides a 
separate set of standards — general, field work, and reporting — for attestation engagements. 
The discussion below contains a brief overview of the Yellow Book standards for audit 
engagements.  
 
General Standards 
The following general standards, coupled with the ethical principles outlined above, establish 
a foundation for credibility of auditors’ work.  
 
INDEPENDENCE 
Both the audit organization and the individual auditor must remain independent in both fact 
and appearance throughout the engagement so that all opinions, conclusions, judgments, and 
recommendations made by the auditor will be impartial and will be viewed as impartial by 
knowledgeable third parties. In determining independence, auditors must consider three 
types of potential impairments— personal impairments, such as family relationships, financial 
interests, or biases; external impairments  arising from actual or perceived pressures from the 
audited organization’s management or employees; and organizational impairments, which occur 
when the audit function is organizationally located within the reporting line of the areas 
under audit or when the auditor is assigned or takes on responsibilities that affect operations 
of the area under audit. 
 
The performance of nonaudit services must also be considered when assessing auditor 
independence. Specifically, auditors must apply the following two principles in regard to 
maintaining independence while performing nonaudit services for an audited program or 
entity: 
• Audit organizations must not provide nonaudit services that involve performing 
management functions or making management decisions; and  
• Audit organizations must not audit their own work or provide nonaudit services in 
situations in which the nonaudit services are significant or material to the subject matter 
of the audits. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.252                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PROFESSIONAL JUDGMENT 
The auditor must use professional judgment, including exercising professional skepticism 
and reasonable care, in planning, performing, and reporting the results of the audit or 
attestation engagement. In applying professional judgment, it is imperative that the auditor 
retain an attitude of professional skepticism, assuming that management is neither inherently 
honest nor inherently dishonest. Thus, auditors must approach the engagement with a 
questioning mind and a critical assessment of all evidence. The application of professional 
judgment also requires auditors to use their professional knowledge, skills, and experience to 
diligently gather information and objectively evaluate the sufficiency and appropriateness of 
evidence. 
 
COMPETENCE 
The staff assigned to an engagement must collectively possess adequate professional 
knowledge, skills, and experience to properly conduct the audit. The necessary competence 
includes knowledge of GAGAS and other applicable auditing and accounting standards; 
general knowledge of the organization’s operating environment; skills to communicate 
clearly and effectively, both orally and in writing; and any specific skills appropriate to the 
work being performed, such as statistical sampling skills or information technology skills. In 
order to maintain their professional competence, all auditors performing governmental 
audits must meet the continuing professional education requirements under GAGAS.  
 
QUALITY CONTROL AND ASSURANCE 
Audit organizations performing government audits must have an internal quality control 
system in place. This system is composed of the organization’s leadership, and its policies 
and procedures established to provide reasonable assurance that the organization is in 
compliance with all applicable audit standards. As part of the system, organizations should 
establish policies and procedures that collectively address: 
• Leadership responsibilities for quality of audit and attestation engagements; 
• Independence, legal, and ethical requirements;  
• Initiation, acceptance, and continuation of audit and attestation engagements;  
• Human resource issues;  
• Performance, documentation, and reporting of audit and attestation engagements; and 
• Monitoring of quality. 
 
Additionally, audit organizations conducting audits and attestations under GAGAS must 
have periodic external peer reviews of their auditing and attestation engagement practices at 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.253 
least once every three years. In addition, the results of the most recent peer review should be 
made publicly available.  
 
Field Work Standards for Financial Audits 
GAGAS field work standards for financial audits include the three generally accepted 
standards of fieldwork established by the AICPA, as well as five additional fieldwork 
standards.  
 
The three AICPA standards of fieldwork are as follows: 
• The auditor must adequately plan the work and must properly supervise any assistants. 
• The auditor must obtain a sufficient understanding of the entity and its environment, 
including its internal control to assess the risk of material misstatement of the financial 
statements whether due to error or fraud, and to design the nature, timing, and extent of 
further audit procedures. 
• The auditor must obtain sufficient appropriate audit evidence by performing procedures 
to afford a reasonable basis for an opinion regarding financial statements under audit. 
 
The five additional fieldwork standards prescribed by GAGAS state that: 
• Auditors should communicate with the audited entity their understanding of the services 
to be performed for each engagement and document that understanding through a 
written communication. In their communications, auditors should specifically address 
their planned work and the level of assurance to be provided related to testing internal 
control over financial reporting and compliance with laws, regulations, and provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements. Auditors should also communicate any potential 
restrictions on the auditors’ reports in order to reduce the risk that the needs or 
expectations of the parties involved may be misinterpreted. 
• Auditors should evaluate whether the audited entity has taken appropriate corrective 
action to address findings and recommendations from previous engagements that could 
have a material effect on the financial statements. 
• Auditors should design the audit to provide reasonable assurance of detecting material 
misstatements resulting from violations of contract provisions or grant agreements that 
have a direct and material effect on the determination of financial statement amounts. If 
during the course of the audit, auditors become aware of indications of abuse that could 
have a material, indirect effect on the financial statements, auditors should apply audit 
procedures specifically directed to ascertain whether material abuse has occurred and the 
potential effect on the financial statements or other financial data significant to the audit 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.254                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
objectives. However, because the determination of abuse is subjective, auditors are not 
required to provide reasonable assurance of detecting abuse. 
• When auditors identify problems such as internal control deficiencies, fraud, illegal acts, 
violations of provisions of contracts or grant agreements, or abuse, they should plan 
audit procedures to develop an explanation of the criteria, condition, cause, and effect or 
potential effect of the problem to facilitate the achievement of the audit objectives.  
• Audit documentation should contain sufficient information to provide a clear 
understanding of the work performed, the audit evidence obtained and its source, and 
the conclusions reached. The audit documentation should enable an experienced auditor, 
having no previous connection with the audit, to understand from the documentation 
the nature, timing, extent, and results of the audit procedures performed, the conclusions 
reached on significant matters, and that the accounting records reconcile to the financial 
statements. The documentation should be completed prior to the issuance of the 
auditors’ report, and should also include evidence of supervisory review of the work 
performed, as well as any departures from GAGAS.  
 
Reporting Standards for Financial Audits 
For reporting standards for financial statement audits, GAGAS incorporate the following 
four AICPA generally accepted standards of reporting: 
• The auditors’ report must state whether the financial statements are presented in 
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). 
• The auditors’ report must identify any circumstances in which GAAP was not 
consistently applied in the current period in relation to the preceding period.  
• Informative disclosures in the financial statements are considered reasonably adequate 
unless otherwise stated in the auditors’ report. 
• The auditors’ report must contain either an expression of opinion regarding the financial 
statements, taken as a whole, or an assertion that such an opinion cannot be expressed. 
If an overall opinion cannot be expressed, the reasons should be stated. In all cases 
where an auditor’s name is associated with financial statements, the report should 
contain a clear-cut indication of the character of the auditor’s work, if any, and the 
degree of responsibility the auditor is taking. 
 
GAGAS prescribe eight additional reporting standards for government financial audits. They 
are: 
• The auditors’ report should specifically state that the audit was performed in accordance 
with GAGAS. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.255 
• The auditors’ report should either (1) describe  the scope of the auditors’ testing internal 
control over financial reporting and compliance with laws, regulations, and provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, and present the results of those tests or an opinion, if 
sufficient work was performed, or (2) refer to separate reports containing that 
information. If a separate report is used, the auditors’ report should state that the 
separate report is an integral part of the audit and should be considered in assessing the 
results of the audit.  
• Auditors should report (1) significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in internal 
control, (2) all material instances of fraud and illegal acts, and (3) significant violations of 
contract provisions or grant agreements and abuse. In some situations, the auditors 
should report the occurrence of these problems directly to parties outside of the audited 
organization.  
• Auditors may add a separate paragraph or separate section of the auditors’ report to 
emphasize certain information that may be critical to the proper use and understanding  
of the audited financial statements. Examples of matters that require such emphasis may 
include significant uncertainties and catastrophic or unusual events.  
• Auditors have specific responsibilities related to potential material misstatements and 
restatements of previously-issued financial statements. In situations where auditors 
become aware of new information that previously issued financial statements were 
materially misstated and that management intends to restate and reissue the misstated 
financial statements, auditors should advise management to disclose the information and 
its impact on the financial statements to parties who rely on the financial statements. 
Additionally, the auditors must (1) evaluate the timeliness and appropriateness of 
management’s disclosure of the misstatements and the actions taken to correct the 
misstatements, (2) perform audit procedures sufficient to reissue or update the auditors’ 
report on the restated financial statements, and (3) report directly to appropriate officials 
when the audited entity does not take the necessary steps. 
• If the auditors’ report contains any disclosures regarding deficiencies in internal control, 
fraud, illegal acts, violations of contract provisions or grant agreements, or abuse, the 
report should also include the views of the organization’s responsible officials 
concerning the findings, conclusions, and recommendations, as well as any planned 
corrective actions. 
• If any pertinent information about the audited entity is prohibited by law or regulation 
from being disclosed to the general public, the auditors’ report should state the nature of 
the omitted information and the reason for its omission.  
• Government auditors should submit their audit reports to those charged with 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.256                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
governance, to the appropriate officials of the audited organization, to the parties 
requiring or arranging for the audit, to officials with oversight authority for the 
organization, to parties who may be responsible for acting on audit findings and 
recommendations, and to others who are authorized to receive such reports. 
Nongovernment auditors should distribute the report according to applicable auditing 
standards, as well as the agreement reached with the party contracting the audit.  
 
Field Work Standards for Performance Audits 
The GAGAS field work standards for performance audits relate to planning the audit; 
supervising staff; obtaining sufficient, appropriate evidence; and preparing audit 
documentation: 
• Auditors must adequately plan and document the planning of the audit work. This 
includes assessing significance (defined as “the relative importance of a matter within the 
context in which it is being considered, including quantitative and qualitative factors”) 
and audit risk (defined as “the possibility that the auditors’ findings, conclusions, 
recommendations, or assurance may be improper or incomplete, as a result of factors 
such as evidence that is not sufficient and/or appropriate, an inadequate audit process, 
or intentional omissions or misleading information due to misrepresentation or fraud”) 
while defining the audit objectives, scope, and methodology. Additionally, as part of 
planning the engagement, auditors must: 
? Consider the nature and profile of the entity, as well as the needs of the users of the 
audit report; 
? Consider the entity’s internal control and information systems controls; 
? Consider all significant legal and regulatory requirements, contract provisions, grant 
agreements, and potential fraud and abuse affecting the audited entity;  
? Consider the results of previous audits and attestation engagements;  
? Identify potential criteria needed to evaluate the audit matters and potential sources 
of audit evidence based on the amount and type of evidence needed;  
? Consider relying on the work of other auditors and experts to help achieve audit 
objectives;  
? Assign staff and specialists with sufficient professional competence to perform the 
audit;  
? Identify other resources needed to complete the audit; 
? Communicate matters about the audit planning and performance to management 
officials; and  
? Prepare a written audit plan. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.257 
• Audit supervisors must properly supervise the audit staff, which involves providing 
guidance and direction to the staff, staying informed about significant problems 
encountered, reviewing the work performed, and providing effective on-the-job training. 
• Auditors must obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable basis for 
the auditors’ findings, conclusions, and recommendations.  
• Auditors should prepare sufficiently detailed audit documentation to provide a clear 
understanding of the nature, timing, extent, and results of the work performed; the 
evidence obtained and its source; and the conclusions reached. 
 
Reporting Standards for Performance Audits 
The Yellow Book standards for performance audits relate to the form of the report, the 
report contents, and the report issuance and distribution: 
• Auditors should prepare audit reports communicating the results of each audit. The 
report should be written or presented in some other retrievable form, and should be 
appropriate for its intended use.  
• The auditors’ report should contain: 
? The audit objectives, scope, and methodology; 
? The audit results, including findings, conclusions, and recommendations; 
? A reference to compliance with GAGAS; 
? The views of responsible officials; and 
? The nature of any privileged and confidential information omitted, if applicable. 
• The reported findings should include any significant deficiencies in internal control, all 
material instances of fraud and illegal acts, significant violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, and significant abuse. 
• Government auditors should submit audit reports to those charged with governance, to 
the appropriate officials of the audited entity, and to the appropriate oversight bodies or 
organizations requiring or arranging for the audits. Auditors should also send copies of 
the reports to other officials who have legal oversight authority or who may be 
responsible for acting on audit findings and recommendations, and to others authorized 
to receive such reports.  
 
In addition to these standards, auditors should refer to AU 801 (SAS No. 74), Compliance 
Auditing Considerations in Audits of Governmental Entities and Recipients of Governmental Financial 
Assistance. This standard incorporates a discussion of responsibilities under certain laws and 
government bulletins, and auditors should know these requirements. A thorough review of 
this statement will provide additional guidance. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.258                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
More information about the Yellow Book and government auditing is contained in the 
chapter entitled “Public Sector Fraud.” The fu ll text of all of the Government Auditing 
Standards is also available at the Government Accountability Office’s website 
(www.gao.gov). 
 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners 
Certified Fraud Examiners are not normally responsible for the initial detection of fraud; 
instead, Certified Fraud Examiners usually become involved after sufficient predication 
exists. Certified Fraud Examiners commonly supervise or direct a fraud examination or 
investigation. The responsibilities of Certified Fraud Examiners are to: 
• Help resolve allegations of fraud, from inception to disposition 
• Obtain evidence 
• Take statements 
• Write reports of fraud examinations 
• Testify to findings 
• Assist in fraud detection and prevention 
 
Help Resolve Allegations of Fraud 
Allegations of fraud often are based on insufficient evidence. They must be resolved through 
lawful evidence-gathering methods. The Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional 
Ethics requires Certified Fraud Examiners to assist in that resolution. The disposition of a 
case might be a settlement or some other form of agreement, rather than a trial and 
conviction or acquittal. 
 
Obtain Evidence 
Certified Fraud Examiners are responsible for gathering and maintaining custody of 
evidence that will either confirm or refute a fraud allegation. The available evidence might 
demonstrate that the fraud allegation is without merit. Such evidence is equally as important 
as evidence that might prove the commission of fraud. 
 
Take Statements
Certified Fraud Examiners use the skills of interviewing. These skills are invaluable in 
obtaining statements from witnesses as well as securing admissions of guilt from 
perpetrators. 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.259 
Write Reports 
Report writing is an important step in fraud examinations. The report is a narration of the 
series of events that has occurred, the witnesses who will testify to the facts, and, if 
appropriate, the signed admission of the perpetrator. 
 
Testify to Findings 
Certified Fraud Examiners might testify to the findings of an examination. Although this 
step is not always necessary (for example, in cases that do not proceed to trial), it is 
important that all examinations be conducted under the premise that the case will go to trial 
and testimony will be required. Keeping this premise in mind helps the fraud examiner 
remember to take the time to perform the examination scrupulously. 
 
Assist in the Detection and Prevention of Fraud 
Because of their education, experience, and training, Certified Fraud Examiners are uniquely 
qualified to assist companies with proactive fraud prevention and detection programs. 
Certified Fraud Examiners assist in the investigation of fraud allegations and also aid 
management with designing and implementing internal control systems so that fraud 
schemes will be less common and not go undetected. 
 
It is common for a Certified Fraud Examiner to hold another designation, such as Certified 
Public Accountant, Certified Protection Professional, or Certified Internal Auditor. Dealing 
with accounting and auditing matters often requires the opinions of these professionals. 
Although Certified Fraud Examiners might hold other designations, they are bound by the 
Certified Fraud Examiner Code of Professional Ethics, which specifically states, in part: 
 
A Certified Fraud Examiner, when conducting examinations, will obtain  evidence or other 
documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any opinion required. No opinion shall be 
expressed regarding the guilt or innocence of any person or party. 
 
This article means that the Certified Fraud Examiner will not express an opinion, even if 
personally convinced of the guilt of an individual. Determining the guilt or innocence of an 
individual is reserved for a judge and jury; the Certified Fraud Examiner is a gatherer of 
facts, not the ultimate judge of them. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.260                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY 
 
This is only a SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICY (DRP), and is NOT LEGAL 
ADVICE. It is only an example of a general DRP and should not be used without revision to meet the 
particular administrative and legal needs of your organi zation. There are many federal, state, and local laws 
that require organizations to retain documents for a certain period of time that may not be represented in this 
sample policy. All companies should contact counsel licensed to practice law in their state before implementing 
a DRP. 
 
I. Purpose  
 
To ensure the most efficient and effective operation of ORGANIZATION (Organization), we are 
implementing this Document Retention Policy (DRP or policy). The records of Organization and its 
subsidiaries are important to the proper functioning of Organization. Our records include virtually all 
of the records you produce as an Organization employee. Such records can be in electronic or paper 
form. Thus, items that you may not consider important, such as interoffice e-mails, desktop 
calendars, and printed memoranda are records that are considered important under this policy. If you 
are ever uncertain as to any procedures set forth in this policy (e.g., what records to retain or destroy, 
when to do so, or how to do so) it is your responsibility to seek answers from Organization’s DRP 
Manager. 
 
The goals of this DRP are to: 
 
1. Retain important documents for reference and future use; 
2. Delete documents that are no longer necessary for the proper functioning of Organization; 
3. Organize important documents for efficient retrieval; and 
4. Ensure that you, as an Organization employee, know what documents should be retained, 
the length of their retention, means of storage, and when and how they should be destroyed. 
 
Federal and state laws require Organization to maintain certain types of records for particular 
periods. Failure to maintain such records could subject you and Organization to penalties and fines, 
obstruct justice, spoil legal evidence, and/or seriously harm Organization’s position in litigation. 
Thus, it is imperative that you fully understand and comply with this, and any future records 
retention or destruction policies and schedules, UNLESS you have been notified by Organization, or 
if you believe that (1) such records are or could be relevant to any future litigation, (2) there is a 
dispute that could lead to litigation, or (3) Organization is a party to a lawsuit, in which case you 
MUST PRESERVE such records until Organization’s legal counsel determines that the records are 
no longer needed.  
 
“Records” discussed herein refers to all business records of Organization (and is used 
interchangeably with “documents”), including written, printed, and recorded materials, as well as 
electronic records (i.e., e-mails and documents saved electronically). All business records shall be 
retained for a period no longer than necessary for the proper conduct and functioning of 
Organization. No business records shall be retained longer than five (5) years, EXCEPT  those that 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.261 
(1) have time periods provided for herein, (2) are in the Document Retention Schedule, found at 
Appendix “A,” or (3) are specifically exempted by Organization’s DRP Manager.  
 
II. Management  
 
To ensure compliance with this DRP, Organization’s DRP Manager is responsible for the following 
oversight functions: 
 
• Implementing the DRP; 
• Ensuring that employees are properly educated, understand, and follow the DRP’s purpose; 
• Providing oversight on actual retention and destruction of documents;  
• Ensuring proper storage of documents; 
• Periodically following-up with counsel to ensure proper retention periods are in place;  
• Ensuring the proper storage of documents; 
• Suspending the destruction of documents upon foreseeable litigation; and 
• Keeping corporate officers, directors, and employees informed of changes in relation to the 
DRP. 
 
Organization’s DRP Manager shall annually review the DRP, modify it accordingly, and inform and 
educate all Organization employees on any such changes. All questions relating to document 
retention and/or destruction should be directly addressed to Organization’s DRP Manager. 
 
III. Types of Records 
 
Appendix “A,” attached at the end of this DRP, lists several categories of records, as well as specific 
records that contain specific retention periods. This is referred to as a Document Retention Schedule 
(DRS). All records not provided for in the DRS or described herein, shall be classified into three 
types: (1) Temporary Records, (2) Final Records, and (3) Permanent Records. 1   
 
Temporary Records 
 
Temporary records consist of all business documents that have not been completed, including, but 
not limited to: written memoranda and dictation to be typed in the future; reminders; to-do lists; 
report, case study, and calculation drafts; interoffice correspondence regarding a client or business 
transaction; and running logs. 
 
Temporary records can be destroyed, or permanently deleted if in electronic form (see protocol 
below for proper destruction of data in electronic form), when a project/case/file closes. Upon the 
closing of a project/case/file, gather and review all such temporary records. Before you destroy or 
permanently delete these documents, make sure you have duplicates of all the final records pertaining 
                                                          
1 See Ashcraft, H., Document Retention:  Gu idelines for Managing Project Files, February 2002. Available at 
http://terrarrg.com/images/pdfs/DocumentRetention.pdf.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.262                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to the project/case/file. Upon destruction or deletion, organize the final records (and duplicates) in a 
file marked “FINAL” and store them appropriately. 
 
Final Records 
 
Final records include all business documents that are not superseded by modification or addition, 
such as, but not limited to: documents given (or sent via electronic form) to any third-party not 
employed by Organization or government agency, final memoranda and reports, correspondence, 
handwritten telephone memoranda not further transcribed, minutes, design/plan specifications, 
journal entries, and cost estimates. All accounting records shall be deemed final. 
 
Except as provided for in the DRS, all final documents are to be discarded 10 years after the close of 
a project/case/file. 
 
Permanent Records 
 
Permanent records include all business documents that define Organization’s scope of work, 
expressions of professional opinions, research, and reference materials, and include, but are not 
limited to: contracts, proposals, materials referenc ing expert opinions, annual financial statements, 
federal tax returns, payroll registers, copyright registration, and patents.  
 
Except as provided for in the Document Retention Schedule (Appendix “A”), all permanent 
documents are to be retained indefinitely. 
 
Accounting and Corporate Tax Records 
 
Accounting and corporate tax records include, but are not limited to: financial statements; ledgers; 
audit records; invoices and expense records; federal, state, and property tax returns; payroll; 
accounting procedures; gross receipts; customer records; and purchases.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of six years 
or until the statute of limitations for a particular record expires (please consult Organization’s counsel 
for time periods if you manage/control such records). 
 
Workplace Records 
 
Workplace records include, but are not limited to: Articles of Incorporation; bylaws; meeting 
minutes; deeds and titles; leases; policy statements; contracts and agreements; and patents and 
trademark records.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained in perpetuity. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.263 
Employment, Employee, and Payroll Records 
 
Employment records include, but are not limited to: job announcements and advertisements, 
employment applications, background investigations, resumes, and letters of recommendation for 
persons not hired.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of one year. 
 
Employee records include, but are not limited to: employment applications, background 
investigations, resumes, and letters of recommendation of current and past employees; and records 
relating to current and past employees’ performance reviews and complaints.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of three years 
following unemployment with Organization. 
 
Payroll records include, but are not limited to: wage rate tables; salary histor y; current rate of pay; 
payroll deductions; time cards; forms W-2 and W-4; and bonuses.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of six years. 
 
Bank Records 
 
Bank records include, but are not limited to: bank deposits, check copies, stop payment orders, bank 
statements, check signature authorizations, and bank reconciliations.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of three 
years. 
 
Legal Records  
 
Legal records include, but are not limited to: a ll contracts; all legal records, statements, and 
correspondence; trademark and copyright registrations; patents; personal injury records and 
statements; press releases; and public findings.  
 
Unless otherwise specified in the DRS, such records should be retained for a minimum of 10 years. 
 
Historical Records 
 
Historical records are those that are no longer of use to Organization, but by virtue of their age or 
research value may be of historical interest or significance to Organization. Historical records should 
be retained indefinitely. 
 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.264                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
IV. Storage  
 
Tangible Records 
 
Tangible records are those which you must physically move to store, such as paper records (including 
printed versions of electronically saved documents), photographs, audio recordings, advertisements, 
and promotional items. Active records and records that need to be readily accessible may be stored in 
Organization’s office space or equipment. Inactive records can be sent to Organization’s off-site 
storage facility. 
 
Electronic Records 
 
Electronic mail (e-mail) should be either printed and stored as tangible evidence, or stored 
electronically.  
 
Organization has computer software that duplicates files, which are then backed up on central 
servers. If you have a notebook computer from Organization that you work on out of the office, 
your computer contains synchronization software that duplicates and backs up files when you log 
into the network. However, it is important that all employees take precautionary measures to save 
work and records on Organization’s network drive. 
 
V. Destruction / Deletion  
 
Tangible Records 
 
Tangible records should be destroyed by shredding or some other means that will render them 
unreadable. If you have a record that you do not know how to destroy, such as a photograph, 
compact disk, or tape recording, ask the advice of Organization’s DRP Manager.  
 
Electronic Records 
 
E-mail records that you “delete” remain in Organi zation’s system. Thus, Organization’s information 
technology (IT) department will be responsible for permanently removing deleted e-mails from the 
computer system. 
 
Deleting files and emptying the recycling bin is usually sufficient in most circumstances to get rid of a 
record. However, because electronic records can be stored in many locations, Organization’s IT 
department will be responsible for permanently removing deleted files from the computer system.  
 
Keep in mind, where duplicate records are involved, both must be destroyed/deleted where proper. 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.265 
VI. Cessation of Record  Destruction / Deletion 
 
If a lawsuit is filed or imminent, or a legal document request has been made upon Organization, ALL 
RECORD DESTRUCTION MUST CEASE IMMEDIATELY. Organization’s DRP Manager may 
suspend this DRP to require that documents relating to the lawsuit or potential legal issue(s) be 
retained and organized. A critical understanding of this section is imperative. Should you fail to 
follow this protocol, you and/or Organization may be subject to fines and penalties, among other 
sanctions.  
 
VII. Acknowledgement 
 
I have read and understand the purpose of this DRP. I understand that strict adherence to this DRP 
is a condition of my employment with Organization. If I do not understand something regarding this 
DRP, I will contact Organization’s DRP Manager im mediately for clarification. I agree to abide by 
Organization’s DRP. 
 
 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ 
Employee’s Signature    Date 
 
_____ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ 
Employee’s Name (print)  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.266                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION SCHEDULE 
 
This is only a SAMPLE DOCUMENT RETENTION SCHEDULE (“DRS”), and is 
NOT LEGAL ADVICE. There are many federal, state, and local laws that require 
organizations to retain documents for a certain period  of time that may be different in your state (or 
different to your particular industry), or that may not be represented in this sample policy. All 
companies should contact counsel licensed to practice  law in their state for proper retention periods. 
 
 
TYPE OF RECORD SPECIFIC RECORD SUGGESTED RETENTION PERIOD  
Accounting Records   
 Annual financial statements Permanent 
 Monthly financial statements 3 years 
 General ledgers 20 years 
 Annual audit records 10 years 
 Journal entries 8 years 
 Special reports 8 years 
 Canceled checks 8 years 
 A/P paid invoices 8 years 
 Business expense records 8 years 
 Credit card receipts 3 years 
 Cash receipts 3 years 
 A/R invoices 8 years 
 Data for acquisitions/divestitures Permanent 
 Data for aborted 
acquisitions/divestitures 
5 years 
 Accounts payable 7 years 
 Accounts receivable 7 years 
 Audit reports 7 years 
 Chart of accounts Permanent 
 Expense records  7 years 
 Inventory records 7 years 
 Loan documents 7 years after final payment 
 Purchase orders 7 years 
 Sales records 7 years 
 Stop payment orders 3 years 
 Bank reconciliations 3 years 
   
Tax Records   
 Federal tax returns (non-payroll) Permanent 
 State & local tax returns (non-Permanent 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.267 
payroll) 
 Forms 990 and supporting 
documentation 
Permanent 
 Forms 990-T and supporting 
documentation 
Permanent 
 Supporting documentation for 
taxes 
4 years 
 City and state excise tax reports, 
and supporting documentation 
5 years (or longer if designated 
by state law) 
 Unclaimed property filings and 
supporting documentation 
6 years (or longer if designated 
by state law) 
 Forms 1099 8 years 
 Magnetic tape and similar records 1 year 
 Payroll taxes (Forms W2 and W3) Permanent 
 Payroll taxes (Forms 940 and 
941, state withholding returns, 
and state unemployment returns)
 8 years (or longer if designated 
by state law) 
   
Payroll Records   
 Wage rate tables  3 years 
 Cost of living tables 3 years 
 Wage histories  6 years 
 Salary histories 6 years 
 Payroll deductions 6 years 
 Time cards or forms 5 years 
 Forms W-2  8 years 
 Forms W-4 8 years 
 Garnishments 4 years following unemployment
  Payroll registers Permanent 
 State employment forms 4 years 
 State unemployment tax records Permanent 
 Cancelled payroll checks  8 years 
 Deductions registers 8 years 
 Earnings records 8 years 
 Changes or adjustments to 
salaries 
8 years 
   
Insurance Records   
 Policies (including expired 
policies) 
Permanent 
 Claims for loss/damage, accident 
reports, appraisals  
5 years 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.268                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
   
Workplace Records   
 Incorporation and reorganization 
records (Articles of 
Incorporation, Bylaws, etc.) 
Permanent 
 Meeting minutes Permanent 
 Policy statements 10 years 
 Employee directories 5 years 
   
Legal Records   
 General Contracts 3 years after termination 
 Real estate contracts and records 20 years–Permanent 
 Personal injury records 8 years 
 Trademark registration Permanent 
 Copyright registration Permanent 
 Patents Permanent 
 Litigation claims 5 years following close of case 
 Court documents and records 5 years following close of case 
 Deposition transcripts 5 years following close of case 
 Discovery materials 3 years following close of case 
 Leases 6 years after termination 
   
Personnel Records   
 Employment applications 
(persons not hired) 
1 year 
 Employment applications 
(persons hired) 
3 years following employment  
 Employee resumes and 
employment history 
3 years following employment 
period 
 Evaluations  3 years following employment  
 Promotions, raises, 
reclassifications, and job 
descriptions 
5 years following employment  
 Disciplinary warnings, 
demotions, lay-offs, and 
discharges 
5 years following employment  
 Employment and termination 
agreements 
Permanent 
 Promotions and raises 3 years following employment  
 Beneficiary information 3 years following employment  
 Medical and safety records 6 years 
 Accident reports 6 years 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.269 
 Education assistance While employed 
 Sick-leave benefits While employed 
 Retirement plans (after 
expiration) 
6 years 
 Incentive plans (after expiration) 6 years 
 Pension plans (after expiration) 6 years 
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.301 



:


manag auditor and fraud examin respons
manag auditor and fraud examin all have a respons with respect to the
prevent and detect of fraud thi section of the fraud examin manual describ
the regul and best practic guidanc for manag intern and extern auditor
and fraud examin in carri out their respect antifraud respons
legisl and best practic
an organ board of director and senior manag gener set the code of
conduct for the compani thi code of conduct is often refer to as the compani ethic
and is the standard by which all employe ar expect to conduct themselv if the
compani ethic is on of high integr it is anticip that the employe will tend to be
more honest if on the other hand the ethic is on of corrupt the employe will view it
as a licens to be corrupt ethic leadership ha to come from insid and from the top
ethic consider have got to be on senior manag agenda and thei have to set
the tone by exampl not by send memo sai j gregori dee a professor at harvard
busi school
an unimpeach compani ethic doe not in and of itself ensur that financi statement
fraud will not occur other measur ar requir for manag to discharg it
respons to prevent and detect fraudul financi report
the treadwai commiss
the nation commiss on fraudul financi report more commonli refer to
as the treadwai commiss wa form in the unit state in 1985 to better defin the
respons of the auditor in detect and prevent fraud the profession audit
organ the american institut of certifi public account the institut of
intern auditor and the american account associ among other establish
the treadwai commiss to underwrit a studi and make recommend in an effort
to curb fraudul financi report the treadwai commiss offer four
recommend that when combin with other measur might help reduc the
probabl of fraudul financi report these recommend ar address to the
board of director audit committe
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1202 2011 fraud examin manual
mandatori independ audit committe
the board of director overse the conduct of manag the treadwai commiss
recommend that each board of director have an audit committe compos of outsid
director
written charter
the treadwai commiss also suggest that compani develop a written charter set
forth the duti and respons of the audit committe the board of director should
period review modifi and approv thi written charter
resourc and author
accord to the treadwai commiss the exist of an audit committe and a written
charter is not enough the committe also must have adequ resourc and author to
carri out it respons
inform vigil and effect audit committe
the audit committe should be compos of member who ar inform vigil and
effect
the coso report
in addit in 1987 the treadwai commiss recommend that manag of publicli
held compani includ with it manag report an acknowledg of respons
for intern control and an assess of it effect in meet those control the
treadwai commiss form the committe on sponsor organ coso to
actual it recommend in 1992 coso issu intern controlintegr framework
follow by an addendum which provid the follow definit
intern control is a process design to provid reason assur regard the
achiev of object in the follow categori
a reliabl of financi report
b effect and effici of oper and
c complianc with applic law and regul
coso also identifi for manag five interrel compon of intern control
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1203
the control environ set the tone of an organ influenc the control
conscious of the organ and provid a foundat for all other control
compon
risk assess is an entiti identif and assess of risk relev to achiev
control object
control activ ar an entiti control polici and procedur
inform and commun is the exchang of inform in a wai that allow
employe to carri out their respons
monitor is the process that assess the control environ over time
these compon combin form an integr system of control
coso guidanc for smaller public compani
in 2006 coso issu a report titl intern control over financi report guidanc for
smaller public compani which provid guidanc for small compani on implement cost
effect intern control over financi report as requir under sarbanesoxlei section
404 while acknowledg that smaller public compani often face uniqu and
disproportion challeng in appli sound intern control practic coso note that
the benefit of good intern control outweigh the cost and add signific valu to an
organ the guidanc is split between three volum and contain 20 principl relat
to the intern controlintegr framework as well as 75 attribut relat to these principl
the report outlin sever method small compani can util to establish and enhanc
costeffect intern control such as widen and direct control from the top
emphas effect oversight on the part of the board of director compens for
limit segreg of duti leverag the abil of commerci avail inform
technolog and us manag monitor activ to offset shortcom in other
control area the report also discuss wai to achiev further effici in design
implement and assess control includ focus on risk adjust document
polici to fit the need of the organ and view intern control as an integr
process
more inform on the coso report can be found at wwwcosoorg
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1204 2011 fraud examin manual
the sarbanesoxlei act
on juli 30 2002 presid bush sign the sarbanesoxlei act thi law significantli
chang the law of corpor govern and the rule and regul under which
account firm and corpor must oper addition certain provis
consider increas the respons of manag and the account profess
with regard to fraud sinc the enact of sarbanesoxlei the secur and exchang
commiss sec ha issu numer sec releas that support and expand the act
requir below is a summari of some of the most import provis of sarban
oxlei and the correspond sec rule that re late to fraud detect and prevent more
inform about sarbanesoxlei can be found in the chapter entitl the law relat to
fraud in the law section of the fraud examin manual
the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act sign in juli 2010
allow small public compani those with less than 75 million in market cap a perman
exempt from section 404b of the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
public compani account oversight board
titl i of sarbanesoxlei establish the public compani account oversight board
pcaob whose purpos is
to overse the audit of public compani that ar subject to the secur law and
relat matter in order to protect the int rest of investor and further the public
interest in the prepar of inform accur and independ audit report for
compani the secur of which ar sold to and held by and for public investor
section 101
in short the board is charg with overse public compani audit set audit
standard and investig act of noncompli by auditor or audit firm the board is
appoint and overseen by the secur and exchang commiss it is made up of five
person two who ar or have been certifi public account cpa and three who have
never been cpa the act list the board duti which includ
regist public account firm that audit publicli trade compani
establish or adopt audit qualiti control ethic independ and other
standard relat to audit of publicli trade compani
inspect regist public account firm
investig regist public account firm and their employe conduct
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1205
disciplinari hear and impos sanction where justifi
perform such other duti as ar necessari to promot high profession standard
among regist account firm to improv the qualiti of audit servic offer by
those firm and to protect investor
enforc complianc with the sarbanesoxlei act the rule of the board profession
standard and secur law relat to public compani audit
registr with the board
public account firm must regist with the pcaob in order to legal prepar or issu an
audit report on a publicli trade compani in order to becom regist account firm
must disclos among other thing the name of all public compani thei audit in the
preced year the name of all public compani thei expect to audit in the current year
and the annual fee thei receiv from each of their public audit client for audit
account and nonaudit servic
audit qualiti control and independ standard and rule
section 103 of the act requir the board to establish standard for audit qualiti control
ethic independ and other issu relat to audit of publicli trade compani
although the act place the respons on the board to establish audit standard it also
set forth certain rule that the board is requir to includ in those audit standard
these rule includ the follow
audit work paper must be maintain for at least seven year
audit firm must includ a concur or second partner review and approv of audit
report and concur approv in the issuanc of the audit report by a qualifi person
other than the person in charg of the audit
all audit report must describ the scope of test of the compani intern control
structur and must present the auditor find from the test includ an
evalu of whether the intern control structur is accept a descript of
materi weak in intern control and ani materi noncompli with control
inspect of regist public account firm
the act also author the board to conduct regular inspect of public account firm
to assess their degre of complianc with law rule and profession standard regard
audit inspect ar to be conduct onc a year for firm that regularli audit more than
100 public compani and at least onc everi three year for firm that regularli audit
between 1 and 100 public compani
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1206 2011 fraud examin manual
investig and disciplinari proceed
the board ha the author to investig regist public account firm or their
employe for potenti violat of the sarbanesoxlei act profession standard ani
rule establish by the board or ani secur law relat to the prepar and issuanc
of audit report dure an investig the board ha the power to compel testimoni and
document product
the board also ha the power to issu sanction for violat or for noncooper with
an investig sanction can includ temporari or perman suspens of a firm
registr with the board which would mean the firm could no longer legal audit
publicli trade compani temporari or perman suspens of a person right to be
associ with a regist public account firm prohibit from audit public
compani and civil monetari penalti of up to 750000 for an individu and up to
15000000 for a firm
offic and director
the act includ sever respons for the offic and director of public compani
certif oblig
the chief execut offic and chief financi offic of public compani must
person certifi annual and quarterli sec file
section 302 of the act requir that the ceo and cfo person certifi the follow
thei have person review the report
base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the report mislead
base on their knowledg the financi statement and inform in the report fairli
present in all materi respect the financi condit and result of oper of the
compani
thei ar respons for establish and maintain intern control and have
design such control to ensur that materi inform relat to the compani and
it consolid subsidiari is made known to them thei have evalu the
effect of intern control within 90 dai prior to the report and thei have
present their conclus about the effect of those control in the report
thei have disclos to their auditor and the audit committe ani signific defici
in the control that could advers affect the compani abil to record process
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1207
summar and report financi data and thei have identifi for their auditor ani
materi weak in intern control further thei have disclos to their auditor
ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other employe who
have a signific role in the compani intern control
thei have indic in their report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control sinc the file of the last report includ ani correct
action with respect to previous identifi signific defici and materi
weak
intern control
under section 404 of the act and sec releas no 338238 and 3447986 manag
respons pertain to the compani intern control over financi report ha been
increas substanti
defin intern control
intern control over financi report icofr is defin as
a process design to provid reason assur re gard the reliabl of financi report and the
prepar of financi statement for extern purpos in accord with gener accept account
principl
addition icofr is deem to includ all polici and procedur that
pertain to the mainten of record that in reason detail accur and fairli
reflect the transact and disposit of the asset of the compani
provid reason assur that transact ar record as necessari to permit
prepar of financi statement in accord with gener accept account
principl and that receipt and expenditur of the compani ar be made onli in
accord with author of manag and director of the compani and
provid reason assur regard prevent or time detect of unauthor
acquisit us or disposit of the compani s asset that could have a materi effect
on the financi statement
exampl of intern control cover by section 404 and the relat releas and standard
includ but ar not limit to
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1208 2011 fraud examin manual
control over initi author record process reconcil and report
signific account balanc transact and disclosur includ in the financi
statement
control relat to the prevent identif and detect of fraud
control relat to initi and process of nonrout and nonsystemat
transact
control relat to the select and applic of appropri account polici
manag report on intern control
the provis of section 404 requir manag to acknowledg it respons for the
icofr of the compani and to assess the oper effect of those control as a
result public compani must issu an addit intern control report within their annual
report contain
a statement of manag respons for establish and maintain adequ
icofr
a statement identifi the framework that manag us in conduct the
assess of the effect of the compani icofr
manag assess of the effect of the compani icofr as of the end of
the compani most recent fiscal year includ disclosur of ani materi weak
identifi in the compani icofr and an explicit statement as to whether the icofr
is effect and
a statement that the compani independ auditor ha issu an attest report
cover manag assess of the compani icofr the auditor attest
report must also be file with the annual report
manag assess of intern control
in perform the icofr assess manag must choos a suitabl intern control
framework against which to evalu the design and effect of the compani icofr
the most commonli us model in the unit state is the intern controlintegr
framework establish by the committe of sponsor organ coso of the
treadwai commiss which provid five compon of effect intern control
control environ
control activ
risk assess
inform and commun
monitor
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1209
the coso framework is discuss in more detail in the fraud prevent program
chapter in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
further detail on the intern controlintegr framework is also avail at the coso
websit httpwwwcosoorg
addition manag must
determin which intern control to test in perform the assess consid the
signific of each control both individu and in the aggreg
evalu whether the failur of a control could result in a misstat to the financi
statement the likelihood and magnitud of ani result misstat and whether
other control ar in place to mitig thi occurr
determin which locat or busi unit to includ in the assess if applic
evalu the design and oper effect of the intern control us the intern
control framework chosen as a guid
evalu the probabl of occurr and the size of potenti misstat result
from the intern control defici identifi and determin whether thei either
individu or in the aggreg constitut materi weak ani defici where the
likelihood of potenti misstat is more than remot or signific defici ani
defici where the likelihood of potenti misstat is more than remot and the
magnitud is more than inconsequenti
provid suffici document to support the assess of icofr includ
document the design of the intern control and the result of manag test
and evalu and
commun the assess find to the independ auditor and ani other
applic parti
recogn that each compani differ with regard to intern control structur the rule
state that the natur of the test perform by manag will depend on the specif
circumst of the compani and the signific of the control be test howev the
rule also assert that inquiri alon ar gener not a suffici basi for manag
assess
in juli 2007 the sec issu guidanc specif address to manag about fulfil
their respons pertain to report on intern control over financi report the
guidanc emphas a topdown riskbas approach to manag evalu of
icofr and explicitli state that an evalu perform in complianc with the guidanc is
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1210 2011 fraud examin manual
on wai that manag can satisfi the intern control requir establish by
sarbanesoxlei in provid direct to assist compani manag in evalu and
assess of the icofr the guidanc address the follow topic
identifi financi report risk and control
evalu evid of the oper effect of icofr
report consider
the full text of the sec interpret guidanc can be found at
httpwwwsecgovrulesinterp2007338810pdf
code of ethic
as requir by section 406 of the act and sec releas no 338177 public compani must
disclos in their annual report whether thei have adopt a code of ethic for senior
financi offic and if thei have not thei must explain their reason
defin code of ethic
the rule defin a code of ethic as a set of written standard that ar design to deter
wrongdo and to promot
honest and ethic conduct includ the ethic treatment of actual or appar
conflict of interest between person and profession interest
full fair accur time and understand disclosur in all document file with the
sec and all other public commun
complianc with all applic government law rule and regul
the prompt report to the appropri person or person within the compani of
violat of the code and
account for adher to the code
the sec believ that the establish of provis beyond thi definit outlin is
best left to the discret of the compani therefor the rule do not specifi ani detail
requir particular languag complianc procedur or sanction for violat that
must be includ in the code of ethic the sec doe howev explicitli encourag the
adopt of code that ar broader and more comprehens than necessari to meet the
disclosur requir
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1211
senior financi offic
the senior financi offic that must be cover by the compani code of ethic includ
the princip execut offic princip financi offic princip account offic or
control and person perform similar function while the rule state that a compani
must have a special code of ethic that appli to senior financi offic the compani
doe not need to adopt a separ code of ethic for these offic howev if it doe not
the compani gener code of ethic should ex pressli state that it appli to all senior
financi offic
disclosur requir
in addit to the disclosur of the exist of the code of ethic in the annual report the
rule requir that compani make publicli avail the portion of their code of ethic that
address the ethic consider contain within the definit of code of ethic and
that appli to the senior financi offic to do so the sec permit compani to emploi
on of three altern method
file the code of ethic that appli to the senior financi offic as an exhibit in the
compani annual report
post the code of ethic that is relev to the senior financi offic on it websit
and disclos the internet address and the fact that the code is post in thi manner
within the annual report or
provid a copi of the code of ethic to ani person upon request and without charg
provid the annual report contain an undertak to do so and an explan of how
a person can make such a request
public compani must also make known either on a form 8k or on their websit ani
chang in and ani waiver of the code of ethic relat to the senior financi offic the
natur of the chang or waiver must be disclos within five busi dai of it occurr
and if disclos on a websit must remain post for 12 month
exampl of code of ethic
the follow ar some exampl of organ that have adopt code of ethic that
meet the sec guidelin addition the acf sampl code of ethic is contain in
the fraud prevent program chapter in the fraud prevent and deterr section
of the fraud examin manual
fei httpinvestorfeicomdocumentdisplaycfmdocumentid2453
exxonmobil
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1212 2011 fraud examin manual
httpwwwexxonmobilcomcorporateaboutoperationssbcethicsaspx
httpmediacorporateirnetmediafilesnysnmgareportsnmgcoefppdf
mcdonald httpwwwmcdonaldscomcorpinvestgovofficerethicshtml
audit committe
the audit committe of a compani is a committe establish by the board of director for
the purpos of overse the account financi report and audit process
section 301 and 407 of the act and sec releas no 338177 338220 3447235 and 34
47654 set out specif requir for audit committe of public compani
composit of the audit committe
independ
each member of the audit committe must be a member of the board of director and must
be independ as evalu by two criteria
feesaudit committe member mai onli be compens for their servic on the
board and ani board committe thei cannot be paid by the compani or ani of it
subsidiari for ani other consult or advisori work includ indirect payment
made by the compani to a parti relat to the committe member audit committe
member mai receiv ani fix retir benefit thei ar entitl to for prior servic
with the compani without violat thi provis as long as the benefit ar not
conting upon the member continu servic
affiliationaudit committe member cannot be affili person of the compani
or ani other compani relat to it thi preclud execut offic
directoremploye gener partner and manag member of the compani or it
parent subsidiari or sister compani from serv on the audit committe there is a
safe harbor provis that exclud member from be consid an affili person
as long as thei ar not an execut offic of the compani or ani of it subsidiari and
thei ar not a sharehold of 10 percent or more of ani class of vote stock of the
compani or ani of it subsidiari
the sec permit three exempt from the independ standard the first provid a
oneyear phasein period for public noninvest compani wherebi there must be at
least on fulli independ member when the compani goe public a major of
independ member within 90 dai and a fulli independ committe within on year
the second exempt allow a committe member to simultan sit on the board of
director of the compani and of an affili compani ie a parent subsidiari or sister
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1213
compani without be consid an affili person provid the member otherwis
meet the independ criteria the final exempt exist to provid a number of
accommod for foreign privat issuer or list compani that ar incorpor
outsid of the unit state the sec ha state that beyond these three exempt no
addit exempt will be grant nor will it consid exempt or waiver for
particular relationship on a casebycas basi
financi expert
the board of director must includ a disclosur in the compani annual report state
whether or not there is at least on member of it audit committe that qualifi as an audit
committe financi expert if there is the compani must also includ the name of the
expert and whether the expert is independ from manag if there is not an
explan must be given as to why the committe doe not have such an expert
addition the board is permit but not requir to disclos that it ha more than on
audit committe financi expert on it audit committe
to qualifi as an audit committe financi expert an individu must possess
an understand of gener accept account principl and of financi
statement
the abil to evalu the applic of account principl us in the account for
estim accrual and reserv
experi in prepar audit analyz or evalu financi statement
contain account issu that ar gene ralli compar to those expect to be
rais in the compani financi statement or experi supervis someon engag
in such activ
an understand of intern control and financi report procedur and
an understand of the function of an audit committe
the rule state that the audit committe financi expert must have acquir these attribut
through educ and experi from serv as or activ supervis a princip
financi offic princip account offic control public account or auditor or
other similar posit or through the oversight or assess of compani or public
account regard the prepar audit or evalu of financi statement the sec
also recogn that individu that do not meet ani of these requir but have other
relev experi mai qualifi as an audit committe financi expert howev ani board
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1214 2011 fraud examin manual
of director that qualifi an expert under thi categori is requir to provid a brief list
of that person experi with the disclosur in the annual report
in determin whether an individu qualifi as an audit committe financi expert the
board of director should consid all relev fact and circumst includ but not
limit to certain qualit factor such as the level of the person account or financi
educ whether the person is a cpa whether the person ha previous serv as a cfo
or control of a public compani the person past or current membership on other audit
committe and ani other relev qualif or experi that would assist in
understand and evalu the compani financi statement the sec emphas that
such factor ar mere exampl and should be consid onli as part of an evalu of
the person knowledg and experi as a whole
to dissuad hesit to serv as an audit committe financi expert the sec ha expressli
state that the duti oblig and liabil of the member serv as the expert ar no
greater than the duti oblig and liabil of all other member of the audit committe
similarli the design of an audit committe member as a financi expert doe not
chang the duti oblig or liabil of ani other board or audit committe member
respons relat to extern auditor
the audit committe ha sole respons for hire pai retain overse and if
necessari fire the compani outsid auditor as well as the ultim author to approv
all audit engag fee and term as a result the extern auditor must report directli to
the audit committe the committe is also charg with resolv ani disput that aris
between the extern auditor and manag regard financi report issu
all audit and permit nonaudit servic other than de minimi servic provid by the
extern auditor must be preapprov by the audit committe the audit committe can
accomplish thi either by approv all servic separ prior to each engag or by
establish a detail set of preapprov polici and procedur cover all engag
as long as the audit committe is inform on a time basi of each servic and the
respons of preapprov cannot be shift to manag if the committe choos
to implement a set of preapprov polici and procedur then either a clear descript or
copi of those polici and procedur must be includ with the compani proxi
statement
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1215
procedur for handl complaint
the audit committe is requir to establish procedur eg a hotlin for receiv
retain and deal with complaint includ confidenti or anonym employe tip
regard irregular in the compani account method intern control or audit
matter
the sec doe not requir ani specif procedur for handl complaint but rather allow
the audit committe to determin the most appropri procedur for the compani
circumst includ in thi flexibl is the abil of the audit committe to defer the
receipt and screen of the complaint to anoth parti such as a messag servic
howev when complaint ar receiv by a parti outsid of the audit committe the
procedur should dictat that the tip ar ultim direct to the audit committe for
resolut further the procedur should be design such that manag is not
exclus respons for receiv and screen the complaint to prevent unscrupul
manag from mishandl complaint or retali against employe complain
ultim the enact of formal procedur should encourag the disclosur of concern
and promot proper conduct throughout the organ the establish procedur
should also allow the audit committe to be alert to potenti problem befor seriou
consequ aris
author to engag outsid advisor
in certain situat audit committe mai want to consult expert other than those hire by
manag especi when face with possibl conflict of manag interest the
rule provid that audit committe ar allow to engag ani outsid advisor such as
expert in specif account issu that mai be necessari to properli carri out their duti
fund
the audit committe is entitl to receiv appropri fund from the compani for
fee paid to the extern auditor for perform of ani audit review or attest
engag
payment to ani outsid advisor retain by the audit committe and
ani administr expens necessari for the audit committe to carri out it duti
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1216 2011 fraud examin manual
extern auditor
report to the audit committe
auditor must report directli to the audit committeenot managementand must make
time report on the follow
all critic account polici and practic us
altern gaap method that were discuss with manag the ramif of
the us of those altern treatment and the treatment prefer by the auditor and
ani other materi written commun between the auditor and manag such
as ani manag letter or the schedul of unadjust audit differ
report over intern control
auditor must also now attest to and issu a report on manag assess of intern
control over financi report under section 404 of sarbanesoxlei thi requir is
cover in more detail in the previou section on pcaob audit standard no 5 an
audit of intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of financi
statement
whistleblow protect
in addit to requir the audit committe to establish procedur to handl employe tip
and complaint the sarbanesoxlei act includ two provis that creat broad
protect for corpor whistleblow
civil liabil
section 806 of the act creat a civil liabil for an employ who out of retali fire
demot suspend threaten harass or discrimin against an employe who provid
inform or otherwis assist in an investig of fraudul activ employe ar
also protect against retali for file testifi particip or otherwis assist in a
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law and
regul employe that were retali against in such a manner ar entitl to
compensatori damag under section 806 includ reinstat with back pai and
interest and compens for legal fee it should be note howev that thi provis
doe not provid protect to all whistleblow as it onli cover employe of publicli
trade compani
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1217
crimin sanction
section 1107 of the act establish crimin sanction for anyon who intention retali
against anoth parti for provid inform regard an alleg feder offens to a law
enforc offic punish for violat the provis includ fine of up to 250000
and up to 10 year in prison for individu and fine of up to 500000 for corpor
unlik the civil liabil the protect provid under section 1107 appli to all individu
regardless of where thei work
the whistleblow protect provis ar discuss in more detail in the law relat to
fraud chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
civil and crimin penalti for noncompli
depend on which particular provis of the sarbanesoxlei act is violat the penalti
can be sever in addit to creat addit crimin offens eg the whistleblow
retali crime discuss abov it increas the jail term for exist crime such as mail
fraud and wire fraud from five to twenti year it also make it a crime to destroi document
and requir auditor of public compani to keep work paper for at least five year
the act also author the sec to freez question asset dure an investig
addition section 304 of the act requir that if a public compani is requir to prepar
an account restat due to misconduct that result in materi noncompli with
ani financi report requir the ceo and cfo shall reimburs the compani for
ani bonus or other incentivebas or equitybas compens that thei receiv
dure the 12month period follow the first public issuanc or file whichev is
earlier of a financi document embodi such financi report requir and
profit on the sale of compani secur dure such 12month period
privat secur litig reform act
the privat secur litig reform act of 1995 drastic chang the procedur and
proof requir in secur fraud case it also includ addit respons for
independ auditor of public compani under the act each audit of the financi
statement of a public compani must includ the follow
procedur design to provid reason assur of detect illeg act that would
have a direct and materi effect on the determin of financi statement amount
procedur design to identifi relatedparti transact that ar materi to the
financi statement or otherwis requir disclosur therein
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1218 2011 fraud examin manual
an evalu of whether there is substanti doubt about the abil of the issuer to
continu as a go concern dure the ensu fiscal year
the term illeg act is defin to mean ani act or omiss that violat ani law rule or
regul have the forc of law
addition if in the cours of an audit an auditor detect or otherwis becom awar
that an illeg act whether or not perceiv to have a materi effect on the financi
statement of the issuer ha or might have occur the auditor must then
determin and consid the possibl effect of the illeg act on the financi statement
of the compani includ ani conting monetari effect such as fine penalti and
damag
inform the appropri level of manag as soon as practic and
assur that the audit committe or the board of director in the absenc of an audit
committe is adequ inform of the illeg act that have been detect unless such
act ar clearli inconsequenti
the reform act provid further that the auditor must take notic of what if ani action is
taken by the compani in respons if the auditor conclud that the illeg act ha a materi
effect on the financi statement of the compani the auditor must then determin
whether senior manag ha taken tim eli and appropri remedi action and
whether the failur to take remedi action is reason expect to warrant departur
from a standard report of the auditor when made or warrant resign from the audit
engag
if the auditor conclud that senior manag ha fail to appropri address the
situat he must report hi conclus to the board of director if the board receiv such
a report the board is then requir to notifi the sec within on busi dai and send a
copi of the sec notic to the auditor if the auditor doe not receiv a copi of thi notic
befor the onedai deadlin then the auditor is requir to furnish the sec with a copi of
hi report to the board
the auditor is provid with some protect howev the act expressli provid that the
auditor cannot be liabl in a privat action for ani statement contain in the auditor
report to the sec
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1219
manag
ultim manag is respons for the prevent and detect of fraud within an
organ it is manag job to ensur the proper intern control ar in place to
prevent fraud as well as to detect it although manag mai not execut all of the
controlsa the perform of intern cont rol function ar gener spread across
individu throughout the entir organ includ individu contributor
manag and even the board of directorsmanag is also respons for
monitor and remedi intern control to ensur thei ar effect design and
oper to prevent and detect fraud
as mention abov the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 includ sever requir of
manag in public compani also discuss abov coso provid sever guidelin
for manag prevent and detect of fraud through the intern control
environ
although prepar the financi statement is the respons of manag fraud is
also frequent investig by member of manag or by peopl under the direct
and control of manag thi can present potenti conflict
document retent polici
manag of an organ should ensur that the organ ha a proper and
effect document retent polici drp in place when establish a document retent
polici it is imper that the organ consid all feder and state law and
regul regard recordkeep requir industri such as health care bank
and audit contain tradespecif rule for document and retain record
furthermor compani should continu check for legal updat concern these
requir to have a document retent polici that ignor pertin recordkeep
requir could lead to statutori violat
an effect document retent polici requir that a compani 1 establish retent
protocol befor it forese litig or offici investig 2 develop review andor
amend a polici for complianc with applic state and feder law and regul 3
ensur the reason of the polici accord to the compani busi practic 4
provid a concis explan of what is to be destroi and when 5 provid adequ
protocol for manag of electron document and 6 clearli set forth when the polici
should be immobil due to a pend investig or forese litig
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1220 2011 fraud examin manual
becaus industri vari significantli in the type of document produc receiv and
distribut court lean toward a subject reason standard in determin
whether a particular polici is adequ thu each compani must develop a polici that is
specif tailor to it busi practic a compani mai find it help to refer to
retent polici of other compani for guidanc but should avoid duplic such
polici by establish individu busi polici and compartment lowvalu and
highvalu document compani can gain quick access to intern document
a properli plan and execut document retent polici will do littl good if individu
within the compani ar unawar of it not onli must employe be awar of the polici thei
must also understand what is to be destroi and when
while electron commun continu to soar compani struggl to catch up with it
agil it is vital that compani includ protocol for preserv and destroi electron
document compani with inform technolog it depart should develop
procedur for handl electron data compani counsel execut and manag
should be awar of how electron data is store and destroi for exampl an email
delet by an employe mai remain in a compani comput system until an administr
perman delet it such situat must be recogn and address when design a
document retent polici
what document should be kept
on of the first step in establish a document retent polici is to identifi the type of
document that need to be retain or destroi it is import to rememb that everi
organ is differ thu an organ mai requir the retent of document that
ar not provid for in thi text all type of document produc by an organ must
be initi account for thi includ tangibl and electron document and is never
limit to financi document account record corpor tax record bank record
employ record variou workplac record includ inhous email and client
correspond and legal record must be consid when construct a drp for a
particular organ
a sampl document retent polici that contain a list of record to be taken into account
when determin retent protocol is includ at the end of thi chapter a compani
should check with it local counsel regard specif state statut requir differ
period
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1221
other factor to consid in identifi document includ memberconstitu
expect ir regul busi taxabl incom regul standard under
sarbanesoxlei and intern factor eg chang in board of director board resolut
patent and copyright
record typic gener by a compani that reflect or materi relat to profession
servic must also be identifi in the drp for exampl account and audit firm
should mention the retent and destruct of document that make up client file such as
client bill and payment record correspond and time record
document storag
in thi electron ag most compani ar back up document via electron media rather
than fill file cabinet storag expens scare small busi document storag
compani ar avail for store tangibl and electron document but can be costli
hard drive backup appear to be the most cost effici mean of storag but it requir
compani to have the comput gusto to withstand larg amount of inform
most importantli document must remain safe for confidenti and destruct
purpos and be easili access in the event of potenti litig and legal request for
document
document destruct
an organ must ceas destruct of document when face with potenti litig or
when a legal document request is pend or immin destruct under a valid drp will
be ineffect if document ar not actual destroi befor a potenti litig trigger
occur thu it is imper that the drp provid for complet destruct of document
that can be validli expung dure the proper period under the polici document should
be destroi by shred or by some other mean that will render them unread
similarli a protocol for the destruct of electron data should be in place to ensur that
document to be destroi ar actual destroi the delet of email or other file on
on comput doe not mean that such record ar remov from evid
drp manag
final in order to properli execut a drp someon with detail knowledg of the drp
should be in charg of the polici and should ensur that employe understand and follow it
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1222 2011 fraud examin manual
as design thi individu should be a seniorlevel employe with the power to enforc the
polici a drp manag is respons for
implement the drp
ensur that employe understand and follow the drp purpos
provid oversight on actual retent and destruct of document
ensur proper storag of document
period followingup with counsel to ensur proper retent period ar in place
suspend the destruct of document upon forese litig and
inform corpor offic director and employe of chang in relat to the
drp
fraud prevent program
the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 the feder sentenc guidelin and other rule and
regul either requir or strongli encourag the implement of on or more fraud
prevent program in most instanc manag is respons for the institut of
such program
these program as well as further detail regard manag respons for fraud
ar discuss in detail in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud
examin manual
certifi fraud examin extern auditor and intern auditor also plai kei role in the
detect and deterr of fraudul financi report follow is a discuss of their
profession respons
extern auditor
chang in the audit landscap primarili those stem from the passag of the
sarbanesoxlei act have led to a dichotomi of standard for extern auditor auditor of
public compani compani regist with the secmust adher to the audit rule
promulg by the public compani account oversight board pcaob convers
for audit of nonsecregist entiti the gener accept audit standard laid out
by the aicpa audit standard board asb appli it should be note howev that
the pcaob adopt all of the asb standard alreadi in exist on april 16 2003 ie
all standard issu through statement on audit standard sa no 101 as interim
standard applic to auditor of public compani unless and until such standard ar
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1223
supersed or amend by the pcaob therefor the discuss below on au section
316 which codifi sa no 99 appli to all extern auditor wherea au section 314
and 339 which respect codifi sa no 109 and 103 appli to audit of nonpubl
entiti onli likewis the pcaob standard discuss appli onli to auditor of sec
regist compani
au section 316 consider of fraud in a financi statement audit sourc sa no 99 and 113
in 1996 the aicpa audit standard board issu sa no 82 consider of fraud in a
financi statement audit in respons to question and critic of the audit and
account profess lack of adequ addr ssing of the subject of fraud follow the
highprofil financi fraud that occur in 2001 and 2002 the asb replac sa no 82
with sa no 99 consider of fraud in a financi statement audit to give expand
guidanc to auditor for detect materi fraud per the aicpa the standard wa part of
an effort to restor investor confid in us capit market and reestablish audit
financi statement as a clear pictur window into corpor america the standard
becam effect for audit of financi statement for period begin on or after
decemb 15 2002 and is codifi in au section 316 consider of fraud in a financi
statement audit
au section 110 respons and function of the independ auditor state the auditor ha
a respons to plan and perform the audit to obtain reason assur about whether
the financi statement ar free of materi misstat whether caus by error or fraud
the purpos of au section 316 is to establ h standard and provid guidanc to auditor
in fulfil that respons
au section 316 is divid into 10 main section
descript and characterist of fraud
import of exercis profession skeptic
discuss among engag personnel regard risk of materi misstat due to
fraud
obtain inform need to identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
identifi risk that mai result in materi misstat due to fraud
assess the identifi risk after take into account an evalu of the entiti
program and control
respond to the result of the assess
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1224 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu audit evid
commun about fraud to manag the audit committe and other
document the auditor consider of fraud
follow is a brief descript of each of these section practition in thi area should
review au section 316 in it entireti for more detail inform a copi of the entir
standard can be obtain from the aicpa wwwaicpaorg
descript and characterist of fraud
au section 316 emphas that while auditor do not make legal determin about the
exist of fraud thei should be interest in all act that result in materi misstat
of the financi statement such misstat can be the result of either fraud or error
depend on whether the misstat ar intent or unintent
two type of misstat ar consid relev for audit purpos
misstat aris from fraudul financi report
misstat aris from misappropri of asset
misstat aris from fraudul financi report
thi categori is defin as intent misstat or omiss of amount or disclosur
in financi statement that ar design to deceiv financi statement user
fraudul financi report mai be accomplish by
manipul falsifi or alter acco unt record or support document
misrepres or intention omit event transact or other signific
inform or
intention misappli account principl relat to amount classif
manner of present or disclosur
misstat aris from misappropri of asset
also refer to as theft or defalc thi categori includ the theft of an entiti asset
where the effect of the theft caus the financi statement in all materi respect not to be
in conform with gaap
au section 316 goe on to remind the auditor that by definit fraud often is conceal
and manag is in a posit to perpetr fraud more easili becaus it is in a posit of
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1225
be abl to directli or indirectli manipul account record auditor cannot obtain
absolut assur that materi misstat ar not present but auditor should be awar
of the possibl that fraud might be conceal and that employe might be in collus
with each other or outsid vendor if auditor notic record or activ that seem unusu
then thei should at least consid the possibl that fraud might have occur
import of exercis profession skeptic
au section 230 due profession care in the perform of work state that due profession
care requir the auditor to exercis profession skeptic becaus of the characterist of
fraud the auditor should conduct the audit w ith a mindset that recogn the possibl
that a materi misstat due to fraud could be present au section 230 also requir an
ongo question of whether inform the auditor obtain could suggest a materi
misstat due to fraud
discuss among engag personnel regard risk of materi misstat due to fraud
prior to or in conjunct with the informationgath procedur discuss below the
member of the audit team should discuss the potenti for materi misstat due to
fraud
the discuss should includ brainstorm among the audit team member about the
follow
how and where thei believ the entiti financi statement might be suscept to
fraud
how manag could perpetr or conceal fraud and
how asset of the entiti could be misappropri
thi discuss should also includ a consider of known extern and intern factor
affect the entiti that might
creat incentivespressur for manag and other to commit fraud
provid the opportun for fraud to be perpetr and
indic a cultur or environ that enabl manag and other to ration
commit fraud
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1226 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor the discuss should emphas the need to maintain a question mind in
gather and evalu evid throughout the audit and to obtain addit inform
if necessari
obtain inform need to identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
au section 314 understand the entiti and it environ and assess the risk of materi
misstat provid guidanc on how the auditor obtain knowledg about the entiti and
it environ includ it intern control as part of that process the auditor should
perform the follow procedur to obtain inform to us in identifi the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
make inquiri of manag and other within the entiti to obtain their view on the
risk of fraud and how those risk ar address
consid ani unusu or unexpect relationship that have been identifi in
perform analyt procedur in plan the audit
consid whether on or more fraud risk factor exist and
consid other inform that mai be help in the identif of risk of materi
misstat due to fraud
make inquiri of manag and other within the entiti to obtain their view about the risk of fraud and how those risk ar address
thi step involv ask manag about a number of issu includ
whether manag ha knowledg of fraud or suspect fraud
manag understand of the risk of fraud
program and control the entiti ha establish to help prevent deter or detect fraud
and
whether and how manag commun to employe it view on busi
practic and ethic behavior
the auditor should also question the audit committe directli about it view concern the
risk of fraud and whether the committe ha knowledg of fraud or suspect fraud the
same should be done with the compani intern audit depart
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1227
addition the auditor mai need to conduct similar inquiri of the entiti other
personnel if the auditor believ thei mai have addit inform about the risk of
fraud
consid the result of analyt procedur perform in plan the audit
au section 329 analyt procedur requir that analyt procedur be perform in
plan the audit with the object of identifi the exist of unusu transact or
event and amount ratio and trend that might indic matter that have financi
statement and audit plan implic if the result of these procedur yield unusu
or unexpect relationship the auditor should consid the result in identifi the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
consid fraud risk factor
as discuss abov even though fraud is conceal the auditor mai identifi event or
condit that indic incent or pressur to commit fraud opportun to carri out
fraud or attitud and ration to justifi fraudul conduct these event and
condit ar refer to as fraud risk factor the auditor should consid whether on
or more fraud risk factor ar present and should be consid in identifi and assess
the risk of materi misstat due to fraud howev the auditor should be care not
to creat a laundri list of factor that ar onli given cursori consider the appendix to
au section 316 contain a list of exampl of fraud risk factor
consid other inform that might be help in identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
final the auditor should consid ani other inform that might be help in
identifi the risk of materi misstat due to fraud
identifi risk that mai result in materi misstat due to fraud
after gather the inform as discuss abov the auditor should consid the
inform in the context of the three condit present when fraud occur
incentivespressur opportun and attitudesration
the auditor should consid
the type of risk that mai exist ie whether it involv fraudul financi report or
misappropri of asset
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1228 2011 fraud examin manual
the signific of the risk ie whether it is of a magnitud that could result in a possibl
materi misstat
the likelihood of the risk ie the likelihood that it will result in a materi misstat
and
the pervas of the risk ie whether the potenti risk is pervas to the financi
statement as a whole or is specif relat to a particular assert account or class of
transact
assess the identifi risk after take into account an evalu of the entiti program and control
au section 314 requir the auditor to obtain an understand of each of the five
compon of intern control suffici to plan the audit as part of thi requir the
auditor should evalu whether the entiti prog ram and control that address identifi
risk of fraud have been suitabl design and place in oper these program and
control mai involv
specif control design to mitig specif risk of fraud eg control to prevent
misappropri of particular suscept asset and
broader program design to prevent deter and detect fraud eg ethic polici
exhibit i of au section 316 provid exampl of program and control an entiti might
implement to creat a cultur of honesti and to prevent fraud see also the chapter on
fraud prevent program in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud
examin manual
respond to the result of the assess
onc the auditor ha gather the inform and assess the risk of fraud he must
determin what impact the assess will have on how the audit is conduct for
exampl the auditor mai need to design addit or differ audit procedur to obtain
more reliabl evid in support of account balanc transact etc or to obtain
addit corrobor of manag expl anat and represent concern
materi matter eg thirdparti confirm document from independ sourc
us of a specialist and analyt procedur
overal respons to the risk of materi misstat
judgment about the risk of materi misstatem ent due to fraud have an overal effect on
how the audit is conduct in sever wai
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1229
assign of personnel and supervis the auditor mai need to consult with
specialist in a particular field
account principl the auditor should consid manag select and
applic of signific account principl particularli those relat to subject
measur and complex transact
predict of audit procedur the auditor should incorpor an element of
unpredict in the select of audit procedur to be perform such as us
differ sampl method and perform procedur at differ locat or at
locat on an unannounc basi
respons involv the natur time and extent of procedur to be perform to address the identifi risk
thi section note that the audit procedur perform in respons to identifi risk will
vari depend on the type of risk identifi such procedur mai involv both
substant test and test of the oper effect of the entiti intern control
howev becaus manag mai have the abil to overrid control that mai otherwis
appear to be oper effect it is unlik that the audit risk can be reduc
appropri by perform onli test of control
therefor the auditor respons to specif identifi risk of fraud should includ the
follow
chang the natur of the audit procedur to obtain more reliabl or addit
corrobor inform by for exampl consult independ sourc or
conduct physic inspect
chang the time of substant test by for exampl conduct substant test at
or near the end of a report period and
ensur the extent of the procedur reflect the assess of the risk of fraud by for
exampl increas sampl size or perform analyt procedur at a more detail
level
exampl of respons to identifi risk of misstat aris from fraudul financi report
au section 316 provid a number of exampl of respons the auditor mai take in regard
to risk of misstat aris from both fraudul financi report and asset
misappropri
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1230 2011 fraud examin manual
some of the exampl of test auditor mai perform to address the risk of fraudul
financi report includ
revenu recognitionperform substant analyt procedur relat to revenu
us disaggreg data for exampl compar revenu report by month and by
product line dure the current report period with compar prior period
confirm with custom relev contract term or question staff about shipment
near the end of a period
inventori quantitiesexamin inventori record to identifi locat or item that
requir specif attent dure or after the physic inventori count perform a more
rigor examin of the count such as examin content of box item and
conduct addit test of count sheet tag or other record
manag estimatesdevelop or engag a specialist to develop an independ
estim for comparison to manag estim and gather further inform to
help evalu the reason of manag estim and underli assumpt
exampl of respons to identifi risk of misstat aris from misappropri of asset
if the auditor identifi a risk of materi misstat due to fraud relat to
misappropri of asset the auditor mai wish to includ addit procedur for
exampl if a particular asset is highli suscept to misappropri the auditor mai wish
to conduct further test of the control to prevent and detect such misappropri
respons to further address risk of manag overrid of control
becaus manag is in a uniqu posit to overrid exist control if such a risk is
identifi the auditor mai need to perform addit procedur to further address the risk
of manag overrid of control
examin journal entri and other adjust for evid of possibl materi misstat due to fraud
materi misstat of financi statement often involv record inappropri or
unauthor journal entri or make adjust to amount report in the financi
statement that ar not reflect in journal entri eg consolid adjust or
reclassif therefor the auditor should design procedur to test the appropri
of journal entri record in the gener ledger and of other adjust eg entri
post directli to financi statement draft
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1231
review account estim for bias that could result in materi misstat due to fraud
in prepar financi statement manag is respons for make a number of
judgment or assumpt that affect signific account estim fraudul financi
report is often accomplish through intent misstat of these estim in
perform the audit the auditor should consid whether the differ between estim
support by the audit evid and the estim includ in the financi statement
indic a possibl bia on the part of manag if so the auditor should perform a
retrospect review of signific account estim of the prior year thi review should
provid the auditor with addit inform about whether manag mai have a bia
in present the currentyear estim
evalu the busi rational for signific unusu transact
dure the cours of the audit the auditor mai becom awar of signific transact that
ar outsid the normal cours of the entiti busi or appear unusu given the auditor
understand of the entiti oper the auditor should gain an understand of the
busi rational for these transact and whether the rational or lack thereof suggest
the transact mai have been enter into to engag in fraudul financi report or to
conceal misappropri of asset
some question the auditor should consid includ
ar the transact overli complex
ha manag discuss the transact with the board of director and audit
committe
ha manag place more emphasi on the need for a particular account
treatment than on the underli econom of the particular transact
do the transact involv unconsolid unrel parti includ special purpos
entiti or parti that do not have the substanc or financi strength to support the
transact
evalu audit evid
assess risk of materi misstat due to fraud throughout the audit
dure the perform of the audit the auditor mai identifi condit that either chang
or support a judgment regard the assess of risk exampl includ
discrep in the account record eg transact that ar not record
unsupport or unauthor balanc or transact or last minut adjust
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1232 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict or miss evidenti matter eg miss or alter document or record
unexplain item on reconcili or miss inventori
problemat or unusu relationship between the auditor and manag eg denial
of access to record facil employe or custom complaint by manag
about the conduct of the audit team unusu delai in provid inform or
unwilling to add or revis disclosur
evalu whether analyt procedur perform indic a previous unrecogn risk of fraud
analyt procedur perform dure the audit mai result in identifi unusu or
unexpect relationship that should be consid in assess the risk of materi
misstat due to fraud determin whether a particular trend or relationship is a risk of
fraud requir profession judgment unusu relationship involv yearend revenu and
incom often ar particularli relev and might includ 1 uncharacterist larg
amount of incom report in the last week or two of the report period from unusu
transact and 2 incom that is inconsist with trend in cash flow from oper
analyt procedur ar us becaus manag or employe gener ar unabl to
manipul all the inform necessari to produc normal or expect relationship au
section 316 provid sever exampl includ the follow
the relationship of net incom to cash flow from oper mai appear unusu
becaus manag record fictiti revenu and receiv but wa unabl to
manipul cash
chang in inventori account payabl sale or cost of sale from the prior period to
the current period mai be inconsist indic a possibl theft of inventori becaus
the employe wa unabl to manipul all of the relat account
an unexpect or unexplain relationship between sale volum as determin from
the account record and product statist maintain by oper personnel
which ar more difficult for manag to manipul mai indic a possibl
misstat of sale
evalu risk of materi misstat at or near the complet of fieldwork
at or near the complet of fieldwork the auditor should evalu whether the accumul
result of audit procedur and other observ affect the assess of risk of
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1233
materi misstat due to fraud made earlier such an evalu might identifi whether
there is a need to perform further audit procedur
respond to misstat that mai be the result of fraud
if the auditor believ that misstat ar or mai be the result of fraud but the effect of
the misstat is not materi to the financi statement the auditor nevertheless should
evalu their implic the auditor should be especi concern with ani implic
pertain to the organiz posit of the person involv as thei mai requir a
reevalu of the assess of the risk of materi misstat for exampl in the
event of theft of cash from a small petti cash fund the amount of the theft gener would
not be of signific to the auditor howev if the theft wa perpetr by higherlevel
manag then it might be indic of a more pervas problem such as
manag integr
if the auditor believ that a misstat is or mai be the result of fraud and either ha
determin that the effect of the misstat is materi to the financi statement or ha
been unabl to evalu whether the effect is materi the auditor should
attempt to obtain addit evid to determin whether materi fraud occur and
it effect on the financi statement
consid the implic for other aspect of the audit
discuss the matter and the approach for further investig with an appropri level
of manag that is at least on level abov those involv and with senior
manag and the audit committe and
if appropri suggest the client consult with legal counsel
commun about possibl fraud to manag the audit committe and other
au section 316 state whenev an auditor ha determin that there is evid that
fraud mai exist the matter should be brought to the attent of an appropri level of
manag it is consid appropri to do so even if the matter might be consid
inconsequenti fraud involv senior manag and fraud by anyon that caus a
materi misstat should be report directli to those charg with govern
if the auditor ha identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud that have continu
control implic the auditor should consid whether these risk should be
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1234 2011 fraud examin manual
commun to those charg with govern convers the auditor should consid
whether the absenc of control to deter detect or prevent fraud should be report
the disclosur of possibl fraud to parti other than the client senior manag and
those charg with govern is ordinarili not part of the auditor respons and mai
be preclud by the auditor legal or ethic oblig of confidenti unless the matter
is reflect in the auditor report
howev au section 316 point out that there mai be a duti to disclos the inform to
outsid parti in the follow circumst
to compli with certain legal and regulatori requir eg sec rule
to inform successor auditor pursuant to au section 315 commun between
predecessor and successor auditor
in respons to a subpoena and
to a fund agenc or other specifi agenc in accord with the requir for
audit of entiti that receiv government financi assist
document the auditor consider of fraud
au section 316 conclud by requir that auditor document the follow
discuss among engag personnel regard the suscept of the entiti
financi statement to materi misstat due to fraud includ how and when the
discuss occur the team member who particip and the subject matter
discuss
procedur perform to obtain inform necessari to identifi and assess the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
specif risk of materi misstat due to fraud that were identifi and the auditor
respons to those risk
the reason support the auditor conclus if the auditor ha not identifi
improp revenu recognit as a risk
the result of the procedur perform to further address the risk of manag
overrid of control
other condit and analyt relationship that caus the auditor to believ that
addit audit procedur or other respons were requir to address such risk
and
the natur of the commun about fraud made to manag those charg with
govern or other
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1235
pcaob audit standard no 5an audit of intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement
in mai 2007 the pcaob adopt audit standard no 5 an audit of intern control over
financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement as a replac to
audit standard no 2 an audit of intern control over financi report perform in
conjunct with an audit of financi statement the previou standard govern audit of
intern control over financi report ico fr as mandat by the sarbanesoxlei act
the audit standard wa intend to improv the effici and effect of intern
control audit while also reduc unnecessari cost especi for smaller public
compani audit standard no 5 supersed audit standard no 2 for all audit of
icofr for fiscal year end on or after novemb 15 2007
section 404 of the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that manag must assess and report
on the effect of the compani icofr and the extern auditor must attest to
manag intern control assess audit standard no 5 lai out the
requir and provid guidanc for auditor who ar engag to perform an audit of
manag assess of the intern control that is integr with an audit of the
financi statement
follow is a descript summari of some of the requir laid out in the standard
practition in thi area should review audit standard no 5 in it entireti for more
detail inform a copi of the entir standard can be obtain from the pcaob
wwwpcaobusorg
perform an icofr audit
integr the intern control audit and the financi statement audit
audit standard no 5 state that although the object of financi statement audit and
audit of icofr ar not ident the two au dit should be integr with the auditor
plan and perform the work to achiev the object of both audit the auditor
should design and perform the test of control in a manner that yield suffici evid to
support both the auditor opinion at yearend and the auditor control risk assess for
the financi statement audit
plan the audit
when plan an integr audit of icofr and the financi statement the auditor must
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1236 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu whether the follow matter ar import to the financi statement and to
icofr and if so how thei w ill affect the audit procedur
knowledg of the compani icofr obtain dure other engag
inform about the compani industri includ financi report practic
econom condit law and regul and technolog chang
inform about the compani busi activ organ oper
characterist and capit structur
the exist and extent of ani recent chang in the compani it oper or it
icofr
the auditor preliminari judgment about materi risk and other factor relat
to the determin of materi weak
ani control defici previous commun to the audit committe board of
director or compani manag
legal or regulatori issu of which the compani is awar
the type and extent of evid relat to the effect of the compani
icofr
preliminari judgment about the effect of icofr
public inform about the compani relat to the evalu of the likelihood of
materi misstat in the compani financi statement and the effect of
the compani icofr
knowledg about the risk relat to the compani that were consid as part of
the auditor client accept and retent evalu and
the rel complex of the compani oper
assess the risk that materi weak exist in area of the compani icofr in order
to determin which account disclosur and assert ar signific and relev to
the audit which control to test and what evid is necessari for a given control in
form thi assess the complex of the organ busi unit or process
will plai an import role
focu the audit attent on those area of the compani icofr that ar assess to
have the highest risk that a materi weak exist the auditor should keep in mind
that the risk a compani icofr will fail to prevent or detect a misstat caus by
fraud usual is higher than the risk of failur to prevent or detect error
scale the audit appropri base on the wai the compani meet it control
object with attent given to the size and complex of the compani it busi
process and it busi unit
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1237
evalu the extent to which he will us the work of other to reduc hi own audit
work
us the same materi consider us in plan the audit of the compani
financi statement
us a topdown approach
in an audit of icofr auditor should implement a topdown approach accord to
audit standard no 5 a topdown approach begin at the financi statement level and
with the auditor understand of the over all risk to intern control over financi
report the auditor then focus on entitylevel control and work down to signific
account and disclosur and their relev assert paragraph 21 thi approach
focus auditor on those account disclosur and assert that ar most like to result
in materi misstat of the compani financi statement the standard make explicit
mention howev that thi approach describ the auditor thought process when
identifi risk and the control to test rather than the order in which the auditor should
perform the audit procedur
test control
the auditor should test both the design and oper effect of the compani
icofr in test the design effect of the control the auditor should determin
whether the control if oper as prescrib satisfi the compani control object and
can effect prevent or detect error or fraud that could result in materi misstat
thi test mai includ inquiri of staff member observ of oper and
examin of relev document
in test the oper effect of the control the auditor should determin whether
the control is oper as design as well as whether the person oper the control ha
the appropri author and compet to perform the control effect an auditor mai
test the oper of the control through inquiri of staff member observ of
oper examin of relev document and reperform of the control
fraud consider
as part of an audit of icofr the auditor must specif evalu 1 the control enact
to address the risk of manag overrid of other control and 2 whether the compani
intern control adequ address the risk of materi misstat due to fraud these
control includ
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1238 2011 fraud examin manual
control over signific unusu transact
control over journal entri and adjust made dure the end of the period
financi report process
control over relat parti transact
control relat to signific manag estim and
control that mitig the motiv for and pressur on manag to engag in
inappropri earn manag and financi statement fraud
further if the auditor discov ani defici in these control the auditor should address
the defici when respond to the risk of materi misstat dure the financi
statement audit
form an opinion on the effect of icofr
in form an opinion on the effect of the compani icofr the auditor must
evalu evid from all sourc thi includ not onli the auditor test of control but
also ani misstat detect dure the financi statement audit as well as ani identifi
control defici the auditor should also review ani report issu dure the year by the
intern audit function that pertain to icofr and should evalu ani defici
identifi therein
the auditor must also evalu manag assess of icofr includ in it annual
report file with the sec to ensur that all requir element in manag report ar
complet and properli present
at the close of the integr audit the auditor mai choos to issu a singl report
contain both an opinion on the compani financi statement and an opinion on
icofr or to issu a separ report for each opinion
statement of standard for attest engag no 15an examin of an
entiti intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of it financi statement
nonpubl entiti mai wish to have auditor examin the intern control over financi
report as a matter of best practic or to compli with lender or regulatori requir
the audit standard board issu statement of standard for attest engag
ssae no 15 an examin of an entiti s intern control over financi report that is
integr with an audit of it financi statement as guidanc to auditor of nonpubl
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1239
organ when undertak thi type of engag alongsid an audit of the financi
statement ssae no 15 converg the standard for these engag for auditor of
nonpubl compani with those provid for auditor of public compani in pcaob
audit standard no 5 more inform about ssae no 15 is avail at
wwwaicpaorg
riskbas audit approach
the pcaob and the aicpa have issu standard that indic both organ
emphasi on us a riskbas approach to audit thi approach involv begin the
audit process with a risk assess and select the particular area of focu base upon
the level of risk to the organ in a riskbas approach auditor focu their resourc
on the area of highest concern as oppos to audit area on a rotat basi or other
method of select audit area thi work well for both intern and extern audit and
also work well at both the macro eg overal financi statement or the organ as a
whole and micro eg account payabl level
as the risk of fraud is signific in most organ it is normal a major factor in the
risk assess process focus audit resourc on the area with the highest risk of fraud
give auditor a significantli higher probabl of detect fraud ifwhen it occur
the standard go into effect for fiscal period begin on or after decemb 15 2010
the pcaob standard includ
as no 8 audit risk
as no 9 audit plan
as no 10 supervis of the audit engag
as no 11 consider of materi in plan and perform the audit
as no 12 identifi and assess risk of ma terial misstat
as no 13 the auditor respons to the risk of materi misstat
as no 14 evalu audit result
as no 15 audit evid
the aicpa standard includ
au section 326audit evid
au section 312materi in plan and perform an audit
au section 312evalu of misstat identifi dure an audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1240 2011 fraud examin manual
au section 311plan an audit
au section 314understand the entiti and it environ and assess the
risk of mat erial misstat
au section 318perform audit procedur in respons to assess risk and
evalu the audit evid obtain
the specif detail of the standard can be found at the pcaob websit at
wwwpcaobusorg and at the aicpa websit at wwwaicpaorg
pcaob audit standard no 3audit document
pcaob audit standard no 3 audit document provid gener guidanc on the
content and extent of the document public compani auditor should prepar when
conduct audit of financi statement audit of intern control over financi report
and review of interim financi inform
audit document includ all memoranda confirm correspond schedul
audit program and letter of represent prepar and obtain dure the audit
engag thi document should be prepar in suffici detail to provid a clear
understand of it purpos and sourc and the conclus reach addition
becaus the document serv as the foundat for the represent in the auditor
report the standard assert that it should
demonstr that the engag wa conduct in complianc with the standard of
the pcaob
support the basi for the auditor conclus concern all relev financi
statement assert and
demonstr that the underli account record agre to or reconcil with the
financi statement
to meet these requir the standard state that audit document should contain
suffici inform to enabl an experienc auditor have no previou connect with
the engag
to understand the natur time extent and result of the procedur perform
evid obtain and conclus reach and
to determin who perform the work and the date such work wa complet as well as
the person who review the work and the date of such review
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1241
the standard also requir auditor to retain audit document for seven year from the
date the auditor report is releas or if no report is issu from the date the audit work is
substanti complet
the full text of the audit standard which also includ guidanc about document of
specif matter and subsequ chang to audit document can be found on the
pcaob websit wwwpcaobusorg
au section 339audit document sourc sa no 103
the asb counterpart to pcaob audit standard no 3 appear in the form of sa no
103 audit document sa no 103 supersed sa no 96 audit document as the
guidanc on audit document that appli to auditor of nonpubl entiti the
standard is codifi in au section 339
in develop au section 339 the asb consid the provis of pcaob audit
standard no 3 consequ the requir of the two standard ar similar in mani
respect specif au section 339 doe the follow
chang the date of the auditor report from the final dai of fieldwork to the date on or
after which the auditor obtain suffici evid to support the audit opinion
requir the audit document to be suffici such that an experienc auditor with
no previou connect to the audit could understand the work perform the evid
obtain and the conclus reach
requir document of departur from gener accept audit standard along
with the justif and altern procedur us
provid that oral explan mai be us to clarifi or explain audit document
but alon ar insuffici support for audit work
requir specif document of matter that the auditor identifi as contradictori or
inconsist with the final audit conclus as well as how the auditor address such
find
instruct the auditor to assembl all of the audit document into the audit file within
60 dai follow the audit report releas date
state that after 60 dai follow the audit report releas date workpap mai not be
delet and all addit must be note as such and
specifi a minimum retent period for audit document of five year from the
report releas date
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1242 2011 fraud examin manual
intern auditor respons
intern auditor plai a kei role in help organ prevent and detect fraudul
activ becaus of their proxim to and understand of the inner work of the
organ intern auditor ar in a uniqu posit to uncov potenti unscrupul
act in fact the acf 2010 report to the nation on occup fraud and abus show that
the intern audit function plai a vital role in detect occup fraud account for
the detect of 139 percent of the 1843 case includ in the studi
as part of it intern profession practic framework ippf the institut of intern
auditor iia ha develop the intern standard for the profession practic of intern
audit thi section includ those iia standard that pertain to the intern auditor
respons for prevent detect and assess the risk of fraud within an
organ more detail on these and all other iia standard can be found at the iia
websit wwwtheiiaorg
standard 1210profici
intern auditor must possess the knowledg skill and other compet need to
perform their individu respons the intern audit activ collect must possess
or obtain the knowledg skill and other compet need to perform it
respons
1210a2
intern auditor must have suffici knowledg to evalu the risk of fraud and the
manner in which it is manag by the organ but ar not expect to have the
expertis of a person whose primari respons is detect and investig fraud
standard 1220due profession care
intern auditor must appli the care and skill expect of a reason prudent and
compet intern auditor due profession care doe not impli infal
1220a1
intern auditor must exercis due profession care by consid the
extent of work need to achiev the engag object
rel complex materi or signific of matter to which assur procedur
ar appli
adequaci and effect of govern risk manag and control process
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1243
probabl of signific error fraud or noncompli and
cost of assur in relat to potenti benefit
1220a3
intern auditor must be alert to the signific risk that might affect object oper
or resourc howev assur procedur alon even when perform with due
profession care do not guarante that all signific risk will be identifi
standard 2060report to senior manag and the board
the chief audit execut must report period to senior manag and the board on
the intern audit activ purpos author respons and perform rel to it
plan report must also includ signific risk exposur and control issu includ
fraud risk govern issu and other matter need or request by senior manag
and the board
standard 2110govern
the intern audit activ must assess and make appropri recommend for
improv the govern process in it accomplish of the follow object
promot appropri ethic and valu within the organ
ensur effect organiz perform manag and account
commun risk and control inform to appropri area of the organ
and
coordin the activ of and commun inform among the board extern
and intern auditor and manag
2110a1
the intern audit activ must evalu the design implement and effect of the
organ ethicsrel object program and activ
standard 2120risk manag
the intern audit activ must evalu the effect and contribut to the
improv of risk manag process
2120a1
the intern audit activ must evalu risk exposur relat to the organ
govern oper and inform system regard the
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1244 2011 fraud examin manual
reliabl and integr of financi and oper inform
effect and effici of oper
safeguard of asset and
complianc with law regul and contract
2120a2
the intern audit activ must evalu the potenti for the occurr of fraud and how
the organ manag fraud risk
standard 2130control
the intern audit activ must assist the organ in maintain effect control by
evalu their effect and effici and by promot continu improv
2130a1
the intern audit activ must evalu the adequaci and effect of control in
respond to risk within the organ govern oper and inform
system regard the
reliabl and integr of financi and oper inform
effect and effici of oper
safeguard of asset and
complianc with law regul and contract
standard 2210engag object
object must be establish for each engag
2210a1
intern auditor must conduct a preliminari assess of the risk relev to the activ
under review engag object must reflect the result of thi assess
2210a2
intern auditor must consid the probabl of signific error fraud noncompli
and other exposur when develop the engag object
iia ippfpractic guid intern audit and fraud
to help auditor compli with their respons pertain to fraud the iia in decemb
of 2009 releas ippfpractic guid intern audit and fraud practic guid although
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1245
not mandatori the guidanc includ in the practic guid is strongli recommend
specif the practic guid address fraud awar potenti fraud indic role
and respons for fraud prevent and detect the intern auditor role dure
audit engag fraud risk assess fraud prevent and detect fraud
investig and form an opinion on intern control relat to fraud the practic
guid also includ an appendix that list ippf practic advisori that pertain to fraud
follow is a discuss of select topic from the practic guid the complet guid is
avail from the iia websit wwwtheiiaorg
intern audit role in fight fraud
fight fraud in an organ requir the combin effort of mani differ
depart includ intern audit intern auditor assist in the prevent and detect
of fraud by evalu the adequaci and effect of intern control assist
manag in establish effect fraud prevent measur proactiv audit for
fraud and investig suspect fraud specif the practic guid state that in
conduct audit engag the intern auditor should
consid fraud risk in the assess of intern control design and determin of
audit step to perform
have suffici knowledg of fraud to identifi red flag indic fraud mai have been
commit
be alert to opportun that could allow fraud such as control defici
evalu whether manag is activ retain respons for oversight of the
fraud risk manag program whether time and suffici correct measur have
been taken with respect to ani note control defici or weak and whether
the plan for monitor the program continu to be adequ for the program ongo
success
evalu the indic of fraud and decid whether ani further action is necessari or
whether an investig should be recommend
recommend investig when appropri
the role intern audit plai in fraud investig vari by organ intern audit mai
have primari respons for fraud investig mai serv as a resourc for the
investig or mai have no involv at all in the investig for intern auditor
who find themselv involv in fraud investig the practic guid discuss the
investig process the role of the intern auditor conduct the investig report
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1246 2011 fraud examin manual
the investig resolut and commun of fraud incid and analysi of lesson
learn
the practic guid also emphas that intern auditor must exercis profession
skeptic an attitud that includ a question mind and a critic assess of audit
evid in all audit work by exercis profession skeptic and focus on the
effect of intern control auditor increas the likelihood that thei will uncov
possibl fraudul activ
other role and respons for fraud prevent and detect
other typic role and respons for fraud detect and prevent outlin in the
practic guid includ the follow
board of director the board of director is respons for effect and respons
corpor fraud govern and is task with overse manag action to manag
fraud risk
audit committe the audit committe role is to evalu manag identif of
fraud risk and the implement of antifraud measur and to provid the tone at the
top that fraud will not be accept in ani form the audit committe is also respons for
overse control to prevent or detect manag fraud
manag manag is respons for overse the activ of employe
assess the vulner of the entiti to fraud and establish and maintain an
effect intern control system at a reason cost
legal counsel legal counsel advis the organ on legal matter pertain to fraud
extern auditor extern auditor have a respons to compli with profession
standard and to plan and perform the audit of the organ financi statement to
obtain reason assur about whether the financi statement ar free of materi
misstat whether caus by error or fraud for more inform on the extern
auditor respons for fraud see the previou section extern auditor
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1247
loss prevent managerth loss prevent manag deal with crime disast
accid wast and other busi risk and usual work close with intern auditor to
identifi area of weak intern control within the organ
fraud investig fraud investig ar respons for detect and investig
fraud and recov asset
other employe all employe have a respons to report suspici activ to a
hotlin the intern audit depart or manag
gao audit standard
standard for govern auditor ar fundament base on the gener accept
audit standard gaa set for auditor of public compani howev for audit of
govern organ program activ function and fund the requir of
govern audit standard also known as the yellow book go beyond gaa the
follow discuss of the yellow book standard is base upon the juli 2007 revis of
the standard for more inform pleas see the full text of the gao standard avail
at wwwgaogov
purpos and applic
the yellow book provid gener a ccept govern audit standard gaga that
form a framework of guidanc for auditor of govern entiti and entiti that receiv
govern award audit perform us yellow book standard provid inform
that is us for oversight account and improv of govern program and
oper by follow the requir and guidanc contain in gaga auditor
perform their duti in a wai that can lead to improv govern manag better
decis make and oversight effect and effici oper and account for
resourc and result
the us of gaga standard is frequent requir under specif law regul
contract grant agreement or polici howev mani auditor and organ mai
voluntarili choos to adher to the standard as well as such the standard in the yellow
book appli to audit and attest engag of govern entiti program
activ and function and of govern assist administ by contractor
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1248 2011 fraud examin manual
nonprofit entiti and other nongovernment entiti when the us of gaga is requir
or is voluntarili follow
ethic principl in govern audit
manag
accord to the yellow book manag is re sponsibl for set the ethic tone of the
organ by
maintain and demonstr an ethic cultur
clearli commun expect about accept behavior to employe and
creat an environ that reinforc and encourag ethic behavior throughout the
organ
auditor
the yellow book stress the import of the auditor ethic respons while
conduct govern audit emphas that the public expect auditor in the
govern sector to conduct their profession work in accord with ethic principl
to underscor thi respons gaga lai out five specif overarch ethic
principl that must guid the work of all auditor perform govern audit
engag
the public interest
serv the public interest and honor the public trust ar crucial compon of the
auditor respons when perform en gagement in the govern environ
gaga defin the public interest as the collect wellb of the commun of peopl
and entiti the auditor serv
integr
to strengthen the public confid in the govern auditor must maintain the highest
level of integr when discharg their profession duti dure a gaga engag
thi involv conduct the audit with an attitud that is object factbas
nonpartisan and nonideolog with regard to audit entiti and user of the auditor
report specif auditor ar instruct to
ensur that all commun regard the audit ar honest candid and construct
make decis that ar consist with the public interest of the program or activ
under audit and
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1249
place prioriti on their respons to the public interest in resolv ani conflict
pressur that mai aris dure the audit engag
object
the auditor credibl in perform an audit of a government entiti is base upon hi
abil to remain object gaga state that object includ
be independ in fact and appear
maintain an attitud of imparti
have intellectu honesti and
be free of conflict of interest
proper us of govern inform resourc and posit
dure an audit of a government entiti the auditor must us all govern inform
resourc and posit for offici purpos onli auditor must not us their access to
these asset for person gain in illeg manner or to the detriment of the legitim
interest of the audit entiti
profession behavior
in conduct an audit or attest engag for a government entiti auditor must
behav in a profession manner thi includ
compli with law and regul
avoid ani conduct that mai discredit the auditor work and
put forth an honest effort in perform their duti and profession servic
type of govern audit engag
the yellow book describ and promulg standard for two type of audit that
govern and nongovern audit organ conduct financi audit and
perform audit the yellow book also contain standard cover attest
engag such as examin and review and other nonaudit servic perform on
govern organ and program
financi audit
financi audit ar defin as those audit that provid an independ assess of
whether an entiti report financi condit result and us of resourc ar present
fairli in accord with recogn criteria in addit to tradit financi statement
audit the yellow book also includ in thi categori those engag for
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1250 2011 fraud examin manual
report on intern control complianc with law and regul and provis of
contract and grant agreement as thei relat to financi transact system
and process
provid special report for specifi element account or item of a
financi statement
review interim financi inform
issu letter for underwrit or other request parti
report on the process of transact by servic organ and
audit complianc with regul relat to feder award expenditur and other
government financi assist in conjunct with or as a byproduct of a financi
statement audit
perform audit
perform audit ar describ in the yellow book as audit that provid assur or
conclus base on an evalu of suffici appropri evid against state criteria
such as specif requir measur or defin busi practic the object of
these audit can vari and mai includ the assess of program economi effici or
effect intern control complianc and prospect analys addition a
perform audit mai cover more than on of these object
attest engag
attest engag can cover financi or nonfinanci inform these
engag involv express a specifi level of assur about the subject matter or
assert relat to the subject matter depend on the user need there ar three type
of attest engag
examin which involv express an opinion on whether the subject matter is
base on or in conform with the criteria in all materi respect or the assert is
present or fairli state in all materi respect base on the criteria
review consist of express of a conclus about whether ani inform came
to the auditor attent that indic that the subject matter is not base on or not
in conform with the criteria or the assert is not present or not fairli state in
all materi respect base on the criteria
agreedupon procedur engag which involv perform specif procedur on
the subject matter
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1251
audit standard
the yellow book set out three type of govern audit standard gener standard field
work standard and report standard the gener standard appli to both financi and
perform audit howev gaga provid a separ set of field work and report
standard for each type of govern audit addition the yellow book provid a
separ set of standard gener field work and report for attest engag
the discuss below contain a brief overview of the yellow book standard for audit
engag
gener standard
the follow gener standard coupl with the ethic principl outlin abov establish
a foundat for credibl of auditor work
independ
both the audit organ and the individu auditor must remain independ in both fact
and appear throughout the engag so that all opinion conclus judgment and
recommend made by the auditor will be imparti and will be view as imparti by
knowledg third parti in determin independ auditor must consid three
type of potenti impair person impair such as famili relationship financi
interest or bias extern impair aris from actual or perceiv pressur from the
audit organ manag or employe and organiz impair which occur
when the audit function is organization locat within the report line of the area
under audit or when the auditor is assign or take on respons that affect oper
of the area under audit
the perform of nonaudit servic must also be consid when assess auditor
independ specif auditor must appli the follow two principl in regard to
maintain independ while perform nonaudit servic for an audit program or
entiti
audit organ must not provid nonaudit servic that involv perform
manag function or make manag decis and
audit organ must not audit their own work or provid nonaudit servic in
situat in which the nonaudit servic ar signific or materi to the subject matter
of the audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1252 2011 fraud examin manual
profession judgment
the auditor must us profession judgment includ exercis profession skeptic
and reason care in plan perform and report the result of the audit or
attest engag in appli profession judgment it is imper that the auditor
retain an attitud of profession skeptic assum that manag is neither inher
honest nor inher dishonest thu auditor must approach the engag with a
question mind and a critic assess of all evid the applic of profession
judgment also requir auditor to us their profession knowledg skill and experi to
dilig gather inform and object evalu the suffici and appropri of
evid
compet
the staff assign to an engag must collect possess adequ profession
knowledg skill and experi to properli conduct the audit the necessari compet
includ knowledg of gaga and other applic audit and account standard
gener knowledg of the organ oper environ skill to commun
clearli and effect both oral and in write and ani specif skill appropri to the
work be perform such as statist sampl skill or inform technolog skill in
order to maintain their profession compet all auditor perform government
audit must meet the continu profession educ requir under gaga
qualiti control and assur
audit organ perform govern audit must have an intern qualiti control
system in place thi system is compos of the organ leadership and it polici
and procedur establish to provid reason assur that the organ is in
complianc with all applic audit standard as part of the system organ should
establish polici and procedur that collect address
leadership respons for qualiti of audit and attest engag
independ legal and ethic requir
initi accept and continu of audit and attest engag
human resourc issu
perform document and report of audit and attest engag and
monitor of qualiti
addition audit organ conduct audit and attest under gaga must
have period extern peer review of their audit and attest engag practic at
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1253
least onc everi three year in addit the result of the most recent peer review should be
made publicli avail
field work standard for financi audit
gaga field work standard for financi audit includ the three gener accept
standard of fieldwork establish by the aicpa as well as five addit fieldwork
standard
the three aicpa standard of fieldwork ar as follow
the auditor must adequ plan the work and must properli supervis ani assist
the auditor must obtain a suffici understand of the entiti and it environ
includ it intern control to assess the risk of materi misstat of the financi
statement whether due to error or fraud and to design the natur time and extent of
further audit procedur
the auditor must obtain suffici appropri audit evid by perform procedur
to afford a reason basi for an opinion regard financi statement under audit
the five addit fieldwork standard prescrib by gaga state that
auditor should commun with the audit entiti their understand of the servic
to be perform for each engag and document that understand through a
written commun in their commun auditor should specif address
their plan work and the level of assur to be provid relat to test intern
control over financi report and complianc with law regul and provis of
contract or grant agreement auditor should also commun ani potenti
restrict on the auditor report in order to reduc the risk that the need or
expect of the parti involv mai be misinterpret
auditor should evalu whether the audit entiti ha taken appropri correct
action to address find and recommend from previou engag that could
have a materi effect on the financi statement
auditor should design the audit to provid reason assur of detect materi
misstat result from violat of contract provis or grant agreement that
have a direct and materi effect on the determin of financi statement amount if
dure the cours of the audit auditor becom awar of indic of abus that could
have a materi indirect effect on the financi statement auditor should appli audit
procedur specif direct to ascertain whether materi abus ha occur and the
potenti effect on the financi statement or other financi data signific to the audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1254 2011 fraud examin manual
object howev becaus the determin of abus is subject auditor ar not
requir to provid reason assur of detect abus
when auditor identifi problem such as intern control defici fraud illeg act
violat of provis of contract or grant agreement or abus thei should plan
audit procedur to develop an explan of the criteria condit caus and effect or
potenti effect of the problem to facilit the achiev of the audit object
audit document should contain suffici inform to provid a clear
understand of the work perform the audit evid obtain and it sourc and
the conclus reach the audit document should enabl an experienc auditor
have no previou connect with the audit to understand from the document
the natur time extent and result of the audit procedur perform the conclus
reach on signific matter and that the account record reconcil to the financi
statement the document should be complet prior to the issuanc of the
auditor report and should also includ evid of supervisori review of the work
perform as well as ani departur from gaga
report standard for financi audit
for report standard for financi statement audit gaga incorpor the follow
four aicpa gener accept standard of report
the auditor report must state whether the financi statement ar present in
accord with gener accept account principl gaap
the auditor report must identifi ani circumst in which gaap wa not
consist appli in the current period in relat to the preced period
inform disclosur in the financi statement ar consid reason adequ
unless otherwis state in the auditor report
the auditor report must contain either an express of opinion regard the financi
statement taken as a whole or an assert that such an opinion cannot be express
if an overal opinion cannot be express the reason should be state in all case
where an auditor name is associ with financi statement the report should
contain a clearcut indic of the charact of the auditor work if ani and the
degre of respons the auditor is take
gaga prescrib eight addit report standard for govern financi audit thei
ar
the auditor report should specif state that the audit wa perform in accord
with gaga
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1255
the auditor report should either 1 describ the scope of the auditor test intern
control over financi report and complianc with law regul and provis of
contract or grant agreement and present the result of those test or an opinion if
suffici work wa perform or 2 refer to separ report contain that
inform if a separ report is us the auditor report should state that the
separ report is an integr part of the audit and should be consid in assess the
result of the audit
auditor should report 1 signific defici and materi weak in intern
control 2 all materi instanc of fraud and illeg act and 3 signific violat of
contract provis or grant agreement and abus in some situat the auditor
should report the occurr of these problem directli to parti outsid of the audit
organ
auditor mai add a separ paragraph or separ section of the auditor report to
emphas certain inform that mai be critic to the proper us and understand
of the audit financi statement exampl of matter that requir such emphasi mai
includ signific uncertainti and catastroph or unusu event
auditor have specif respons relat to potenti materi misstat and
restat of previouslyissu financi statement in situat where auditor
becom awar of new inform that previous issu financi statement were
materi misstat and that manag intend to restat and reissu the misstat
financi statement auditor should advis manag to disclos the inform and
it impact on the financi statement to parti who reli on the financi statement
addition the auditor must 1 evalu the timeli and appropri of
manag disclosur of the misstat and the action taken to correct the
misstat 2 perform audit procedur suffici to reissu or updat the auditor
report on the restat financi statement and 3 report directli to appropri offici
when the audit entiti doe not take the necessari step
if the auditor report contain ani disclosur regard defici in intern control
fraud illeg act violat of contract provis or grant agreement or abus the
report should also includ the view of the organ respons offici
concern the find conclus and recommend as well as ani plan
correct action
if ani pertin inform about the audit entiti is prohibit by law or regul
from be disclos to the gener public the auditor report should state the natur of
the omit inform and the reason for it omiss
govern auditor should submit their audit report to those charg with
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1256 2011 fraud examin manual
govern to the appropri offici of the audit organ to the parti
requir or arrang for the audit to offici with oversight author for the
organ to parti who mai be respons for act on audit find and
recommend and to other who ar author to receiv such report
nongovern auditor should distribut the report accord to applic audit
standard as well as the agreement reach with the parti contract the audit
field work standard for perform audit
the gaga field work standard for perform audit relat to plan the audit
supervis staff obtain suffici appropri evid and prepar audit
document
auditor must adequ plan and document the plan of the audit work thi
includ assess signific defin as the rel import of a matter within the
context in which it is be consid includ quantit and qualit factor
and audit risk defin as the possibl that the auditor find conclus
recommend or assur mai be improp or incomplet as a result of factor
such as evid that is not suffici andor appropri an inadequ audit process
or intent omiss or mislead inform due to misrepresent or fraud
while defin the audit object scope and methodolog addition as part of
plan the engag auditor must
consid the natur and profil of the entiti as well as the need of the user of the
audit report
consid the entiti intern control and inform system control
consid all signific legal and regulatori requir contract provis grant
agreement and potenti fraud and abus affect the audit entiti
consid the result of previou audit and attest engag
identifi potenti criteria need to evalu the audit matter and potenti sourc
of audit evid base on the amount and type of evid need
consid reli on the work of other auditor and expert to help achiev audit
object
assign staff and specialist with suffici profession compet to perform the
audit
identifi other resourc need to complet the audit
commun matter about the audit plan and perform to manag
offici and
prepar a written audit plan
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1257
audit supervisor must properli supervis the audit staff which involv provid
guidanc and direct to the staff stai inform about signific problem
encount review the work perform and provid effect onthejob train
auditor must obtain suffici appropri evid to provid a reason basi for
the auditor find conclus and recommend
auditor should prepar suffici detail audit document to provid a clear
understand of the natur time extent and result of the work perform the
evid obtain and it sourc and the conclus reach
report standard for perform audit
the yellow book standard for perform audit relat to the form of the report the
report content and the report issuanc and distribut
auditor should prepar audit report commun the result of each audit the
report should be written or present in some other retriev form and should be
appropri for it intend us
the auditor report should contain
the audit object scope and methodolog
the audit result includ find conclus and recommend
a refer to complianc with gaga
the view of respons offici and
the natur of ani privileg and confidenti inform omit if applic
the report find should includ ani signific defici in intern control all
materi instanc of fraud and illeg act signific violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement and signific abus
govern auditor should submit audit report to those charg with govern to
the appropri offici of the audit entiti and to the appropri oversight bodi or
organ requir or arrang for the audit auditor should also send copi of
the report to other offici who have legal oversight author or who mai be
respons for act on audit find and recommend and to other author
to receiv such report
in addit to these standard auditor should refer to au 801 sa no 74 complianc
audit consider in audit of government entiti and recipi of government financi
assist thi standard incorpor a discuss of respons under certain law and
govern bulletin and auditor should know these requir a thorough review of
thi statement will provid addit guidanc
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1258 2011 fraud examin manual
more inform about the yellow book and govern audit is contain in the
chapter entitl public sector fraud the fu ll text of all of the govern audit
standard is also avail at the govern account offic websit
wwwgaogov
certifi fraud examin
certifi fraud examin ar not normal respons for the initi detect of fraud
instead certifi fraud examin usual becom involv after suffici predic
exist certifi fraud examin commonli supervis or direct a fraud examin or
investig the respons of certifi fraud examin ar to
help resolv alleg of fraud from incept to disposit
obtain evid
take statement
write report of fraud examin
testifi to find
assist in fraud detect and prevent
help resolv alleg of fraud
alleg of fraud often ar base on insuffici evid thei must be resolv through
law evidencegath method the certifi fraud examin code of profession
ethic requir certifi fraud examin to assist in that resolut the disposit of a
case might be a settlement or some other form of agreement rather than a trial and
convict or acquitt
obtain evid
certifi fraud examin ar respons for gather and maintain custodi of
evid that will either confirm or refut a fraud alleg the avail evid might
demonstr that the fraud alleg is without merit such evid is equal as import
as evid that might prove the commiss of fraud
take statement
certifi fraud examin us the skill of interview these skill ar invalu in
obtain statement from wit as well as secur admiss of guilt from
perpetr
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1259
write report
report write is an import step in fraud examin the report is a narrat of the
seri of event that ha occur the wit who will testifi to the fact and if
appropri the sign admiss of the perpetr
testifi to find
certifi fraud examin might testifi to the find of an examin although thi
step is not alwai necessari for exampl in case that do not proce to trial it is
import that all examin be conduct under the premis that the case will go to trial
and testimoni will be requir keep thi premis in mind help the fraud examin
rememb to take the time to perform the examin scrupul
assist in the detect and prevent of fraud
becaus of their educ experi and train certifi fraud examin ar uniqu
qualifi to assist compani with proactiv fraud prevent and detect program
certifi fraud examin assist in the investig of fraud alleg and also aid
manag with design and implement intern control system so that fraud
scheme will be less common and not go undetect
it is common for a certifi fraud examin to hold anoth design such as certifi
public account certifi protect profession or certifi intern auditor deal
with account and audit matter often requir the opinion of these profession
although certifi fraud examin might hold other design thei ar bound by the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic which specif state in part
a certifi fraud examin when conduct examin will obtain evid or other
document to establish a reason basi for ani opinion requir no opinion shall be
express regard the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
thi articl mean that the certifi fraud examin will not express an opinion even if
person convinc of the guilt of an individu determin the guilt or innoc of an
individu is reserv for a judg and juri the certifi fraud examin is a gather of
fact not the ultim judg of them
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1260 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl document retent polici
thi is onli a sampl document retent polici drp and is not legal
advic it is onli an exampl of a gener drp and should not be us without revis to meet the
particular administr and legal need of your organi zation there ar mani feder state and local law
that requir organ to retain document for a certain period of time that mai not be repres in thi
sampl polici all compani should contact counsel licens to practic law in their state befor implement
a drp
i purpos
to ensur the most effici and effect oper of organ organ we ar
implement thi document retent polici drp or polici the record of organ and it
subsidiari ar import to the proper function of organ our record includ virtual all
of the record you produc as an organ employe such record can be in electron or paper
form thu item that you mai not consid import such as interoffic email desktop
calendar and print memoranda ar record that ar consid import under thi polici if you
ar ever uncertain as to ani procedur set forth in thi polici eg what record to retain or destroi
when to do so or how to do so it is your respons to seek answer from organ drp
manag
the goal of thi drp ar to
1 retain import document for refer and futur us
2 delet document that ar no longer necessari for the proper function of organ
3 organ import document for effici retriev and
4 ensur that you as an organ employe know what document should be retain
the length of their retent mean of storag and when and how thei should be destroi
feder and state law requir organ to maintain certain type of record for particular
period failur to maintain such record could subject you and organ to penalti and fine
obstruct justic spoil legal evid andor serious harm organ posit in litig
thu it is imper that you fulli understand and compli with thi and ani futur record
retent or destruct polici and schedul unless you have been notifi by organ or
if you believ that 1 such record ar or could be relev to ani futur litig 2 there is a
disput that could lead to litig or 3 organ is a parti to a lawsuit in which case you
must preserv such record until organ legal counsel determin that the record ar
no longer need
record discuss herein refer to all busi record of organ and is us
interchang with document includ written print and record materi as well as
electron record ie email and document save electron all busi record shall be
retain for a period no longer than necessari for the proper conduct and function of
organ no busi record shall be retain longer than five 5 year except those that
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1261
1 have time period provid for herein 2 ar in the document retent schedul found at
appendix a or 3 ar specif exempt by organ drp manag
ii manag
to ensur complianc with thi drp organ drp manag is respons for the follow
oversight function
implement the drp
ensur that employe ar properli educ understand and follow the drp purpos
provid oversight on actual retent and destruct of document
ensur proper storag of document
period followingup with counsel to ensur proper retent period ar in place
ensur the proper storag of document
suspend the destruct of document upon forese litig and
keep corpor offic director and employe inform of chang in relat to the
drp
organ drp manag shall annual review the drp modifi it accordingli and inform and
educ all organ employe on ani such chang all question relat to document
retent andor destruct should be directli address to organ drp manag
iii type of record
appendix a attach at the end of thi drp list sever categori of record as well as specif
record that contain specif retent period thi is refer to as a document retent schedul
dr all record not provid for in the dr or describ herein shall be classifi into three
type 1 temporari record 2 final record and 3 perman record 1
temporari record
temporari record consist of all busi document that have not been complet includ but
not limit to written memoranda and dictat to be type in the futur remind todo list
report case studi and calcul draft interoffic correspond regard a client or busi
transact and run log
temporari record can be destroi or perman delet if in electron form see protocol
below for proper destruct of data in electron form when a projectcasefil close upon the
close of a projectcasefil gather and review all such temporari record befor you destroi or
perman delet these document make sure you have duplic of all the final record pertain
1 see ashcraft h document retent gu idelin for manag project file februari 2002 avail at
httpterrarrgcomimagespdfsdocumentretentionpdf
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1262 2011 fraud examin manual
to the projectcasefil upon destruct or delet organ the final record and duplic in a
file mark final and store them appropri
final record
final record includ all busi document that ar not supersed by modif or addit
such as but not limit to document given or sent via electron form to ani thirdparti not
emploi by organ or govern agenc final memoranda and report correspond
handwritten telephon memoranda not further transcrib minut designplan specif
journal entri and cost estim all account record shall be deem final
except as provid for in the dr all final document ar to be discard 10 year after the close of
a projectcasefil
perman record
perman record includ all busi document that defin organ scope of work
express of profession opinion research and refer materi and includ but ar not
limit to contract propos materi referenc ing expert opinion annual financi statement
feder tax return payrol regist copyright registr and patent
except as provid for in the document retent schedul appendix a all perman
document ar to be retain indefinit
account and corpor tax record
account and corpor tax record includ but ar not limit to financi statement ledger
audit record invoic and expens record feder state and properti tax return payrol
account procedur gross receipt custom record and purchas
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of six year
or until the statut of limit for a particular record expir pleas consult organ counsel
for time period if you managecontrol such record
workplac record
workplac record includ but ar not limit to articl of incorpor bylaw meet
minut deed and titl leas polici statement contract and agreement and patent and
trademark record
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain in perpetu
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1263
employ employe and payrol record
employ record includ but ar not limit to job announc and advertis
employ applic background investig resum and letter of recommend for
person not hire
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of on year
employe record includ but ar not limit to employ applic background
investig resum and letter of recommend of current and past employe and record
relat to current and past employe perform review and complaint
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of three year
follow unemploy with organ
payrol record includ but ar not limit to wage rate tabl salari histor y current rate of pai
payrol deduct time card form w2 and w4 and bonus
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of six year
bank record
bank record includ but ar not limit to bank deposit check copi stop payment order bank
statement check signatur author and bank reconcili
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of three
year
legal record
legal record includ but ar not limit to a ll contract all legal record statement and
correspond trademark and copyright registr patent person injuri record and
statement press releas and public find
unless otherwis specifi in the dr such record should be retain for a minimum of 10 year
histor record
histor record ar those that ar no longer of us to organ but by virtu of their ag or
research valu mai be of histor interest or signific to organ histor record should
be retain indefinit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1264 2011 fraud examin manual
iv storag
tangibl record
tangibl record ar those which you must physic move to store such as paper record includ
print version of electron save document photograph audio record advertis
and promot item activ record and record that need to be readili access mai be store in
organ offic space or equip inact record can be sent to organ offsit
storag facil
electron record
electron mail email should be either print and store as tangibl evid or store
electron
organ ha comput softwar that duplic file which ar then back up on central
server if you have a notebook comput from organ that you work on out of the offic
your comput contain synchron softwar that duplic and back up file when you log
into the network howev it is import that all employe take precautionari measur to save
work and record on organ network drive
v destruct delet
tangibl record
tangibl record should be destroi by shred or some other mean that will render them
unread if you have a record that you do not know how to destroi such as a photograph
compact disk or tape record ask the advic of organ drp manag
electron record
email record that you delet remain in organi zation system thu organ inform
technolog it depart will be respons for perman remov delet email from the
comput system
delet file and empti the recycl bin is usual suffici in most circumst to get rid of a
record howev becaus electron record can be store in mani locat organ it
depart will be respons for perman remov delet file from the comput system
keep in mind where duplic record ar involv both must be destroyeddelet where proper
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1265
vi cessat of record destruct delet
if a lawsuit is file or immin or a legal document request ha been made upon organ all
record destruct must ceas immedi organ drp manag mai
suspend thi drp to requir that document relat to the lawsuit or potenti legal issu be
retain and organ a critic understand of thi section is imper should you fail to
follow thi protocol you andor organ mai be subject to fine and penalti among other
sanction
vii acknowledg
i have read and understand the purpos of thi drp i understand that strict adher to thi drp
is a condit of my employ with organ if i do not understand someth regard thi
drp i will contact organ drp manag im mediat for clarif i agre to abid by
organ drp
employe signatur date
employe name print
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1266 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl document retent schedul
thi is onli a sampl document retent schedul dr and is
not legal advic there ar mani feder state and local law that requir
organ to retain document for a certain period of time that mai be differ in your state or
differ to your particular industri or that mai not be repres in thi sampl polici all
compani should contact counsel licens to practic law in their state for proper retent period
type of record specif record suggest retent period
account record
annual financi statement perman
monthli financi statement 3 year
gener ledger 20 year
annual audit record 10 year
journal entri 8 year
special report 8 year
cancel check 8 year
ap paid invoic 8 year
busi expens record 8 year
credit card receipt 3 year
cash receipt 3 year
ar invoic 8 year
data for acquisitionsdivestitur perman
data for abort
acquisitionsdivestitur
5 year
account payabl 7 year
account receiv 7 year
audit report 7 year
chart of account perman
expens record 7 year
inventori record 7 year
loan document 7 year after final payment
purchas order 7 year
sale record 7 year
stop payment order 3 year
bank reconcili 3 year
tax record
feder tax return nonpayrol perman
state local tax return nonperman
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1267
payrol
form 990 and support
document
perman
form 990t and support
document
perman
support document for
tax
4 year
citi and state excis tax report
and support document
5 year or longer if design
by state law
unclaim properti file and
support document
6 year or longer if design
by state law
form 1099 8 year
magnet tape and similar record 1 year
payrol tax form w2 and w3 perman
payrol tax form 940 and
941 state withhold return
and state unemploy return
8 year or longer if design
by state law
payrol record
wage rate tabl 3 year
cost of live tabl 3 year
wage histori 6 year
salari histori 6 year
payrol deduct 6 year
time card or form 5 year
form w2 8 year
form w4 8 year
garnish 4 year follow unemploy
payrol regist perman
state employ form 4 year
state unemploy tax record perman
cancel payrol check 8 year
deduct regist 8 year
earn record 8 year
chang or adjust to
salari
8 year
insur record
polici includ expir
polici
perman
claim for lossdamag accid
report apprais
5 year
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1268 2011 fraud examin manual
workplac record
incorpor and reorgan
record articl of
incorpor bylaw etc
perman
meet minut perman
polici statement 10 year
employe directori 5 year
legal record
gener contract 3 year after termin
real estat contract and record 20 yearsperman
person injuri record 8 year
trademark registr perman
copyright registr perman
patent perman
litig claim 5 year follow close of case
court document and record 5 year follow close of case
deposit transcript 5 year follow close of case
discoveri materi 3 year follow close of case
leas 6 year after termin
personnel record
employ applic
person not hire
1 year
employ applic
person hire
3 year follow employ
employe resum and
employ histori
3 year follow employ
period
evalu 3 year follow employ
promot rais
reclassif and job
descript
5 year follow employ
disciplinari warn
demot layoff and
discharg
5 year follow employ
employ and termin
agreement
perman
promot and rais 3 year follow employ
beneficiari inform 3 year follow employ
medic and safeti record 6 year
accid report 6 year
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1269
educ assist while emploi
sickleav benefit while emploi
retir plan after
expir
6 year
incent plan after expir 6 year
pension plan after expir 6 year
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1301
