2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/Management


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


Management 
Ultimately, management is responsible for the prevention and detection of fraud within an 
organization. It is management’s job to ensure the proper internal controls are in place to 
prevent fraud, as well as to detect it. Although management may not execute all of the 
controls—as the performance of internal cont rol functions are generally spread across 
individuals throughout the entire organization, including individual contributors, 
management, and even the Board of Directors—management is also responsible for 
monitoring and remediating internal controls to ensure they are effectively designed and 
operating to prevent and detect fraud. 
 
As mentioned above, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 includes several requirements of 
management in public companies. Also discussed above, COSO provided several guidelines 
for management’s prevention and detection of fraud through the internal control 
environment. 
 
Although preparing the financial statements is the responsibility of management, fraud is 
also frequently investigated by members of management or by people under the direction 
and control of management. This can present potential conflicts.   
 
Document Retention Policies 
Management of an organization should ensure that the organization has a proper and 
effective document retention policy (DRP) in place. When establishing a document retention 
policy, it is imperative that the organization consider all federal and state laws and 
regulations regarding record-keeping requirements. Industries such as health care, banking, 
and auditing contain trade-specific rules for documenting and retaining records. 
Furthermore, companies should continuously check for legal updates concerning these 
requirements. To have a document retention policy that ignores pertinent record-keeping 
requirements could lead to statutory violations. 
 
An effective document retention policy requires that a company (1) establish retention 
protocols before it foresees litigation or official investigation; (2) develop, review, and/or 
amend a policy for compliance with applicable state and federal laws and regulations; (3) 
ensure the reasonableness of the policy according to the company’s business practices; (4) 
provide a concise explanation of what is to be destroyed and when; (5) provide adequate 
protocols for management of electronic documents; and (6) clearly set forth when the policy 
should be immobilized due to a pending investigation or foreseeable litigation.  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.220                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Because industries vary significantly in the types of documents produced, received, and 
distributed, courts lean toward a subjective “reasonableness” standard in determining 
whether a particular policy is adequate. Thus, each company must develop a policy that is 
specifically tailored to its business practices. A company may find it helpful to refer to 
retention policies of other companies for guidance, but should avoid duplicating such 
policies. By establishing individual business policies and compartmentalizing low-value and 
high-value documents, companies can gain quick access to internal documents. 
 
A properly planned and executed document retention policy will do little good if individuals 
within the company are unaware of it. Not only must employees be aware of the policy, they 
must also understand what is to be destroyed and when. 
 
While electronic communication continues to soar, companies struggle to catch up with its 
agility. It is vital that companies include protocols for preserving and destroying electronic 
documents. Companies with information technology (IT) departments should develop 
procedures for handling electronic data. Company counsels, executives, and managers 
should be aware of how electronic data is stored and destroyed. For example, an e-mail 
deleted by an employee may remain in a company’s computer systems until an administrator 
permanently deletes it. Such situations must be recognized and addressed when designing a 
document retention policy. 
 
What Documents Should Be Kept?   
One of the first steps in establishing a document retention policy is to identify the types of 
documents that need to be retained or destroyed. It is important to remember that every 
organization is different; thus, an organization may require the retention of documents that 
are not provided for in this text. All types of documents produced by an organization must 
be initially accounted for. This includes tangible and electronic documents, and is never 
limited to financial documents. Accounting records, corporate tax records, bank records, 
employment records, various workplace records (including in-house e-mails and client 
correspondence), and legal records must be considered when constructing a DRP for a 
particular organization.  
 
A sample document retention policy that contains a list of records to be taken into account 
when determining retention protocol is included at the end of this chapter. A company 
should check with its local counsel regarding specific state statutes requiring different 
periods. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.221 
Other factors to consider in identifying documents include member/constituent 
expectations, IRS regulations, business taxable income regulations, standards under 
Sarbanes-Oxley, and internal factors (e.g., changes in Board of Directors, Board resolutions, 
patents, and copyrights). 
 
Records typically generated by a company that reflect or materially relate to professional 
services must also be identified in the DRP. For example, accounting and auditing firms 
should mention the retention and destruction of documents that make up client files, such as 
client billing and payment records, correspondence, and time records. 
 
Document Storage 
In this electronic age, most companies are backing up documents via electronic media rather 
than filling file cabinets. Storage expense scares small businesses. Document storage 
companies are available for storing tangible and electronic documents, but can be costly. 
Hard drive back-up appears to be the most cost efficient means of storage, but it requires 
companies to have the computer gusto to withstand large amounts of information.  
 
Most importantly, documents must remain safe (for confidentiality and destruction 
purposes) and be easily accessible in the event of potential litigation and legal requests for 
documents. 
 
Document Destruction 
An organization must cease destruction of documents when faced with potential litigation or 
when a legal document request is pending or imminent. Destruction under a valid DRP will 
be ineffective if documents are not actually destroyed before a potential litigation trigger 
occurs. Thus, it is imperative that the DRP provides for complete destruction of documents 
that can be validly expunged during the proper periods under the policy. Documents should 
be destroyed by shredding or by some other means that will render them unreadable. 
Similarly, a protocol for the destruction of electronic data should be in place to ensure that 
documents to be destroyed are actually destroyed. The deletion of e-mails or other files on 
one’s computer does not mean that such records are removed from evidence.  
 
DRP Managers 
Finally, in order to properly execute a DRP, someone with detailed knowledge of the DRP 
should be in charge of the policy and should ensure that employees understand and follow it 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.222                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
as designed. This individual should be a senior-level employee with the power to enforce the 
policy. A DRP manager is responsible for: 
• Implementing the DRP; 
• Ensuring that employees understand and follow the DRP’s purpose; 
• Providing oversight on actual retention and destruction of documents;  
• Ensuring proper storage of documents; 
• Periodically following-up with counsel to ensure proper retention periods are in place;  
• Suspending the destruction of documents upon foreseeable litigation; and 
• Informing corporate officers, directors, and employees of changes in relation to the 
DRP. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the Federal Sentencing Guidelines, and other rules and 
regulations either require or strongly encourage the implementation of one or more fraud 
prevention programs. In most instances, management is responsible for the institution of 
such programs. 
 
These programs, as well as further details regarding management’s responsibility for fraud, 
are discussed in detail in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud 
Examiners  Manual. 
 
Certified Fraud Examiners, external auditors, and internal auditors also play key roles in the 
detection and deterrence of fraudulent financial reporting. Following is a discussion of their 
professional responsibilities. 
 
 



:


manag
ultim manag is respons for the prevent and detect of fraud within an
organ it is manag job to ensur the proper intern control ar in place to
prevent fraud as well as to detect it although manag mai not execut all of the
controlsa the perform of intern cont rol function ar gener spread across
individu throughout the entir organ includ individu contributor
manag and even the board of directorsmanag is also respons for
monitor and remedi intern control to ensur thei ar effect design and
oper to prevent and detect fraud
as mention abov the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 includ sever requir of
manag in public compani also discuss abov coso provid sever guidelin
for manag prevent and detect of fraud through the intern control
environ
although prepar the financi statement is the respons of manag fraud is
also frequent investig by member of manag or by peopl under the direct
and control of manag thi can present potenti conflict
document retent polici
manag of an organ should ensur that the organ ha a proper and
effect document retent polici drp in place when establish a document retent
polici it is imper that the organ consid all feder and state law and
regul regard recordkeep requir industri such as health care bank
and audit contain tradespecif rule for document and retain record
furthermor compani should continu check for legal updat concern these
requir to have a document retent polici that ignor pertin recordkeep
requir could lead to statutori violat
an effect document retent polici requir that a compani 1 establish retent
protocol befor it forese litig or offici investig 2 develop review andor
amend a polici for complianc with applic state and feder law and regul 3
ensur the reason of the polici accord to the compani busi practic 4
provid a concis explan of what is to be destroi and when 5 provid adequ
protocol for manag of electron document and 6 clearli set forth when the polici
should be immobil due to a pend investig or forese litig
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1220 2011 fraud examin manual
becaus industri vari significantli in the type of document produc receiv and
distribut court lean toward a subject reason standard in determin
whether a particular polici is adequ thu each compani must develop a polici that is
specif tailor to it busi practic a compani mai find it help to refer to
retent polici of other compani for guidanc but should avoid duplic such
polici by establish individu busi polici and compartment lowvalu and
highvalu document compani can gain quick access to intern document
a properli plan and execut document retent polici will do littl good if individu
within the compani ar unawar of it not onli must employe be awar of the polici thei
must also understand what is to be destroi and when
while electron commun continu to soar compani struggl to catch up with it
agil it is vital that compani includ protocol for preserv and destroi electron
document compani with inform technolog it depart should develop
procedur for handl electron data compani counsel execut and manag
should be awar of how electron data is store and destroi for exampl an email
delet by an employe mai remain in a compani comput system until an administr
perman delet it such situat must be recogn and address when design a
document retent polici
what document should be kept
on of the first step in establish a document retent polici is to identifi the type of
document that need to be retain or destroi it is import to rememb that everi
organ is differ thu an organ mai requir the retent of document that
ar not provid for in thi text all type of document produc by an organ must
be initi account for thi includ tangibl and electron document and is never
limit to financi document account record corpor tax record bank record
employ record variou workplac record includ inhous email and client
correspond and legal record must be consid when construct a drp for a
particular organ
a sampl document retent polici that contain a list of record to be taken into account
when determin retent protocol is includ at the end of thi chapter a compani
should check with it local counsel regard specif state statut requir differ
period
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1221
other factor to consid in identifi document includ memberconstitu
expect ir regul busi taxabl incom regul standard under
sarbanesoxlei and intern factor eg chang in board of director board resolut
patent and copyright
record typic gener by a compani that reflect or materi relat to profession
servic must also be identifi in the drp for exampl account and audit firm
should mention the retent and destruct of document that make up client file such as
client bill and payment record correspond and time record
document storag
in thi electron ag most compani ar back up document via electron media rather
than fill file cabinet storag expens scare small busi document storag
compani ar avail for store tangibl and electron document but can be costli
hard drive backup appear to be the most cost effici mean of storag but it requir
compani to have the comput gusto to withstand larg amount of inform
most importantli document must remain safe for confidenti and destruct
purpos and be easili access in the event of potenti litig and legal request for
document
document destruct
an organ must ceas destruct of document when face with potenti litig or
when a legal document request is pend or immin destruct under a valid drp will
be ineffect if document ar not actual destroi befor a potenti litig trigger
occur thu it is imper that the drp provid for complet destruct of document
that can be validli expung dure the proper period under the polici document should
be destroi by shred or by some other mean that will render them unread
similarli a protocol for the destruct of electron data should be in place to ensur that
document to be destroi ar actual destroi the delet of email or other file on
on comput doe not mean that such record ar remov from evid
drp manag
final in order to properli execut a drp someon with detail knowledg of the drp
should be in charg of the polici and should ensur that employe understand and follow it
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1222 2011 fraud examin manual
as design thi individu should be a seniorlevel employe with the power to enforc the
polici a drp manag is respons for
implement the drp
ensur that employe understand and follow the drp purpos
provid oversight on actual retent and destruct of document
ensur proper storag of document
period followingup with counsel to ensur proper retent period ar in place
suspend the destruct of document upon forese litig and
inform corpor offic director and employe of chang in relat to the
drp
fraud prevent program
the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 the feder sentenc guidelin and other rule and
regul either requir or strongli encourag the implement of on or more fraud
prevent program in most instanc manag is respons for the institut of
such program
these program as well as further detail regard manag respons for fraud
ar discuss in detail in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud
examin manual
certifi fraud examin extern auditor and intern auditor also plai kei role in the
detect and deterr of fraudul financi report follow is a discuss of their
profession respons
