2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/External Auditors


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


External Auditors 
Changes in the auditing landscape, primarily those stemming from the passage of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, have led to a dichotomy of standards for external auditors. Auditors of 
public companies — companies registered with the SEC—must adhere to the auditing rules 
promulgated by the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). Conversely, 
for audits of non-SEC-registered entities, the generally accepted auditing standards laid out 
by the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board (ASB) apply. It should be noted, however, that 
the PCAOB adopted all of the ASB’s standards already in existence on April 16, 2003 (i.e., 
all standards issued through Statement on Auditing Standard (SAS) No. 101) as interim 
standards applicable to auditors of public companies, unless and until such standards are 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.223 
superseded or amended by the PCAOB. Therefore, the discussion below on AU Section 
316, which codifies SAS No. 99, applies to all external auditors; whereas, AU sections 314 
and 339, which respectively codify SAS Nos. 109 and 103, apply to audits of non-public 
entities only. Likewise, the PCAOB standards discussed apply only to auditors of SEC-
 registered companies.  
 
AU Section 316 — Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit (Source: SAS Nos. 99 and 113) 
In 1996, the AICPA’s Auditing Standards Board issued SAS No. 82, Consideration of Fraud in a 
Financial Statement Audit, in response to questions and criticisms of the auditing and 
accounting profession’s lack of adequate addre ssing of the subject of fraud. Following the 
high-profile financial frauds that occurred in 2001 and 2002, the ASB replaced SAS No. 82 
with SAS No. 99, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial Statement Audit, to give expanded 
guidance to auditors for detecting material fraud. Per the AICPA, the standard was part of 
an effort to “restore investor confidence in U.S. capital markets and re-establish audited 
financial statements as a clear picture window into Corporate America.” The standard 
became effective for audits of financial statements for periods beginning on or after 
December 15, 2002, and is codified in AU section 316, Consideration of Fraud in a Financial 
Statement Audit. 
 
AU section 110, Responsibilities and Functions of the Independent Auditor,  states, “The auditor has 
a responsibility to plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether 
the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether caused by error or fraud.” 
The purpose of AU section 316 is to “establis h standards and provide guidance to auditors 
in fulfilling that responsibility.”  
 
AU section 316 is divided into 10 main sections: 
• Description and characteristics of fraud 
• Importance of exercising professional skepticism 
• Discussion among engagement personnel regarding risk of material misstatement due to 
fraud 
• Obtaining information needed to identify risks of material misstatements due to fraud 
• Identifying risks that may result in material misstatements due to fraud 
• Assessing the identified risks after taking into account an evaluation of the entity’s 
programs and controls 
• Responding to the results of the assessment 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.224                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluating audit evidence 
• Communicating about fraud to management, the audit committee, and others 
• Documenting the auditor’s consideration of fraud 
 
Following is a brief description of each of these sections. Practitioners in this area should 
review AU section 316 in its entirety for more detailed information. A copy of the entire 
standard can be obtained from the AICPA (www.aicpa.org). 
 
Description and Characteristics of Fraud 
AU section 316 emphasizes that while auditors do not make legal determinations about the 
existence of fraud, they should be interested in all acts that result in material misstatements 
of the financial statements. Such misstatements can be the result of either fraud or error, 
depending on whether the misstatements are intentional or unintentional.  
 
Two types of misstatements are considered relevant for audit purposes: 
• Misstatements arising from fraudulent financial reporting 
• Misstatements arising from misappropriation of assets 
 
MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING 
This category is defined as intentional misstatements or omissions of amounts or disclosures 
in financial statements that are “designed to deceive financial statement users.”   
 
Fraudulent financial reporting may be accomplished by: 
• Manipulating, falsifying, or altering acco unting records or supporting documents; 
• Misrepresenting or intentionally omitting events, transactions, or other significant 
information; or  
• Intentionally misapplying accounting principles relating to amounts, classification, 
manner of presentation, or disclosure. 
 
MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM MISAPPROPRIATION OF ASSETS 
Also referred to as theft or defalcation, this category includes the theft of an entity’s assets 
where the effect of the theft causes the financial statements, in all material respects, not to be 
in conformity with GAAP. 
 
AU section 316 goes on to remind the auditor that, by definition, fraud often is concealed, 
and management is in a position to perpetrate fraud more easily because it is in a position of 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.225 
being able to directly or indirectly manipulate accounting records. Auditors cannot obtain 
absolute assurance that material misstatements are not present, but auditors should be aware 
of the possibility that fraud might be concealed and that employees might be in collusion 
with each other or outside vendors. If auditors notice records or activities that seem unusual, 
then they should at least consider the possibility that fraud might have occurred. 
 
Importance of Exercising Professional Skepticism 
AU section 230, Due Professional Care in the Performance of Work, states that due professional 
care requires the auditor to exercise professional skepticism. Because of the characteristics of 
fraud, the auditor should conduct the audit “w ith a mindset that recognizes the possibility 
that a material misstatement due to fraud could be present.” AU section 230 also requires an 
“ongoing questioning” of whether information the auditor obtains could suggest a material 
misstatement due to fraud. 
 
Discussion Among Engagement Personnel Regarding Risk of Material Misstatement Due to Fraud 
Prior to or in conjunction with the information-gathering procedures discussed below, the 
members of the audit team should discuss the potential for material misstatements due to 
fraud. 
 
The discussion should include “brainstorming” among the audit team members about the 
following: 
• How and where they believe the entity’s financial statements might be susceptible to 
fraud; 
• How management could perpetrate or conceal fraud; and  
• How assets of the entity could be misappropriated. 
 
This discussion should also include a consideration of known external and internal factors 
affecting the entity that might: 
• Create incentives/pressures for management and others to commit fraud; 
• Provide the opportunity for fraud to be perpetrated; and 
• Indicate a culture or environment that enables management and others to rationalize 
committing fraud. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.226                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, the discussion should emphasize the need to maintain “a questioning mind” in 
gathering and evaluating evidence throughout the audit and to obtain additional information 
if necessary. 
 
Obtaining Information Needed to Identify Risks of Material Misstatements Due to Fraud 
AU section 314, Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the Risks of Material 
Misstatement, provides guidance on how the auditor obtains knowledge about the entity and 
its environment, including its internal control. As part of that process, the auditor should 
perform the following procedures to obtain information to use in identifying the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud: 
• Make inquiries of management and others within the entity to obtain their views on the 
risks of fraud and how those risks are addressed; 
• Consider any unusual or unexpected relationships that have been identified in 
performing analytical procedures in planning the audit; 
• Consider whether one or more fraud risk factors exist; and 
• Consider other information that may be helpful in the identification of risks of material 
misstatement due to fraud. 
 
MAKING INQUIRIES OF MANAGEMENT AND OTHERS WITHIN THE ENTITY TO OBTAIN THEIR VIEWS ABOUT THE RISKS OF FRAUD AND HOW THOSE RISKS ARE ADDRESSED 
This step involves asking management about a number of issues, including: 
• Whether management has knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud; 
• Management’s understanding of the risks of fraud; 
• Programs and controls the entity has established to help prevent, deter, or detect fraud; 
and 
• Whether and how management communicates to employees its views on business 
practices and ethical behavior. 
 
The auditor should also question the audit committee directly about its views concerning the 
risks of fraud and whether the committee has knowledge of fraud or suspected fraud. The 
same should be done with the company’s internal audit department.  
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.227 
Additionally, the auditor may need to conduct similar inquiries of the entity’s other 
personnel if the auditor believes they may have additional information about the risks of 
fraud. 
 
CONSIDERING THE RESULTS OF ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES PERFORMED IN PLANNING THE AUDIT  
AU section 329, Analytical Procedures, requires that analytical procedures be performed in 
planning the audit with the objective of identifying the existence of unusual transactions or 
events, and amounts, ratios, and trends that might indicate matters “that have financial 
statement and audit planning implications.” If  the results of these procedures yield unusual 
or unexpected relationships, the auditor should consider the results in identifying the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud. 
 
CONSIDERING FRAUD RISK FACTORS 
As discussed above, even though fraud is concealed, the auditor may identify events or 
conditions that indicate incentives or pressures to commit fraud, opportunities to carry out 
fraud, or attitudes and rationalizations to justify fraudulent conduct. These events and 
conditions are referred to as “fraud risk factors.” The auditor should consider whether one 
or more fraud risk factors are present and should be considered in identifying and assessing 
the risks of material misstatement due to fraud. However, the auditor should be careful not 
to create a laundry list of factors that are only given cursory consideration. The Appendix to 
AU section 316 contains a list of examples of fraud risk factors. 
 
CONSIDERING OTHER INFORMATION THAT MIGHT BE HELPFUL IN IDENTIFYING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD 
Finally, the auditor should consider any other information that might be helpful in 
identifying the risks of material misstatement due to fraud. 
 
Identifying Risks that May Result in Material Misstatements Due to Fraud 
After gathering the information as discussed above, the auditor should consider the 
information in the context of the three conditions present when fraud occurs—
 incentives/pressures, opportunities, and attitudes/rationalizations. 
 
The auditor should consider: 
• The type of risk that may exist, i.e., whether it involves fraudulent financial reporting or 
misappropriation of assets; 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.228                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The significance  of the risk, i.e., whether it is of a magnitude that could result in a possible 
material misstatement; 
• The likelihood  of the risk, i.e., the likelihood that it will result in a material misstatement; 
and 
• The pervasiveness of the risk, i.e., whether the potential risk is pervasive to the financial 
statement as a whole or is specifically related to a particular assertion, account, or class of 
transactions. 
 
Assessing the Identified Risks After Taking into Account an Evaluation of the Entity’s Programs and Controls 
AU section 314 requires the auditor to obtain an understanding of each of the five 
components of internal controls sufficient to plan the audit. As part of this requirement, the 
auditor should evaluate whether the entity’s prog rams and controls that address identified 
risks of fraud have been suitably designed and placed in operation. These programs and 
controls may involve: 
• Specific controls designed to mitigate specific risks of fraud (e.g., controls to prevent 
misappropriation of particular, susceptible assets), and  
• Broader programs designed to prevent, deter, and detect fraud (e.g., ethics policies). 
 
Exhibit I of AU section 316 provides examples of programs and controls an entity might 
implement to create a culture of honesty and to prevent fraud (see also the chapter on 
“Fraud Prevention Programs” in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual ). 
 
Responding to the Results of the Assessment 
Once the auditor has gathered the information and assessed the risk of fraud, he must 
determine what impact the assessment will have on how the audit is conducted. For 
example, the auditor may need to design additional or different audit procedures to obtain 
more reliable evidence in support of account balances, transactions, etc., or to obtain 
additional corroboration of management’s expl anations and representations concerning 
material matters (e.g., third-party confirmation, documentation from independent sources, 
use of a specialist, and analytical procedures). 
 
OVERALL RESPONSES TO THE RISK OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT 
Judgments about the risk of material misstatem ent due to fraud have an overall effect on 
how the audit is conducted in several ways: 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.229 
• Assignment of personnel and supervision. The auditor may need to consult with 
specialists in a particular field. 
• Accounting principles. The auditor should consider management’s selection and 
application of significant accounting principles, particularly those related to subjective 
measurements and complex transactions. 
• Predictability of auditing procedures. The auditor should incorporate an “element of 
unpredictability” in the selection of auditing procedures to be performed, such as using 
differing sampling methods, and performing procedures at different locations or at 
locations on an unannounced basis. 
 
RESPONSES INVOLVING THE NATURE, TIMING, AND EXTENT OF PROCEDURES TO BE PERFORMED TO ADDRESS THE IDENTIFIED RISKS 
This section notes that the auditing procedures performed in response to identified risks will 
vary depending on the type of risks identified. Such procedures may involve both 
substantive tests and tests of the operating effectiveness of the entity’s internal controls. 
However, because management may have the ability to override controls that may otherwise 
appear to be operating effectively, it is unlikely that the audit risk can be reduced 
appropriately by performing only tests of controls. 
  
Therefore, the auditor’s response to specifically identified risks of fraud should include the 
following: 
• Changing the nature  of the auditing procedures to obtain more reliable or additional 
corroborative information by, for example, consulting independent sources or 
conducting physical inspections; 
• Changing the timing  of substantive tests by, for example, conducting substantive tests at 
or near the end of a reporting period; and 
• Ensuring the extent  of the procedures reflects the assessment of the risk of fraud by, for 
example, increasing sample sizes or performing analytical procedures at a more detailed 
level. 
 
EXAMPLES OF RESPONSES TO IDENTIFIED RISKS OF MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING  
AU section 316 provides a number of examples of responses the auditor may take in regard 
to risks of misstatements arising from both fraudulent financial reporting and asset 
misappropriation. 
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.230                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some of the examples of testing auditors may perform to address the risk of fraudulent 
financial reporting include: 
• Revenue recognition—Performing substantive analytical procedures relating to revenue 
using disaggregated data (for example, comparing revenue reported by month and by 
product line during the current reporting period with comparable prior periods); 
confirming with customers relevant contract terms; or questioning staff about shipments 
near the end of a period. 
• Inventory quantities—Examining inventory records to identify locations or items that 
require specific attention during or after the physical inventory count; performing a more 
rigorous examination of the count, such as examining contents of boxed items; and 
conducting additional testing of count sheets, tags, or other records. 
• Management estimates—Developing or engaging  a specialist to develop an independent 
estimate for comparison to management’s estimate and gathering further information to 
help evaluate the reasonableness of management’s estimates and underlying assumptions. 
 
EXAMPLES OF RESPONSES TO IDENTIFIED RISKS OF MISSTATEMENTS ARISING FROM MISAPPROPRIATIONS OF ASSETS 
If the auditor identifies a risk of material misstatement due to fraud relating to 
misappropriation of assets, the auditor may wish to include additional procedures. For 
example, if a particular asset is highly susceptible to misappropriation, the auditor may wish 
to conduct further testing of the controls to prevent and detect such misappropriation. 
 
RESPONSES TO FURTHER ADDRESS RISK OF MANAGEMENT OVERRIDE OF CONTROLS 
Because management is in a unique position to override existing controls, if such a risk is 
identified, the auditor may need to perform additional procedures to further address the risk 
of management override of controls. 
 
EXAMINING JOURNAL ENTRIES AND OTHER ADJUSTMENTS FOR EVIDENCE OF POSSIBLE MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD  
Material misstatements of financial statements often involve recording inappropriate or 
unauthorized journal entries, or making adjustments to amounts reported in the financial 
statements that are not reflected in journal entries (e.g., consolidating adjustments or 
reclassifications). Therefore, the auditor should design procedures to test the appropriateness 
of journal entries recorded in the general ledger and of other adjustments (e.g., entries 
posted directly to financial statement drafts). 
 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.231 
REVIEWING ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES FOR BIASES THAT COULD RESULT IN MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD  
In preparing financial statements, management is responsible for making a number of 
judgments or assumptions that affect significant accounting estimates. Fraudulent financial 
reporting is often accomplished through intentional misstatement of these estimates. In 
performing the audit, the auditor should consider whether the differences between estimates 
supported by the audit evidence and the estimates included in the financial statements 
indicate a possible bias on the part of management. If so, the auditor should perform a 
retrospective review of significant accounting estimates of the prior year. This review should 
provide the auditor with additional information about whether management may have a bias 
in presenting the current-year estimates. 
 
EVALUATING THE BUSINESS RATIONALE FOR SIGNIFICANT UNUSUAL TRANSACTIONS  
During the course of the audit, the auditor may become aware of significant transactions that 
are outside the normal course of the entity’s business or appear unusual given the auditor’s 
understanding of the entity’s operations. The auditor should gain an understanding of the 
business rationale for these transactions and whether the rationale (or lack thereof) suggests 
the transactions may have been entered into to engage in fraudulent financial reporting or to 
conceal misappropriation of assets. 
Some questions the auditor should consider include: 
• Are the transactions overly complex? 
• Has management discussed the transactions with the board of directors and audit 
committee? 
• Has management placed more emphasis on the need for a particular accounting 
treatment than on the underlying economics of the particular transaction? 
• Do the transactions involve unconsolidated, unrelated parties (including special purposes 
entities), or parties that do not have the substance or financial strength to support the 
transaction? 
 
Evaluating Audit Evidence 
ASSESSING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT DUE TO FRAUD THROUGHOUT THE AUDIT 
During the performance of the audit, the auditor may identify conditions that either change 
or support a judgment regarding the assessment of risks. Examples include: 
• Discrepancies in the accounting records (e.g., transactions that are not recorded, 
unsupported or unauthorized balances or transactions, or last minute adjustments). 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.232                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Conflicting or missing evidential matter (e.g., missing or altered documents or records, 
unexplained items on reconciliations, or missing inventory). 
• Problematic or unusual relationships between the auditor and management (e.g., denial 
of access to records, facilities, employees, or customers; complaints by management 
about the conduct of the audit team; unusual delays in providing information; or 
unwillingness to add or revise disclosures). 
 
EVALUATING WHETHER ANALYTICAL PROCEDURES PERFORMED INDICATE A PREVIOUSLY UNRECOGNIZED RISK OF FRAUD 
Analytical procedures performed during the audit may result in identifying unusual or 
unexpected relationships that should be considered in assessing the risk of material 
misstatement due to fraud. Determining whether a particular trend or relationship is a risk of 
fraud requires professional judgment. Unusual relationships involving year-end revenue and 
income often are particularly relevant and might include (1) uncharacteristically large 
amounts of income reported in the last week or two of the reporting period from unusual 
transactions and (2) income that is inconsistent with trends in cash flow from operations. 
 
Analytical procedures are useful because management or employees generally are unable to 
manipulate all the information necessary to produce normal or expected relationships. AU 
section 316 provides several examples, including the following: 
• The relationship of net income to cash flows from operations may appear unusual 
because management recorded fictitious revenues and receivables, but was unable to 
manipulate cash. 
• Changes in inventory, accounts payable, sales, or costs of sales from the prior period to 
the current period may be inconsistent, indicating a possible theft of inventory because 
the employee was unable to manipulate all of the related accounts. 
• An unexpected or unexplained relationship between sales volume as determined from 
the accounting records and production statistics maintained by operations personnel 
(which are more difficult for management to manipulate) may indicate a possible 
misstatement of sales. 
 
EVALUATING RISKS OF MATERIAL MISSTATEMENT AT OR NEAR THE COMPLETION OF FIELDWORK 
At or near the completion of fieldwork, the auditor should evaluate whether the accumulated 
results of auditing procedures and other observations affect the assessment of risk of 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.233 
material misstatements due to fraud made earlier. Such an evaluation might identify whether 
there is a need to perform further audit procedures.  
 
RESPONDING TO MISSTATEMENTS THAT MAY BE THE RESULT OF FRAUD 
If the auditor believes that misstatements are or may be the result of fraud, but the effect of 
the misstatements is not material to the financial statements, the auditor nevertheless should 
evaluate their implications. The auditor should be especially concerned with any implications 
pertaining to the “organizational position” of the person involved as they may require a 
reevaluation of the assessment of the risk of material misstatement. For example, in the 
event of theft of cash from a small petty cash fund, the amount of the theft generally would 
not be of significance to the auditor; however, if the theft was perpetrated by higher-level 
management, then it might be indicative of a more pervasive problem such as  
management integrity. 
 
If the auditor believes that a misstatement is or may be the result of fraud, and either has 
determined that the effect of the misstatement is material to the financial statements, or has 
been unable to evaluate whether the effect is material, the auditor should: 
• Attempt to obtain additional evidence to determine whether material fraud occurred and 
its effect on the financial statements; 
• Consider the implications for other aspects of the audit; 
• Discuss the matter and the approach for further investigation with an appropriate level 
of management that is at least one level above those involved, and with senior 
management and the audit committee; and 
• If appropriate, suggest the client consult with legal counsel. 
 
Communicating About Possible Fraud to Management, the Audit Committee, and Others 
AU section 316 states, “Whenever an auditor has determined that there is evidence that 
fraud may exist, the matter should be brought to the attention of an appropriate level of 
management.” It is considered appropriate to do  so even if the matter might be considered 
inconsequential. Fraud involving senior management and fraud (by anyone) that causes a 
material misstatement should be reported directly to those charged with governance. 
 
If the auditor has identified risks of material misstatement due to fraud that have continuing 
control implications, the auditor should consider whether these risks should be 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.234                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
communicated to those charged with governance. Conversely, the auditor should consider 
whether the absence of controls to deter, detect, or prevent fraud should be reported.  
 
The disclosure of possible fraud to parties other than the client’s senior management and 
those charged with governance is ordinarily not part of the auditor’s responsibilities and may 
be precluded by the auditor’s legal or ethical obligations of confidentiality, unless the matter 
is reflected in the auditor’s report. 
 
However, AU section 316 points out that there may be a duty to disclose the information to 
outside parties in the following circumstances: 
• To comply with certain legal and regulatory requirements (e.g., SEC rules); 
• To inform successor auditors pursuant to AU section 315, Communications Between 
Predecessor and Successor Auditors; 
• In response to a subpoena; and 
• To a funding agency or other specified agency in accordance with the requirements for 
audits of entities that receive governmental financial assistance. 
 
Documenting the Auditor’s Consideration of Fraud 
AU section 316 concludes by requiring that auditors document the following: 
• Discussion among engagement personnel regarding the susceptibility of the entity’s 
financial statements to material misstatement due to fraud (including how and when the 
discussion occurred, the team members who participated, and the subject matter 
discussed); 
• Procedures performed to obtain information necessary to identify and assess the risks of 
material misstatement due to fraud; 
• Specific risks of material misstatement due to fraud that were identified and the auditor’s 
response to those risks; 
• The reasons supporting the auditor’s conclusion, if the auditor has not identified 
improper revenue recognition as a risk; 
• The results of the procedures performed to further address the risk of management 
override of controls; 
• Other conditions and analytical relationships that caused the auditor to believe that 
additional auditing procedures or other responses were required to address such risks; 
and  
• The nature of the communication about fraud made to management, those charged with 
governance, or others. 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.235 
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5—An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting that Is Integrated with an Audit of Financial Statements  
In May 2007, the PCAOB adopted Auditing Standard No. 5, An Audit of Internal Control Over 
Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With An Audit of Financial Statements, as a replacement to 
Auditing Standard No. 2, An Audit of Internal Control Over Financial Reporting Performed in 
Conjunction With an Audit of Financial Statements,  the previous standard governing audits of 
internal control over financial reporting (ICO FR) as mandated by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. 
The auditing standard was intended to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of internal 
control audits, while also reducing unnecessary costs, especially for smaller public 
companies. Auditing Standard No. 5 supersedes Auditing Standard No. 2 for all audits of 
ICOFR for fiscal years ending on or after November 15, 2007.  
 
Section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that management must assess and report 
on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR,  and the external auditor must attest to 
management’s internal control assessment. Auditing Standard No. 5 lays out the 
requirements and provides guidance for auditors who are engaged to perform an audit of 
management’s assessment of the internal controls that is integrated with an audit of the 
financial statements.  
 
Following is a descriptive summary of some of the requirements laid out in the standard. 
Practitioners in this area should review Auditing Standard No. 5 in its entirety for more 
detailed information. A copy of the entire standard can be obtained from the PCAOB 
(www.pcaobus.org). 
 
Performing an ICOFR Audit 
INTEGRATING THE INTERNAL CONTROL AUDIT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDIT 
Auditing Standard No. 5 states that although the objectives of financial statement audits and 
audits of ICOFR are not identical, the two au dits should be integrated, with the auditor 
planning and performing the work to achieve the objectives of both audits. The auditor 
should design and perform the tests of controls in a manner that yields sufficient evidence to 
support both the auditor’s opinion at year-end and the auditor’s control risk assessment for 
the financial statement audit. 
 
PLANNING THE AUDIT 
When planning an integrated audit of ICOFR and the financial statements, the auditor must: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.236                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluate whether the following matters are important to the financial statements and to 
ICOFR and, if so, how they w ill affect the audit procedures: 
? Knowledge of the company’s ICOFR obtained during other engagements; 
? Information about the company’s industry, including financial reporting practices, 
economic conditions, laws and regulations, and technological changes;  
? Information about the company’s business activities, organization, operating 
characteristics, and capital structure;  
? The existence and extent of any recent changes in the company, its operations, or its 
ICOFR;  
? The auditor’s preliminary judgments about materiality, risk, and other factors relating 
to the determination of material weaknesses;  
? Any control deficiencies previously communicated to the audit committee, board of 
directors, or company management;  
? Legal or regulatory issues of which the company is aware;  
? The type and extent of evidence related to the effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR; 
? Preliminary judgments about the effectiveness of ICOFR;  
? Public information about the company related to the evaluation of the likelihood of 
material misstatements in the company’s financial statements and the effectiveness of 
the company’s ICOFR; 
? Knowledge about the risks related to the company that were considered as part of 
the auditor’s client acceptance and retention evaluation; and 
? The relative complexity of the company’s operations. 
• Assess the risk that material weaknesses exist in areas of the company’s ICOFR in order 
to determine which accounts, disclosures, and assertions are significant and relevant to 
the audit, which controls to test, and what evidence is necessary for a given control. In 
forming this assessment, the complexity of the organization, business unit, or process 
will play an important role. 
• Focus the audit attention on those areas of the company’s ICOFR that are assessed to 
have the highest risk that a material weakness exists. The auditor should keep in mind 
that the risk a company’s ICOFR will fail to  prevent or detect a misstatement caused by 
fraud usually is higher than the risk of failure to prevent or detect errors. 
• Scale the audit appropriately based on the ways the company meets its control 
objectives, with attention given to the size and complexity of the company, its business 
processes, and its business units.  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.237 
• Evaluate the extent to which he will use the work of others to reduce his own audit 
work. 
• Use the same materiality considerations used in planning the audit of the company’s 
financial statements. 
 
USING A TOP-DOWN APPROACH 
In an audit of ICOFR, auditors should implement a top-down approach. According to 
Auditing Standard No. 5, a top-down approach “begins at the financial statement level and 
with the auditor’s understanding of the over all risks to internal control over financial 
reporting. The auditor then focuses on entity-level controls and works down to significant 
accounts and disclosures and their relevant assertions.” (Paragraph 21) This approach 
focuses auditors on those accounts, disclosures, and assertions that are most likely to result 
in material misstatement of the company’s financial statements. The standard makes explicit 
mention, however, that this approach describes the auditor’s thought process when 
identifying risks and the controls to test, rather than the order in which the auditor should 
perform the audit procedures.  
 
TESTING CONTROLS 
The auditor should test both the design and operating effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR. In testing the design effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine 
whether the controls, if operated as prescribed, satisfy the company’s control objectives and 
can effectively prevent or detect errors or fraud that could result in material misstatements. 
This testing may include inquiry of staff members, observation of operations, and 
examination of relevant documentation. 
 
In testing the operating effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine whether 
the control is operating as designed, as well as whether the person operating the control has 
the appropriate authority and competence to perform the control effectively. An auditor may 
test the operations of the controls through inquiry of staff members, observation of 
operations, examination of relevant documentation, and re-performance of the control. 
 
Fraud Considerations 
As part of an audit of ICOFR, the auditor must specifically evaluate (1) the controls enacted 
to address the risk of management override of other controls and (2) whether the company’s 
internal controls adequately address the risk of material misstatement due to fraud. These 
controls include:  
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.238                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Controls over significant unusual transactions;  
• Controls over journal entries and adjustments made during the end of the period 
financial reporting process;  
• Controls over related party transactions; 
• Controls related to significant management estimates; and 
• Controls that mitigate the motivations for, and pressures on, management to engage in 
inappropriate earnings management and financial statement fraud. 
 
Further, if the auditor discovers any deficiencies in these controls, the auditor should address 
the deficiencies when responding to the risks of material misstatement during the financial 
statement audit. 
 
Forming an Opinion on the Effectiveness of ICOFR 
In forming an opinion on the effectiveness of the company’s ICOFR, the auditor must 
evaluate evidence from all sources. This includes not only the auditor’s tests of controls, but 
also any misstatements detected during the financial statement audit, as well as any identified 
control deficiencies. The auditor should also review any reports issued during the year by the 
internal audit function that pertain to ICOFR and should evaluate any deficiencies  
identified therein.  
 
The auditor must also evaluate management’s assessment of ICOFR, included in its annual 
reports filed with the SEC, to ensure that all required elements in management’s report are 
complete and properly presented. 
 
At the close of the integrated audit, the auditor may choose to issue a single report 
containing both an opinion on the company’s financial statements and an opinion on 
ICOFR, or to issue a separate report for each opinion.  
 
Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements No. 15—An Examination of an 
Entity’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements  
Non-public entities may wish to have auditors examine the internal controls over financial 
reporting as a matter of best practice or to comply with lender or regulatory requirements. 
The Auditing Standards Board issued Statement of Standards for Attestation Engagements 
(SSAE) No. 15, An Examination of an Entity ’s Internal Control Over Financial Reporting That Is 
Integrated With an Audit of Its Financial Statements, as guidance to auditors of non-public 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.239 
organizations when undertaking this type of engagement alongside an audit of the financial 
statements. SSAE No. 15 converges the standards for these engagements for auditors of 
non-public companies with those provided for auditors of public companies in PCAOB 
Auditing Standard No. 5. More information about SSAE No. 15 is available at 
www.AICPA.org.  
 
Risk-Based Audit Approach 
The PCAOB and the AICPA have issued standards that indicate both organizations’ 
emphasis on using a risk-based approach to auditing. This approach involves beginning the 
audit process with a risk assessment and selecting the particular areas of focus based upon 
the level of risk to the organization. In a risk-based approach, auditors focus their resources 
on the areas of highest concern as opposed to auditing areas on a rotational basis or other 
method of selecting audit areas. This works well for both internal and external audits, and 
also works well at both the macro (e.g., overall financial statements or the organization as a 
whole) and micro (e.g., accounts payable) levels.  
 
As the risk of fraud is significant in most organizations, it is normally a major factor in the 
risk assessment process. Focusing audit resources on the areas with the highest risk of fraud 
gives auditors a significantly higher probability of detecting fraud if/when it occurs. 
 
The standards go into effect for fiscal periods beginning on or after December 15, 2010.   
 
The PCAOB standards include: 
• AS No. 8 — Audit Risk 
• AS No. 9 — Audit Planning 
• AS No. 10 — Supervision of the Audit Engagement 
• AS No. 11 — Consideration of Materiality in Planning and Performing the Audit 
• AS No. 12 — Identifying and Assessing Risks of Ma terial Misstatement 
• AS No. 13 — The Auditor’s Responses to  the Risks of Material Misstatement 
• AS No. 14 — Evaluating Audit Results 
• AS No. 15 — Audit Evidence 
 
• The AICPA standards include: 
• AU section 326—Audit Evidence 
• AU section 312—Materiality in Planning and Performing an Audit 
• AU section 312—Evaluation of Misstatements Identified During an Audit 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.240                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• AU section 311—Planning an Audit 
• AU section 314—Understanding the Entity and Its Environment and Assessing the 
Risks of Mat erial Misstatement 
• AU section 318—Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks and 
Evaluating the Audit Evidence Obtained 
 
The specific details of the standards can be found at the PCAOB website at 
www.pcaobus.org and at the AICPA website at www.aicpa.org 
 
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3—Audit Documentation  
PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3, Audit Documentation, provides general guidance on the 
content and extent of the documentation public company auditors should prepare when 
conducting audits of financial statements, audits of internal control over financial reporting, 
and reviews of interim financial information.  
 
Audit documentation includes all memoranda, confirmations, correspondence, schedules, 
audit programs, and letters of representation prepared and obtained during the audit 
engagement. This documentation “should be prepared in sufficient detail to provide a clear 
understanding of its purpose and source, and the conclusions reached.” Additionally, 
because the documentation serves as the foundation for the representations in the auditor’s 
report, the standard asserts that it should: 
• Demonstrate that the engagement was conducted in compliance with the standards of 
the PCAOB,  
• Support the basis for the auditor’s conclusions concerning all relevant financial 
statement assertions, and  
• Demonstrate that the underlying accounting records agree to or reconcile with the 
financial statements.  
 
To meet these requirements, the standard states that audit documentation should “contain 
sufficient information to enable an experienced auditor, having no previous connection with 
the engagement: 
• To understand the nature, timing, extent, and results of the procedures performed, 
evidence obtained, and conclusions reached, and 
• To determine who performed the work and the date such work was completed as well as 
the person who reviewed the work and the date of such review.” 
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.241 
The standard also requires auditors to retain audit documentation for seven years from the 
date the auditors’ report is released or, if no report is issued, from the date the audit work is 
substantially completed.  
 
The full text of the auditing standard, which also includes guidance about documentation of 
specific matters and subsequent changes to audit documentation, can be found on the 
PCAOB’s website (www.pcaobus.org).  
 
AU Section 339—Audit Documentation (Source: SAS No. 103) 
The ASB counterpart to PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 3 appears in the form of SAS No. 
103, Audit Documentation. SAS No. 103 supersedes SAS No. 96, Audit Documentation, as the 
guidance on audit documentation that applies to auditors of non-public entities. The 
standard is codified in AU section 339.  
 
In developing AU section 339, the ASB considered the provisions of PCAOB Auditing 
Standard No. 3; consequently, the requirements of the two standards are similar in many 
respects. Specifically, AU section 339 does the following:  
• Changes the date of the auditor’s report from the final day of fieldwork to the date on or 
after which the auditor obtained sufficient evidence to support the audit opinion;  
• Requires the audit documentation to be sufficient such that an experienced auditor with 
no previous connection to the audit could understand the work performed, the evidence 
obtained, and the conclusions reached;  
• Requires documentation of departures from generally accepted auditing standards, along 
with the justification and alternative procedures used; 
• Provides that oral explanations may be used to clarify or explain audit documentation, 
but alone are insufficient support for audit work; 
• Requires specific documentation of matters that the auditor identified as contradictory or 
inconsistent with the final audit conclusions, as well as how the auditor addressed such 
findings;  
• Instructs the auditor to assemble all of the audit documentation into the audit file within 
60 days following the audit report release date; 
• States that after 60 days following the audit report release date, workpapers may not be 
deleted, and all additions must be noted as such; and 
• Specifies a minimum retention period for audit documentation of five years from the 
report release date.  
 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.242                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


extern auditor
chang in the audit landscap primarili those stem from the passag of the
sarbanesoxlei act have led to a dichotomi of standard for extern auditor auditor of
public compani compani regist with the secmust adher to the audit rule
promulg by the public compani account oversight board pcaob convers
for audit of nonsecregist entiti the gener accept audit standard laid out
by the aicpa audit standard board asb appli it should be note howev that
the pcaob adopt all of the asb standard alreadi in exist on april 16 2003 ie
all standard issu through statement on audit standard sa no 101 as interim
standard applic to auditor of public compani unless and until such standard ar
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1223
supersed or amend by the pcaob therefor the discuss below on au section
316 which codifi sa no 99 appli to all extern auditor wherea au section 314
and 339 which respect codifi sa no 109 and 103 appli to audit of nonpubl
entiti onli likewis the pcaob standard discuss appli onli to auditor of sec
regist compani
au section 316 consider of fraud in a financi statement audit sourc sa no 99 and 113
in 1996 the aicpa audit standard board issu sa no 82 consider of fraud in a
financi statement audit in respons to question and critic of the audit and
account profess lack of adequ addr ssing of the subject of fraud follow the
highprofil financi fraud that occur in 2001 and 2002 the asb replac sa no 82
with sa no 99 consider of fraud in a financi statement audit to give expand
guidanc to auditor for detect materi fraud per the aicpa the standard wa part of
an effort to restor investor confid in us capit market and reestablish audit
financi statement as a clear pictur window into corpor america the standard
becam effect for audit of financi statement for period begin on or after
decemb 15 2002 and is codifi in au section 316 consider of fraud in a financi
statement audit
au section 110 respons and function of the independ auditor state the auditor ha
a respons to plan and perform the audit to obtain reason assur about whether
the financi statement ar free of materi misstat whether caus by error or fraud
the purpos of au section 316 is to establ h standard and provid guidanc to auditor
in fulfil that respons
au section 316 is divid into 10 main section
descript and characterist of fraud
import of exercis profession skeptic
discuss among engag personnel regard risk of materi misstat due to
fraud
obtain inform need to identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
identifi risk that mai result in materi misstat due to fraud
assess the identifi risk after take into account an evalu of the entiti
program and control
respond to the result of the assess
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1224 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu audit evid
commun about fraud to manag the audit committe and other
document the auditor consider of fraud
follow is a brief descript of each of these section practition in thi area should
review au section 316 in it entireti for more detail inform a copi of the entir
standard can be obtain from the aicpa wwwaicpaorg
descript and characterist of fraud
au section 316 emphas that while auditor do not make legal determin about the
exist of fraud thei should be interest in all act that result in materi misstat
of the financi statement such misstat can be the result of either fraud or error
depend on whether the misstat ar intent or unintent
two type of misstat ar consid relev for audit purpos
misstat aris from fraudul financi report
misstat aris from misappropri of asset
misstat aris from fraudul financi report
thi categori is defin as intent misstat or omiss of amount or disclosur
in financi statement that ar design to deceiv financi statement user
fraudul financi report mai be accomplish by
manipul falsifi or alter acco unt record or support document
misrepres or intention omit event transact or other signific
inform or
intention misappli account principl relat to amount classif
manner of present or disclosur
misstat aris from misappropri of asset
also refer to as theft or defalc thi categori includ the theft of an entiti asset
where the effect of the theft caus the financi statement in all materi respect not to be
in conform with gaap
au section 316 goe on to remind the auditor that by definit fraud often is conceal
and manag is in a posit to perpetr fraud more easili becaus it is in a posit of
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1225
be abl to directli or indirectli manipul account record auditor cannot obtain
absolut assur that materi misstat ar not present but auditor should be awar
of the possibl that fraud might be conceal and that employe might be in collus
with each other or outsid vendor if auditor notic record or activ that seem unusu
then thei should at least consid the possibl that fraud might have occur
import of exercis profession skeptic
au section 230 due profession care in the perform of work state that due profession
care requir the auditor to exercis profession skeptic becaus of the characterist of
fraud the auditor should conduct the audit w ith a mindset that recogn the possibl
that a materi misstat due to fraud could be present au section 230 also requir an
ongo question of whether inform the auditor obtain could suggest a materi
misstat due to fraud
discuss among engag personnel regard risk of materi misstat due to fraud
prior to or in conjunct with the informationgath procedur discuss below the
member of the audit team should discuss the potenti for materi misstat due to
fraud
the discuss should includ brainstorm among the audit team member about the
follow
how and where thei believ the entiti financi statement might be suscept to
fraud
how manag could perpetr or conceal fraud and
how asset of the entiti could be misappropri
thi discuss should also includ a consider of known extern and intern factor
affect the entiti that might
creat incentivespressur for manag and other to commit fraud
provid the opportun for fraud to be perpetr and
indic a cultur or environ that enabl manag and other to ration
commit fraud
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1226 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor the discuss should emphas the need to maintain a question mind in
gather and evalu evid throughout the audit and to obtain addit inform
if necessari
obtain inform need to identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
au section 314 understand the entiti and it environ and assess the risk of materi
misstat provid guidanc on how the auditor obtain knowledg about the entiti and
it environ includ it intern control as part of that process the auditor should
perform the follow procedur to obtain inform to us in identifi the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
make inquiri of manag and other within the entiti to obtain their view on the
risk of fraud and how those risk ar address
consid ani unusu or unexpect relationship that have been identifi in
perform analyt procedur in plan the audit
consid whether on or more fraud risk factor exist and
consid other inform that mai be help in the identif of risk of materi
misstat due to fraud
make inquiri of manag and other within the entiti to obtain their view about the risk of fraud and how those risk ar address
thi step involv ask manag about a number of issu includ
whether manag ha knowledg of fraud or suspect fraud
manag understand of the risk of fraud
program and control the entiti ha establish to help prevent deter or detect fraud
and
whether and how manag commun to employe it view on busi
practic and ethic behavior
the auditor should also question the audit committe directli about it view concern the
risk of fraud and whether the committe ha knowledg of fraud or suspect fraud the
same should be done with the compani intern audit depart
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1227
addition the auditor mai need to conduct similar inquiri of the entiti other
personnel if the auditor believ thei mai have addit inform about the risk of
fraud
consid the result of analyt procedur perform in plan the audit
au section 329 analyt procedur requir that analyt procedur be perform in
plan the audit with the object of identifi the exist of unusu transact or
event and amount ratio and trend that might indic matter that have financi
statement and audit plan implic if the result of these procedur yield unusu
or unexpect relationship the auditor should consid the result in identifi the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
consid fraud risk factor
as discuss abov even though fraud is conceal the auditor mai identifi event or
condit that indic incent or pressur to commit fraud opportun to carri out
fraud or attitud and ration to justifi fraudul conduct these event and
condit ar refer to as fraud risk factor the auditor should consid whether on
or more fraud risk factor ar present and should be consid in identifi and assess
the risk of materi misstat due to fraud howev the auditor should be care not
to creat a laundri list of factor that ar onli given cursori consider the appendix to
au section 316 contain a list of exampl of fraud risk factor
consid other inform that might be help in identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud
final the auditor should consid ani other inform that might be help in
identifi the risk of materi misstat due to fraud
identifi risk that mai result in materi misstat due to fraud
after gather the inform as discuss abov the auditor should consid the
inform in the context of the three condit present when fraud occur
incentivespressur opportun and attitudesration
the auditor should consid
the type of risk that mai exist ie whether it involv fraudul financi report or
misappropri of asset
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1228 2011 fraud examin manual
the signific of the risk ie whether it is of a magnitud that could result in a possibl
materi misstat
the likelihood of the risk ie the likelihood that it will result in a materi misstat
and
the pervas of the risk ie whether the potenti risk is pervas to the financi
statement as a whole or is specif relat to a particular assert account or class of
transact
assess the identifi risk after take into account an evalu of the entiti program and control
au section 314 requir the auditor to obtain an understand of each of the five
compon of intern control suffici to plan the audit as part of thi requir the
auditor should evalu whether the entiti prog ram and control that address identifi
risk of fraud have been suitabl design and place in oper these program and
control mai involv
specif control design to mitig specif risk of fraud eg control to prevent
misappropri of particular suscept asset and
broader program design to prevent deter and detect fraud eg ethic polici
exhibit i of au section 316 provid exampl of program and control an entiti might
implement to creat a cultur of honesti and to prevent fraud see also the chapter on
fraud prevent program in the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud
examin manual
respond to the result of the assess
onc the auditor ha gather the inform and assess the risk of fraud he must
determin what impact the assess will have on how the audit is conduct for
exampl the auditor mai need to design addit or differ audit procedur to obtain
more reliabl evid in support of account balanc transact etc or to obtain
addit corrobor of manag expl anat and represent concern
materi matter eg thirdparti confirm document from independ sourc
us of a specialist and analyt procedur
overal respons to the risk of materi misstat
judgment about the risk of materi misstatem ent due to fraud have an overal effect on
how the audit is conduct in sever wai
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1229
assign of personnel and supervis the auditor mai need to consult with
specialist in a particular field
account principl the auditor should consid manag select and
applic of signific account principl particularli those relat to subject
measur and complex transact
predict of audit procedur the auditor should incorpor an element of
unpredict in the select of audit procedur to be perform such as us
differ sampl method and perform procedur at differ locat or at
locat on an unannounc basi
respons involv the natur time and extent of procedur to be perform to address the identifi risk
thi section note that the audit procedur perform in respons to identifi risk will
vari depend on the type of risk identifi such procedur mai involv both
substant test and test of the oper effect of the entiti intern control
howev becaus manag mai have the abil to overrid control that mai otherwis
appear to be oper effect it is unlik that the audit risk can be reduc
appropri by perform onli test of control
therefor the auditor respons to specif identifi risk of fraud should includ the
follow
chang the natur of the audit procedur to obtain more reliabl or addit
corrobor inform by for exampl consult independ sourc or
conduct physic inspect
chang the time of substant test by for exampl conduct substant test at
or near the end of a report period and
ensur the extent of the procedur reflect the assess of the risk of fraud by for
exampl increas sampl size or perform analyt procedur at a more detail
level
exampl of respons to identifi risk of misstat aris from fraudul financi report
au section 316 provid a number of exampl of respons the auditor mai take in regard
to risk of misstat aris from both fraudul financi report and asset
misappropri
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1230 2011 fraud examin manual
some of the exampl of test auditor mai perform to address the risk of fraudul
financi report includ
revenu recognitionperform substant analyt procedur relat to revenu
us disaggreg data for exampl compar revenu report by month and by
product line dure the current report period with compar prior period
confirm with custom relev contract term or question staff about shipment
near the end of a period
inventori quantitiesexamin inventori record to identifi locat or item that
requir specif attent dure or after the physic inventori count perform a more
rigor examin of the count such as examin content of box item and
conduct addit test of count sheet tag or other record
manag estimatesdevelop or engag a specialist to develop an independ
estim for comparison to manag estim and gather further inform to
help evalu the reason of manag estim and underli assumpt
exampl of respons to identifi risk of misstat aris from misappropri of asset
if the auditor identifi a risk of materi misstat due to fraud relat to
misappropri of asset the auditor mai wish to includ addit procedur for
exampl if a particular asset is highli suscept to misappropri the auditor mai wish
to conduct further test of the control to prevent and detect such misappropri
respons to further address risk of manag overrid of control
becaus manag is in a uniqu posit to overrid exist control if such a risk is
identifi the auditor mai need to perform addit procedur to further address the risk
of manag overrid of control
examin journal entri and other adjust for evid of possibl materi misstat due to fraud
materi misstat of financi statement often involv record inappropri or
unauthor journal entri or make adjust to amount report in the financi
statement that ar not reflect in journal entri eg consolid adjust or
reclassif therefor the auditor should design procedur to test the appropri
of journal entri record in the gener ledger and of other adjust eg entri
post directli to financi statement draft
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1231
review account estim for bias that could result in materi misstat due to fraud
in prepar financi statement manag is respons for make a number of
judgment or assumpt that affect signific account estim fraudul financi
report is often accomplish through intent misstat of these estim in
perform the audit the auditor should consid whether the differ between estim
support by the audit evid and the estim includ in the financi statement
indic a possibl bia on the part of manag if so the auditor should perform a
retrospect review of signific account estim of the prior year thi review should
provid the auditor with addit inform about whether manag mai have a bia
in present the currentyear estim
evalu the busi rational for signific unusu transact
dure the cours of the audit the auditor mai becom awar of signific transact that
ar outsid the normal cours of the entiti busi or appear unusu given the auditor
understand of the entiti oper the auditor should gain an understand of the
busi rational for these transact and whether the rational or lack thereof suggest
the transact mai have been enter into to engag in fraudul financi report or to
conceal misappropri of asset
some question the auditor should consid includ
ar the transact overli complex
ha manag discuss the transact with the board of director and audit
committe
ha manag place more emphasi on the need for a particular account
treatment than on the underli econom of the particular transact
do the transact involv unconsolid unrel parti includ special purpos
entiti or parti that do not have the substanc or financi strength to support the
transact
evalu audit evid
assess risk of materi misstat due to fraud throughout the audit
dure the perform of the audit the auditor mai identifi condit that either chang
or support a judgment regard the assess of risk exampl includ
discrep in the account record eg transact that ar not record
unsupport or unauthor balanc or transact or last minut adjust
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1232 2011 fraud examin manual
conflict or miss evidenti matter eg miss or alter document or record
unexplain item on reconcili or miss inventori
problemat or unusu relationship between the auditor and manag eg denial
of access to record facil employe or custom complaint by manag
about the conduct of the audit team unusu delai in provid inform or
unwilling to add or revis disclosur
evalu whether analyt procedur perform indic a previous unrecogn risk of fraud
analyt procedur perform dure the audit mai result in identifi unusu or
unexpect relationship that should be consid in assess the risk of materi
misstat due to fraud determin whether a particular trend or relationship is a risk of
fraud requir profession judgment unusu relationship involv yearend revenu and
incom often ar particularli relev and might includ 1 uncharacterist larg
amount of incom report in the last week or two of the report period from unusu
transact and 2 incom that is inconsist with trend in cash flow from oper
analyt procedur ar us becaus manag or employe gener ar unabl to
manipul all the inform necessari to produc normal or expect relationship au
section 316 provid sever exampl includ the follow
the relationship of net incom to cash flow from oper mai appear unusu
becaus manag record fictiti revenu and receiv but wa unabl to
manipul cash
chang in inventori account payabl sale or cost of sale from the prior period to
the current period mai be inconsist indic a possibl theft of inventori becaus
the employe wa unabl to manipul all of the relat account
an unexpect or unexplain relationship between sale volum as determin from
the account record and product statist maintain by oper personnel
which ar more difficult for manag to manipul mai indic a possibl
misstat of sale
evalu risk of materi misstat at or near the complet of fieldwork
at or near the complet of fieldwork the auditor should evalu whether the accumul
result of audit procedur and other observ affect the assess of risk of
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1233
materi misstat due to fraud made earlier such an evalu might identifi whether
there is a need to perform further audit procedur
respond to misstat that mai be the result of fraud
if the auditor believ that misstat ar or mai be the result of fraud but the effect of
the misstat is not materi to the financi statement the auditor nevertheless should
evalu their implic the auditor should be especi concern with ani implic
pertain to the organiz posit of the person involv as thei mai requir a
reevalu of the assess of the risk of materi misstat for exampl in the
event of theft of cash from a small petti cash fund the amount of the theft gener would
not be of signific to the auditor howev if the theft wa perpetr by higherlevel
manag then it might be indic of a more pervas problem such as
manag integr
if the auditor believ that a misstat is or mai be the result of fraud and either ha
determin that the effect of the misstat is materi to the financi statement or ha
been unabl to evalu whether the effect is materi the auditor should
attempt to obtain addit evid to determin whether materi fraud occur and
it effect on the financi statement
consid the implic for other aspect of the audit
discuss the matter and the approach for further investig with an appropri level
of manag that is at least on level abov those involv and with senior
manag and the audit committe and
if appropri suggest the client consult with legal counsel
commun about possibl fraud to manag the audit committe and other
au section 316 state whenev an auditor ha determin that there is evid that
fraud mai exist the matter should be brought to the attent of an appropri level of
manag it is consid appropri to do so even if the matter might be consid
inconsequenti fraud involv senior manag and fraud by anyon that caus a
materi misstat should be report directli to those charg with govern
if the auditor ha identifi risk of materi misstat due to fraud that have continu
control implic the auditor should consid whether these risk should be
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1234 2011 fraud examin manual
commun to those charg with govern convers the auditor should consid
whether the absenc of control to deter detect or prevent fraud should be report
the disclosur of possibl fraud to parti other than the client senior manag and
those charg with govern is ordinarili not part of the auditor respons and mai
be preclud by the auditor legal or ethic oblig of confidenti unless the matter
is reflect in the auditor report
howev au section 316 point out that there mai be a duti to disclos the inform to
outsid parti in the follow circumst
to compli with certain legal and regulatori requir eg sec rule
to inform successor auditor pursuant to au section 315 commun between
predecessor and successor auditor
in respons to a subpoena and
to a fund agenc or other specifi agenc in accord with the requir for
audit of entiti that receiv government financi assist
document the auditor consider of fraud
au section 316 conclud by requir that auditor document the follow
discuss among engag personnel regard the suscept of the entiti
financi statement to materi misstat due to fraud includ how and when the
discuss occur the team member who particip and the subject matter
discuss
procedur perform to obtain inform necessari to identifi and assess the risk of
materi misstat due to fraud
specif risk of materi misstat due to fraud that were identifi and the auditor
respons to those risk
the reason support the auditor conclus if the auditor ha not identifi
improp revenu recognit as a risk
the result of the procedur perform to further address the risk of manag
overrid of control
other condit and analyt relationship that caus the auditor to believ that
addit audit procedur or other respons were requir to address such risk
and
the natur of the commun about fraud made to manag those charg with
govern or other
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1235
pcaob audit standard no 5an audit of intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement
in mai 2007 the pcaob adopt audit standard no 5 an audit of intern control over
financi report that is integr with an audit of financi statement as a replac to
audit standard no 2 an audit of intern control over financi report perform in
conjunct with an audit of financi statement the previou standard govern audit of
intern control over financi report ico fr as mandat by the sarbanesoxlei act
the audit standard wa intend to improv the effici and effect of intern
control audit while also reduc unnecessari cost especi for smaller public
compani audit standard no 5 supersed audit standard no 2 for all audit of
icofr for fiscal year end on or after novemb 15 2007
section 404 of the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that manag must assess and report
on the effect of the compani icofr and the extern auditor must attest to
manag intern control assess audit standard no 5 lai out the
requir and provid guidanc for auditor who ar engag to perform an audit of
manag assess of the intern control that is integr with an audit of the
financi statement
follow is a descript summari of some of the requir laid out in the standard
practition in thi area should review audit standard no 5 in it entireti for more
detail inform a copi of the entir standard can be obtain from the pcaob
wwwpcaobusorg
perform an icofr audit
integr the intern control audit and the financi statement audit
audit standard no 5 state that although the object of financi statement audit and
audit of icofr ar not ident the two au dit should be integr with the auditor
plan and perform the work to achiev the object of both audit the auditor
should design and perform the test of control in a manner that yield suffici evid to
support both the auditor opinion at yearend and the auditor control risk assess for
the financi statement audit
plan the audit
when plan an integr audit of icofr and the financi statement the auditor must
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1236 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu whether the follow matter ar import to the financi statement and to
icofr and if so how thei w ill affect the audit procedur
knowledg of the compani icofr obtain dure other engag
inform about the compani industri includ financi report practic
econom condit law and regul and technolog chang
inform about the compani busi activ organ oper
characterist and capit structur
the exist and extent of ani recent chang in the compani it oper or it
icofr
the auditor preliminari judgment about materi risk and other factor relat
to the determin of materi weak
ani control defici previous commun to the audit committe board of
director or compani manag
legal or regulatori issu of which the compani is awar
the type and extent of evid relat to the effect of the compani
icofr
preliminari judgment about the effect of icofr
public inform about the compani relat to the evalu of the likelihood of
materi misstat in the compani financi statement and the effect of
the compani icofr
knowledg about the risk relat to the compani that were consid as part of
the auditor client accept and retent evalu and
the rel complex of the compani oper
assess the risk that materi weak exist in area of the compani icofr in order
to determin which account disclosur and assert ar signific and relev to
the audit which control to test and what evid is necessari for a given control in
form thi assess the complex of the organ busi unit or process
will plai an import role
focu the audit attent on those area of the compani icofr that ar assess to
have the highest risk that a materi weak exist the auditor should keep in mind
that the risk a compani icofr will fail to prevent or detect a misstat caus by
fraud usual is higher than the risk of failur to prevent or detect error
scale the audit appropri base on the wai the compani meet it control
object with attent given to the size and complex of the compani it busi
process and it busi unit
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1237
evalu the extent to which he will us the work of other to reduc hi own audit
work
us the same materi consider us in plan the audit of the compani
financi statement
us a topdown approach
in an audit of icofr auditor should implement a topdown approach accord to
audit standard no 5 a topdown approach begin at the financi statement level and
with the auditor understand of the over all risk to intern control over financi
report the auditor then focus on entitylevel control and work down to signific
account and disclosur and their relev assert paragraph 21 thi approach
focus auditor on those account disclosur and assert that ar most like to result
in materi misstat of the compani financi statement the standard make explicit
mention howev that thi approach describ the auditor thought process when
identifi risk and the control to test rather than the order in which the auditor should
perform the audit procedur
test control
the auditor should test both the design and oper effect of the compani
icofr in test the design effect of the control the auditor should determin
whether the control if oper as prescrib satisfi the compani control object and
can effect prevent or detect error or fraud that could result in materi misstat
thi test mai includ inquiri of staff member observ of oper and
examin of relev document
in test the oper effect of the control the auditor should determin whether
the control is oper as design as well as whether the person oper the control ha
the appropri author and compet to perform the control effect an auditor mai
test the oper of the control through inquiri of staff member observ of
oper examin of relev document and reperform of the control
fraud consider
as part of an audit of icofr the auditor must specif evalu 1 the control enact
to address the risk of manag overrid of other control and 2 whether the compani
intern control adequ address the risk of materi misstat due to fraud these
control includ
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1238 2011 fraud examin manual
control over signific unusu transact
control over journal entri and adjust made dure the end of the period
financi report process
control over relat parti transact
control relat to signific manag estim and
control that mitig the motiv for and pressur on manag to engag in
inappropri earn manag and financi statement fraud
further if the auditor discov ani defici in these control the auditor should address
the defici when respond to the risk of materi misstat dure the financi
statement audit
form an opinion on the effect of icofr
in form an opinion on the effect of the compani icofr the auditor must
evalu evid from all sourc thi includ not onli the auditor test of control but
also ani misstat detect dure the financi statement audit as well as ani identifi
control defici the auditor should also review ani report issu dure the year by the
intern audit function that pertain to icofr and should evalu ani defici
identifi therein
the auditor must also evalu manag assess of icofr includ in it annual
report file with the sec to ensur that all requir element in manag report ar
complet and properli present
at the close of the integr audit the auditor mai choos to issu a singl report
contain both an opinion on the compani financi statement and an opinion on
icofr or to issu a separ report for each opinion
statement of standard for attest engag no 15an examin of an
entiti intern control over financi report that is integr with an audit of it financi statement
nonpubl entiti mai wish to have auditor examin the intern control over financi
report as a matter of best practic or to compli with lender or regulatori requir
the audit standard board issu statement of standard for attest engag
ssae no 15 an examin of an entiti s intern control over financi report that is
integr with an audit of it financi statement as guidanc to auditor of nonpubl
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1239
organ when undertak thi type of engag alongsid an audit of the financi
statement ssae no 15 converg the standard for these engag for auditor of
nonpubl compani with those provid for auditor of public compani in pcaob
audit standard no 5 more inform about ssae no 15 is avail at
wwwaicpaorg
riskbas audit approach
the pcaob and the aicpa have issu standard that indic both organ
emphasi on us a riskbas approach to audit thi approach involv begin the
audit process with a risk assess and select the particular area of focu base upon
the level of risk to the organ in a riskbas approach auditor focu their resourc
on the area of highest concern as oppos to audit area on a rotat basi or other
method of select audit area thi work well for both intern and extern audit and
also work well at both the macro eg overal financi statement or the organ as a
whole and micro eg account payabl level
as the risk of fraud is signific in most organ it is normal a major factor in the
risk assess process focus audit resourc on the area with the highest risk of fraud
give auditor a significantli higher probabl of detect fraud ifwhen it occur
the standard go into effect for fiscal period begin on or after decemb 15 2010
the pcaob standard includ
as no 8 audit risk
as no 9 audit plan
as no 10 supervis of the audit engag
as no 11 consider of materi in plan and perform the audit
as no 12 identifi and assess risk of ma terial misstat
as no 13 the auditor respons to the risk of materi misstat
as no 14 evalu audit result
as no 15 audit evid
the aicpa standard includ
au section 326audit evid
au section 312materi in plan and perform an audit
au section 312evalu of misstat identifi dure an audit
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1240 2011 fraud examin manual
au section 311plan an audit
au section 314understand the entiti and it environ and assess the
risk of mat erial misstat
au section 318perform audit procedur in respons to assess risk and
evalu the audit evid obtain
the specif detail of the standard can be found at the pcaob websit at
wwwpcaobusorg and at the aicpa websit at wwwaicpaorg
pcaob audit standard no 3audit document
pcaob audit standard no 3 audit document provid gener guidanc on the
content and extent of the document public compani auditor should prepar when
conduct audit of financi statement audit of intern control over financi report
and review of interim financi inform
audit document includ all memoranda confirm correspond schedul
audit program and letter of represent prepar and obtain dure the audit
engag thi document should be prepar in suffici detail to provid a clear
understand of it purpos and sourc and the conclus reach addition
becaus the document serv as the foundat for the represent in the auditor
report the standard assert that it should
demonstr that the engag wa conduct in complianc with the standard of
the pcaob
support the basi for the auditor conclus concern all relev financi
statement assert and
demonstr that the underli account record agre to or reconcil with the
financi statement
to meet these requir the standard state that audit document should contain
suffici inform to enabl an experienc auditor have no previou connect with
the engag
to understand the natur time extent and result of the procedur perform
evid obtain and conclus reach and
to determin who perform the work and the date such work wa complet as well as
the person who review the work and the date of such review
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1241
the standard also requir auditor to retain audit document for seven year from the
date the auditor report is releas or if no report is issu from the date the audit work is
substanti complet
the full text of the audit standard which also includ guidanc about document of
specif matter and subsequ chang to audit document can be found on the
pcaob websit wwwpcaobusorg
au section 339audit document sourc sa no 103
the asb counterpart to pcaob audit standard no 3 appear in the form of sa no
103 audit document sa no 103 supersed sa no 96 audit document as the
guidanc on audit document that appli to auditor of nonpubl entiti the
standard is codifi in au section 339
in develop au section 339 the asb consid the provis of pcaob audit
standard no 3 consequ the requir of the two standard ar similar in mani
respect specif au section 339 doe the follow
chang the date of the auditor report from the final dai of fieldwork to the date on or
after which the auditor obtain suffici evid to support the audit opinion
requir the audit document to be suffici such that an experienc auditor with
no previou connect to the audit could understand the work perform the evid
obtain and the conclus reach
requir document of departur from gener accept audit standard along
with the justif and altern procedur us
provid that oral explan mai be us to clarifi or explain audit document
but alon ar insuffici support for audit work
requir specif document of matter that the auditor identifi as contradictori or
inconsist with the final audit conclus as well as how the auditor address such
find
instruct the auditor to assembl all of the audit document into the audit file within
60 dai follow the audit report releas date
state that after 60 dai follow the audit report releas date workpap mai not be
delet and all addit must be note as such and
specifi a minimum retent period for audit document of five year from the
report releas date
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1242 2011 fraud examin manual
