2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/External Auditors/Performing an ICOFR Audit


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Manager's and Auditor's Responsibilities


:


Performing an ICOFR Audit 
INTEGRATING THE INTERNAL CONTROL AUDIT AND THE FINANCIAL STATEMENT AUDIT 
Auditing Standard No. 5 states that although the objectives of financial statement audits and 
audits of ICOFR are not identical, the two au dits should be integrated, with the auditor 
planning and performing the work to achieve the objectives of both audits. The auditor 
should design and perform the tests of controls in a manner that yields sufficient evidence to 
support both the auditor’s opinion at year-end and the auditor’s control risk assessment for 
the financial statement audit. 
 
PLANNING THE AUDIT 
When planning an integrated audit of ICOFR and the financial statements, the auditor must: 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.236                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Evaluate whether the following matters are important to the financial statements and to 
ICOFR and, if so, how they w ill affect the audit procedures: 
? Knowledge of the company’s ICOFR obtained during other engagements; 
? Information about the company’s industry, including financial reporting practices, 
economic conditions, laws and regulations, and technological changes;  
? Information about the company’s business activities, organization, operating 
characteristics, and capital structure;  
? The existence and extent of any recent changes in the company, its operations, or its 
ICOFR;  
? The auditor’s preliminary judgments about materiality, risk, and other factors relating 
to the determination of material weaknesses;  
? Any control deficiencies previously communicated to the audit committee, board of 
directors, or company management;  
? Legal or regulatory issues of which the company is aware;  
? The type and extent of evidence related to the effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR; 
? Preliminary judgments about the effectiveness of ICOFR;  
? Public information about the company related to the evaluation of the likelihood of 
material misstatements in the company’s financial statements and the effectiveness of 
the company’s ICOFR; 
? Knowledge about the risks related to the company that were considered as part of 
the auditor’s client acceptance and retention evaluation; and 
? The relative complexity of the company’s operations. 
• Assess the risk that material weaknesses exist in areas of the company’s ICOFR in order 
to determine which accounts, disclosures, and assertions are significant and relevant to 
the audit, which controls to test, and what evidence is necessary for a given control. In 
forming this assessment, the complexity of the organization, business unit, or process 
will play an important role. 
• Focus the audit attention on those areas of the company’s ICOFR that are assessed to 
have the highest risk that a material weakness exists. The auditor should keep in mind 
that the risk a company’s ICOFR will fail to  prevent or detect a misstatement caused by 
fraud usually is higher than the risk of failure to prevent or detect errors. 
• Scale the audit appropriately based on the ways the company meets its control 
objectives, with attention given to the size and complexity of the company, its business 
processes, and its business units.  
Financial Transactions  Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.237 
• Evaluate the extent to which he will use the work of others to reduce his own audit 
work. 
• Use the same materiality considerations used in planning the audit of the company’s 
financial statements. 
 
USING A TOP-DOWN APPROACH 
In an audit of ICOFR, auditors should implement a top-down approach. According to 
Auditing Standard No. 5, a top-down approach “begins at the financial statement level and 
with the auditor’s understanding of the over all risks to internal control over financial 
reporting. The auditor then focuses on entity-level controls and works down to significant 
accounts and disclosures and their relevant assertions.” (Paragraph 21) This approach 
focuses auditors on those accounts, disclosures, and assertions that are most likely to result 
in material misstatement of the company’s financial statements. The standard makes explicit 
mention, however, that this approach describes the auditor’s thought process when 
identifying risks and the controls to test, rather than the order in which the auditor should 
perform the audit procedures.  
 
TESTING CONTROLS 
The auditor should test both the design and operating effectiveness of the company’s 
ICOFR. In testing the design effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine 
whether the controls, if operated as prescribed, satisfy the company’s control objectives and 
can effectively prevent or detect errors or fraud that could result in material misstatements. 
This testing may include inquiry of staff members, observation of operations, and 
examination of relevant documentation. 
 
In testing the operating effectiveness of the controls, the auditor should determine whether 
the control is operating as designed, as well as whether the person operating the control has 
the appropriate authority and competence to perform the control effectively. An auditor may 
test the operations of the controls through inquiry of staff members, observation of 
operations, examination of relevant documentation, and re-performance of the control. 
 



:


perform an icofr audit
integr the intern control audit and the financi statement audit
audit standard no 5 state that although the object of financi statement audit and
audit of icofr ar not ident the two au dit should be integr with the auditor
plan and perform the work to achiev the object of both audit the auditor
should design and perform the test of control in a manner that yield suffici evid to
support both the auditor opinion at yearend and the auditor control risk assess for
the financi statement audit
plan the audit
when plan an integr audit of icofr and the financi statement the auditor must
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1236 2011 fraud examin manual
evalu whether the follow matter ar import to the financi statement and to
icofr and if so how thei w ill affect the audit procedur
knowledg of the compani icofr obtain dure other engag
inform about the compani industri includ financi report practic
econom condit law and regul and technolog chang
inform about the compani busi activ organ oper
characterist and capit structur
the exist and extent of ani recent chang in the compani it oper or it
icofr
the auditor preliminari judgment about materi risk and other factor relat
to the determin of materi weak
ani control defici previous commun to the audit committe board of
director or compani manag
legal or regulatori issu of which the compani is awar
the type and extent of evid relat to the effect of the compani
icofr
preliminari judgment about the effect of icofr
public inform about the compani relat to the evalu of the likelihood of
materi misstat in the compani financi statement and the effect of
the compani icofr
knowledg about the risk relat to the compani that were consid as part of
the auditor client accept and retent evalu and
the rel complex of the compani oper
assess the risk that materi weak exist in area of the compani icofr in order
to determin which account disclosur and assert ar signific and relev to
the audit which control to test and what evid is necessari for a given control in
form thi assess the complex of the organ busi unit or process
will plai an import role
focu the audit attent on those area of the compani icofr that ar assess to
have the highest risk that a materi weak exist the auditor should keep in mind
that the risk a compani icofr will fail to prevent or detect a misstat caus by
fraud usual is higher than the risk of failur to prevent or detect error
scale the audit appropri base on the wai the compani meet it control
object with attent given to the size and complex of the compani it busi
process and it busi unit
financi transact manag and auditor respons
2011 fraud examin manual 1237
evalu the extent to which he will us the work of other to reduc hi own audit
work
us the same materi consider us in plan the audit of the compani
financi statement
us a topdown approach
in an audit of icofr auditor should implement a topdown approach accord to
audit standard no 5 a topdown approach begin at the financi statement level and
with the auditor understand of the over all risk to intern control over financi
report the auditor then focus on entitylevel control and work down to signific
account and disclosur and their relev assert paragraph 21 thi approach
focus auditor on those account disclosur and assert that ar most like to result
in materi misstat of the compani financi statement the standard make explicit
mention howev that thi approach describ the auditor thought process when
identifi risk and the control to test rather than the order in which the auditor should
perform the audit procedur
test control
the auditor should test both the design and oper effect of the compani
icofr in test the design effect of the control the auditor should determin
whether the control if oper as prescrib satisfi the compani control object and
can effect prevent or detect error or fraud that could result in materi misstat
thi test mai includ inquiri of staff member observ of oper and
examin of relev document
in test the oper effect of the control the auditor should determin whether
the control is oper as design as well as whether the person oper the control ha
the appropri author and compet to perform the control effect an auditor mai
test the oper of the control through inquiri of staff member observ of
oper examin of relev document and reperform of the control
