2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE 
 
Definition of Evidence 
Black’s Law Dictionary defines evidence as: 
 
Anything perceivable by the five senses, and any proof such as testimony of witnesses, records, 
documents, facts, data, or tangible objects legally presented at trial to prove a contention and 
induce a belief in the minds of a jury. 
 
Evidence refers to an intricate rule, developed and refined over hundreds of years, that is 
designed to ensure that only relevant and probative evidence is admitted in court proceedings, 
and that irrelevant, unreliable, and prejudicial evidence is excluded so that cases can be fairly 
and expeditiously decided. 
 
Every aspect of trying a case — from filing the complaint through discovery, into the 
presentation of witnesses and exhibits — is affected by rules of evidence. This body of law 
covers not just what counts as evidence, but how that evidence is gathered, handled, and 
presented.  
 
Evidence in federal courts is governed by the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE). These rules 
set out what can and cannot be introduced during a dispute. In the late 1960s, a U.S. Supreme 
Court panel began codifying centuries of common law into the FRE. What had previously 
been a far-flung set of precedents, buried in local jurisdictions and lengthy appeals decisions, 
was gathered into a singular body of information. Congress passed the Uniform Code of 
Evidence in 1974 as Public Law No. 93-595. State and local courts often have some 
specialized rules of evidence, but these rules are themselves based on federal guidelines.  
 
The rules of evidence are complex, and counsel should be contacted if an important question 
of evidence arises. This part focuses on the more important rules and those of greatest 
interest to fraud examiners.  
 
 
Three Basic Forms of Evidence 
Evidence is anything perceptible by the five senses, which is invoked in the process of 
arguing a case. Documents, spoken recollections, data of various sorts, and physical objects 
are all potentially evidence. Evidence is simply anything that relates to the proving or 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.702  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
disproving of a fact or consequence. With the known universe available for court inspection, 
legal authorities have narrowed the field by setting up categories to evaluate evidentiary 
significance.  
 
There are three basic forms, as distinguished from types, of evidence: testimonial, real, and 
demonstrative. Testimony refers to the oral statements made by witnesses under oath. In 
general, there are two types of testimonial witnesses: lay witnesses and expert witnesses. A lay  
(or fact) witness is a non-expert witness who must testify from personal knowledge about a 
matter at issue. An expert witness is a person who, by reason of education, training, skill, or 
experience, is qualified to render an opinion or otherwise testify in areas relevant to resolution 
of a legal dispute. 
 
Real evidence describes physical objects that played a part in the issues being litigated. The term 
includes both documentary evidence — such as canceled checks, invoices, ledgers, and 
letters — as well as other types of physical evidence.  Therefore, a typewriter or printer in a case 
involving questioned documents is clearly real evidence, as is a tape recording since members 
of the court can experience the sounds firsthand.  
 
Demonstrative evidence is a tangible item that illustrates some material proposition (e.g., a map, a 
chart, or a summary). It differs from real evidence in that demonstrative evidence was not 
part of the underlying event; it was created specifically for the trial. Its purpose is to provide a 
visual aid for the jury. Nonetheless, it is evidence and can be considered by the jury in 
reaching a verdict. 
 
 
Direct Versus Circumstantial Evidence 
There are two basic types of admissible evidence:  direct evidence and circumstantial evidence. 
Direct evidence includes testimony that tends to prove or disprove a fact in issue directly, such 
as eyewitness testimony or a confession. Circumstantial evidence is evidence that tends to prove 
or disprove facts in issue indirectly, by inference. Many fraud cases are proved entirely by 
circumstantial evidence, or by a combination of circumstantial and direct evidence, but 
seldom by direct evidence alone. The most difficult element to prove in many fraud cases —
fraudulent intent — is usually proved circumstantially, and necessarily so, because direct proof 
of the defendant’s state of mind, absent a confession or the testimony of a co-conspirator, is 
impossible. 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.703 
In a circumstantial case, the court may instruct the jury that the prosecution must exclude all 
inferences from the facts other than its determination of guilt. Even if no such instruction is 
given, the Certified Fraud Examiner should apply the same standard in preparing a 
circumstantial case. 
 
 
Admissibility of Evidence 
Questions involving the admissibility of evidence occur when one party objects to another 
party’s offer of evidence. If a judge sustains  an objection, the evidence is not admitted. If, 
however, the judge overrules the objection, the evidence is admitted and can be considered by 
the fact finder.  
 
The admissibility of evidence depends on a wide variety of factors — and, in large part, on the 
discretion of the trial judge. 
 
Relevance 
Although the admissibility of evidence depends on a number of factors, the most important 
factor is relevance. The general rule of evidence provides that all relevant evidence is 
admissible. Rule 401 of the Federal Rules of Evidence defines relevant evidence  as evidence 
“having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the 
evidence.” In other words, evidence is relevant if it tends to make some fact in issue more or 
less likely than it would be without the evidence. The facts in issue, of course, vary according 
to the case, but generally can be said to be those that tend to prove the essential elements of 
the offense or claim, as well as related matters such as motive, opportunity, identity of the 
parties, and credibility. 
 
Whether a particular piece of evidence is relevant or not depends on what the evidence is 
offered to prove. An item of evidence might be relevant and admissible if offered to prove 
one thing, but not relevant and inadmissible if offered to prove something else. For example, 
under Rule 404(b) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts 
committed by the defendant would not be admissible if offered to prove that the defendant is 
generally a bad person, and therefore is likely to have committed the crime with which he is 
charged. However, evidence would be admissible if offered to prove motive, intent, identity, 
absence of mistake, or modus operandi, if such factors are at issue. If evidence of other 
wrongs or acts is admitted, the judge will instruct the jury that they may consider the evidence 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.704  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
only as it relates to the narrow issue for which it was admitted, and may not consider it for 
any other purpose.  
 
That evidence is relevant does not, however, automatically mean that it will be admitted. 
Under Rule 403 of the Federal Rules of Evidence, relevant evidence still might be excluded if 
it is unduly prejudicial, threatens to confuse or mislead the jury, threatens to cause 
unnecessary delay or waste of time, or is merely cumulative. Relevant evidence also might be 
excluded if it is subject to certain privileges as noted below. Thus, evidence of drug addiction 
technically might be relevant to prove motive for embezzlement or fraud, but the judge still 
might exclude the evidence if he believes that its probative value is outweighed by the danger 
of prejudice to the defendant. Evidence of other crimes and acts, as discussed above, that are 
otherwise relevant also might be excluded for the same reason. 
 
 
Special Rules Concerning Some Types of Circumstantial Evidence 
Special rules govern certain types of evidence that have been found over the years to be so 
misleading and prejudicial that they have been categorically excluded. Such evidence is always 
excluded unless an exception applies. 
 
Character Evidence 
In civil and criminal trials, there is strong policy against character evidence (FRE 404). 
Character evidence (sometimes called propensity evidence) is testimony or exhibits that 
purport to establish a “trait of character” or propensity to behave in a particular way, such as 
carefulness, honesty, violence, or cowardice. There are some good reasons to leave character  
out of the discussion whenever possible, such as the subjective nature of the description —
one person’s “gruff” is another viewer’s “aggressive.”  
 
Additionally, character is not an absolute indicator of behavior. That is, it is pretty common 
to remark how “out of character” somebody’s actions were in a given situation. So there is 
always a chance someone was acting out of character, making the behavioral propensity (if 
there was one) useless in the legal exchange. 
 
Finally, testimony about character has a reckless potential to be mistakenly founded, misled, 
or concocted. It is always possible to “misjudge” someone, especially if we only know the 
person in limited circumstances like work or a social club. Moreover, it is exceedingly easy to 
fabricate incidents about character and, for shrewd talkers, to manipulate perceptions of 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.705 
personality. In a fraud case, it must be shown that the defendant committed the act in 
question. There is too great a danger of prejudicing the jury if you allow testimony about the 
defendant just being a bad person. Whether he is a bad person or not ought to have no 
bearing on whether or not he committed the act in question. 
 
In general, character evidence is not admissible. In civil cases, character evidence is rarely 
admissible, and the general rule in criminal cases provides that evidence of a defendant’s bad 
character is not admissible at trial. For example, the government cannot offer evidence of a 
defendant’s prior crimes or other bad acts to prove the defendant’s bad character.  
 
There are, however, some instances where character evidence may be admitted in criminal 
trials. Some of the exceptions for use of character evidence in criminal cases include:  
• The accused may offer evidence of his good character, in which case the prosecution may 
introduce evidence of the accused’s bad character. 
• Character evidence may be admissible to reflect on the credibility of a witness. 
 
Under Rule 404(b) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or 
acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person. In other words, such evidence is not 
admissible to prove that the defendant is generally a bad person, and therefore is likely to 
have committed the crime with which he is charged. For example, if a defendant is charged 
with stealing money from his employer’s safe, the prosecution would not be permitted to 
offer evidence that the defendant had previously stolen money from another employer to 
show the defendant had a propensity to steal.  
 
However, there are some uses of character evidence that may be admissible because they are 
offered for a purpose other than showing character. Some of the exceptions for use of 
character evidence in criminal cases include: 
• To show the accused’s knowledge, intent, or motive for the crime 
• To prove the existence of a larger plan of which the charged crime is a part 
• To show the accused’s preparation to commit the charged crime 
• To show the accused’s ability and means of committing the crime (possession of a 
weapon, tool, or skill used in the commission of the act) 
• To show the accused’s opportunity to commit the crime 
• Threats or expressions of ill will by the accused 
• To link the accused to physical evidence at the scene 
• The suspect’s conduct and comments during arrest 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.706  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Attempts to conceal identity 
• Attempts to destroy evidence 
• Valid confessions 
 
Opinion Testimony 
During trial, most evidence is introduced through the testimony of witnesses. Evidence on 
which the jury can make factual determinations must be introduced in the form of admissible 
testimony or documentary evidence by law or fact (i.e., non-expert) witnesses.  
 
The rules of evidence, however, limit the testimony of lay witnesses. Lay witnesses are only 
allowed to testify about what they have actually experienced firsthand and their factual 
observations (FRE 701). In general, witnesses provide a report on what they know and must 
keep their opinions and conclusions to themselves.  
 
Despite the general rule, there are ways to get a non-expert witness’s opinion into the record. 
A lay witnesses may give opinions if the statement is “rationally based” on their own 
perceptions, and if the opinion is helpful to a clear understanding of their testimony or the 
determination of a fact.   
 
Opinions are admissible if they pass a three-part test:  
• The witness must have direct personal knowledge of the facts to which the opinion 
pertains.  
• The opinion must be of the common, everyday sort (i.e., does not involve specialized 
knowledge or tests). 
• The opinion is not part of a legal judgment, reserved for the jury or judge to decide. 
 
Opinions from ordinary witnesses must be based on personal experience and have some 
bearing on the facts (as opposed to the judgment) of the case. This distinction is further refined 
in situations involving hearsay and personal judgment (discussed below).  
 
In contrast to lay witnesses, expert witnesses are exempt from the opinion rule because 
experts are hired to render a professional opinion. They possess education, training, skill, or 
experience in drawing conclusions from certain types of data or information that lay 
witnesses do not possess. Expert testimony, however, may be excluded if it embraces a legal 
conclusion. Therefore, expert opinions addressing guilt or innocence will likely be excluded in 
criminal cases.  
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.707 
Exhibits 
Exhibits are the tangible objects presented as evidence. Therefore, both real evidence and 
demonstrative evidence are entered into the record as exhibits. This includes documents such 
as contracts, letters, and receipts, as well as photographs, X-rays, baseball bats, knives, 
fountain pens and computer files. In short, anything that is not testimony is an exhibit. 
Testimony is what people say. Exhibits are the “props.” 
 
Authenticating Typical Exhibits 
At the most basic level, evidence must be established as reliable or authentic. Thus, evidence, 
other than testimonial evidence, must be properly authenticated; that is, the party offering the 
evidence must produce some evidence to show it is, in fact, what the party says it is. If a piece 
of real evidence cannot be authenticated, the evidence will not be admitted even if it is plainly 
relevant.  
 
For proper authentication, the party offering the evidence must produce some evidence (e.g., 
testimony from a person with first-hand knowledge) to show it is, in fact, what the party says 
it is and that it has remained in the same condition from the moment it was seized until it is 
used in court. 
 
Similar to the authentication requirement for tangible evidence, there is a similar sort of 
“credibility test” for witnesses. If testimony is to become admissible evidence, the witness 
must demonstrate that the knowledge being communicated is believable and gained by 
personal experience.  
 
Below are some of the issues you will encounter in proving to the judge that a particular 
exhibit is authentic. 
 
Demonstrative Evidence 
Again, demonstrative evidence refers to a tangible item that illustrates some material proposition. 
It differs from real evidence in that demonstrative evidence is not part of the underlying 
event; it is created specifically for the trial. Its purpose is to provide a visual aid for the jury. 
 
An exhibit used for purely “illustrative purposes” is a type of demonstrative evidence. 
Demonstrative evidence includes charts, graphs, and summaries that help to simplify 
complicated evidence for the jury. In complex fraud cases, such evidence is extremely useful, 
but it must be simple and easy to understand.   
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.708  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Demonstrative evidence is admissible if the court decides that it presents a fair and balanced 
summary or picture of the evidence and is not unduly prejudicial, and if offered for its truth 
value (and not just to illustrate a point), demonstrative evidence must be authenticated to 
show that the evidence is in fact what it is claimed to be.  
 
Also, demonstrative evidence must be made available to the other party, and the court may 
order that the information used to create the exhibit be produced in court. 
 
Diagrams 
A diagram  is a schematic or technical drawing that is used to help make something easier to 
understand. A diagram (on paper or some other tangible display) can be admitted as evidence 
with no more foundation than the assent of a witness: “Is this a fair representation of the 
suite where you work?” It does not have to be true to scale or particularly detailed. A diagram 
can be prepared before trial, during trial, or prepped outside the court and finished during 
questioning. If a party objects to the admission of a diagram, the offering party may need to 
establish that it is reliable. Diagrams can be used in tandem with photos or other 
representational evidence, or as assistance in demonstrations to the jury. 
 
Writings 
In general, authentication of a writing consists of establishing who authored the document. 
Depending on the document and situation, this is done in one of several ways: (1) the author 
testifies and claims authorship; (2) a witness testifies to seeing the author write the document; 
(3) with handwritten letters, a witness verifies the author’s penmanship; (4) with typed or 
machine-written documents, the witness verifies the author’s signature; (5) a witness testifies 
that the contents of the document point decisively to the author. These and many other 
document issues may require the participation of a questioned documents expert.  
 
Business Records and Other Documents 
Business records can encompass a broad range of documents, from all sorts of organizations, 
including corporations, small businesses, nonprofit operations, and community groups. Like 
other evidence, a party offering business records must provide testimony that the exhibit is 
the business record in question. For proper authentication, the party offering the evidence 
should be able to establish the following two things: 
• The content of the document is complete and unaltered 
• The document originated from the named place of origination 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.709 
Certain documents, such as business records, are self-authenticating and may be received into 
evidence without independent proof of authenticity. Under the Federal Rules of Evidence, 
business records are self-authenticating if a custodian or other qualified person certifies that 
the records meet the following requirements:  
• The records were prepared reasonably near the time of the event it describes. 
• The records were made by, or based on information transmitted from, a person with 
knowledge 
• The document was prepared as a usual part of doing business (i.e., it was not prepared 
specifically for litigation). 
 
Business records are also vulnerable to hearsay objections. Put differently, offering the 
contents of business records to establish the truth of their contents can constitute hearsay. 
Thus, such materials can be barred as unreliable out-of-court statements unless a trustworthy 
foundation can be established. If, however, there is certification that complies with the self-authenticating 
rules listed above, the records will not only be self-authenticating, but the 
contents of the records will be admissible to the prove the truth of the contents as an 
exception to the rule against hearsay.  
 
Government Documents 
The requirements for government documents are the same as for other business records. The 
distinction between government and business records arose because of narrow interpretations 
of the law that separated nonprofit from for-profit enterprises. Today, most records, 
regardless of origin, are called business records. 
 
Phone Records 
To be admitted into evidence, phone records  must meet the business records authentication test. 
However, investigators must also be aware of the federal Telephone Records and Privacy 
Protection Act of 2006 (TRPPA), which criminalizes the practice of obtaining and attempting 
to obtain confidential phone record information through pretexting (gaining access through 
the use of false statements) unless it is otherwise permitted by law. Violations of the Act are 
criminal, and if convicted, a violator faces up to 10 years in prison and up to $100,000 in 
fines.  
 
Electronically Stored Information 
Currently, there is still much controversy regarding how to authenticate electronically stored 
information (ESI). The U.S. Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.710  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Property Section has developed a manual for electronic search and seizure, which judges have 
used as a guide as to whether digital evidence has been properly seized. If digital evidence 
needs to be seized, it is vital that examiners engage the services of a trained computer forensic 
technician. A properly trained technician should know the procedures to follow to ensure that 
the files can be authenticated. 
 
Generally, to be admissible, ESI evidence must meet the same authentication standards as 
hard copy documents (i.e., to show that the item is what the proponent claims); however, 
courts have recognized that the authentication of ESI evidence may require greater scrutiny 
because ESI can easily be altered after creation. Thus, to prove that a particular electronic 
document is authentic, those offering the evidence must demonstrate that the original 
document was not modified after its creation.  
 
Rule 901 of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides a non-exclusive, explicative list of 
methods by which evidence can be authenticated, and some of the methods may be used to 
authenticate ESI. Rule 901(b)(1) allows authentication through testimony of a witness with 
knowledge that a matter is what it is claimed to be. Additionally, Rule 901(b)(3) allows for 
authentication by comparison to already authenticated evidence by an expert witness or the 
trier of fact. Similarly, Rule 901(b)(4) allows authentication by circumstantial evidence of 
distinctive characteristics (e.g., hash values or metadata).  
 
Furthermore, under Rule 902, some documents are self-authenticating, which means that they 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. For ESI purposes, 
the three most relevant categories of self-authenticating documents are official publications, 
trade inscriptions, and certified copies of business records.  
 
In addition, different forms of ESI evidence may require different authentication approaches. 
Therefore, it is helpful to examine a few common types.  
 
E-MAIL 
Unlike traditional business letters written on formal letterhead, e-mails are more prone to 
authenticity issues and may be more difficult to properly authenticate. For example, the judge 
in Lorraine v. Markel, 241 F.R.D. 534 (D. Md. 2007) refused to allow either party to offer e-mails
of an arbitration negotiation as evidence, finding that neither party authenticated the e-mails 
by simply attaching them to their motions as exhibits. 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.711 
E-mail authenticity issues usually arise because e-mail systems are unreliable and inherently 
unsecure, making e-mails susceptible to alteration. Moreover, e-mails can lack reliability 
because the identities of senders can be corrupted through unauthorized access and use.  
 
Even so, there are numerous ways e-mail can be authenticated, including:  
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., a witness testifies that he recognizes a copy of an 
e-mail that he received or drafted) 
• Comparison with authenticated examples (e.g., if one e-mail has been properly 
authenticated, a second e-mail could by authenticated by comparing it with the first) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., the presence of a party’s name 
and e-mail address or the presence of metadata) 
• Trade inscriptions purporting to have been affixed in the course of business and 
indicating ownership, control, or origin (e.g., an automatic business signature at the end of 
the e-mail) 
• Certified copies of business records (e.g., e-mail is accompanied by a written certification 
by its custodian) 
 
TEXT AND INSTANT MESSAGES 
As the use of text and instant messages continues to grow, parties are offering this ESI as 
evidence in an increasing number of cases. However, given the nature of this type of 
evidence, parties often encounter foundational issues when authenticating text and instant 
messages. Notwithstanding the novel technology involved, these types of ESI can be 
admissible when the proponent offers direct or circumstantial evidence as to its authenticity. 
The most likely authenticate chat room and text messages are: 
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., a witness testifies that he recognizes a copy 
messages that he received or drafted) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., the use of the defendant’s name 
in the text messages and the subject matter of the messages) 
 
COMPUTER RECORDS  
Courts typically accept computer files and documents as evidence. In fact, courts themselves 
are using more electronic resources because many aspects of litigation can now be conducted 
electronically. 
 
Traditionally, to be admitted as evidence, computerized records need only meet the usual 
business-records authentication, which requires that the computerized records be 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.712  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
accompanied by certification by a qualified person stating that (1) the records were prepared 
reasonably near the time of the event they describe, (2) the records were prepared as a usual 
part of doing business, and (3) the organization’s way of keeping records is demonstrably 
reliable.  
 
The required supporting material to authenticate computer records will include information 
on the computing machine used, any software, and the record-keeping process. A business 
record, electronic or otherwise, is legal as long as it’s kept in the normal course of business. 
When there are clear routines for compiling information, admitting the record into court will 
be routine.  
 
Recently, however, courts have recognized that authentication of computerized records may 
require greater scrutiny because, unlike other ESI evidence, the primary authentication issue 
regarding computerized records is what has, or may have, happened to the record in the time 
between when it was entered in the files and the time of trial. Based upon this view, the most 
likely methods of authenticating computerized records are: 
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., an authenticating witness attests to the process by 
which the computerized records are created, acquired, maintained, and preserved) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., a person’s business habit is 
consistent with the document) 
• Certified copies of business records (e.g., computerized records are accompanied by 
custodian’s written certification)  
 
Website Data 
A growing number of people are using social networking sites like LinkedIn, Facebook, 
MySpace, and Twitter, and, as a result, the legal use of information obtained from social 
media sites has increased. Many users don’t give much thought to what they post online. And 
because most of the information that gets posted online becomes a permanent record 
somewhere, investigators, attorneys, and employers are increasingly mining these sites for 
information, photos, and videos that can become evidence in civil and criminal litigation. 
 
As with all evidence, the proponent of social media evidence must be prepared to establish 
that the evidence is authentic. The standard for authenticating evidence from social media 
sites is no different than for any other types of evidence. That is, there must be sufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the evidence is what the proponent claims.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.713 
In some courts, authenticity can be established by the testimony of a witness. Like any other 
demonstrative exhibit, parties can authenticate a website with the testimony of a witness who 
verifies that the exhibit at issue accurately reflects what he observed after logging on to the 
site and reviewing what was there.  
 
Alternately, the proponent may be able authenticate a website by providing testimony from 
the webmaster or someone with personal knowlege to show that the data was posted by the 
person to whom the information is attributed. For example, if website data is attributated to 
the website owner, the webmaster can testify that a particular file or content was entered on a 
site at a specific time. This is similar to authenticating writings by showing that the item was 
written by the person to whom it is attributed. But because Facebook, MySpace, and Twitter-type
evidence typically comes from third parties, who sometimes uses pseudonyms, 
attributing this type of evidence to a certain person can be challenging.  
 
Finally, some website data may be self-authenticated. To review, self-authenticating evidence 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. The types of 
website evidence that may fall under this category include government material that appears 
on official government websites or business-related material that appears on an organization’s 
website. 
 
Photographs 
Concerning photographs, it is necessary to establish their fidelity to the object they claim to 
represent. This means that the offering party must prove that the picture is unaltered and 
shows what the proponent claims it shows. Generally it is enough to have a witness familiar 
with the object or space in a photo to corroborate it (e.g., “Yes, that’s the hallway running 
between our two buildings.”). The matter gets more complicated when a photo is 
controversial. This can require technical specifications for proper foundation. In the most 
famous trial since Sam Sheppard, O.J. Simpson’s lawyers challenged a photo of the defendant 
wearing Bruno Mali shoes as “doctored.” Both sides introduced experts to discuss whether 
the photo had been altered, what sort of camera, lens, and environmental conditions were 
involved, etc. The same issues can arise with photos in any trial.   
 
In some unusual situations, a photo may reveal information that no witness can corroborate. 
There has been at least one instance where the background of a photo showed a stabbing that 
took place in a crowd. No one, not even the photographer, saw the stabbing at the time. In 
unusual situations where a photo communicates evidence not substantiated elsewhere, the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.714  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation of the photograph will need more strength — including technical details on the 
camera, the film, who took the shot, why and where, etc.  
 
The exceptions make photos seem more legally fraught than they are. They usually are 
admitted with little objection. Photos do not even have to be contemporary with the crime or 
grievance to which they pertain. If a photograph is established as accurate in its portrayal, it 
can be shot after the original act.  
 
General Points 
Either side can enter exhibits into the record, given the proper foundation. Once admitted, 
the evidence is available for use by either side. It does not matter who entered the item into 
evidence; either side can use it during questioning.  
 
It also does not matter when exhibits are admitted. They may be introduced into evidence 
during direct examination: opposing counsel is allowed to inspect the exhibit and then the 
witness confirms the exhibit, which has been marked Exhibit A (or Exhibit 1). Some courts 
use letters for exhibits while some court use numbers. Usually the exhibit is identified by 
which side enters it (e.g., Plaintiff’s Exhibit 1.)  
 
When everyone agrees, exhibits can be directly entered into the record, without foundational 
review, by stipulation — both parties sign the stipulation form, describing and acknowledging 
the exhibit. 
 
The “Best Evidence” Rule 
Sometimes testimony may be rejected because of the “best evidence” rule, which prohibits a 
party from testifying about the contents of a document without producing the document 
itself. This rule, however, only applies when an original or copy is being used to prove the 
contents of a writing.  
 
Also known as the “original writing” rule, the best evidence rule provides that when a witness 
testifies about the contents of a document, at least a fair copy of the original must be available 
for inspection. If there is no original, a copy of the proven authentic document will do, but 
the court must be assured that the copies are reliable and accurate. If the document is lost —
no original, no copies — the judge will have to be convinced there is good reason to forgo the 
exhibit and admit the testimony.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.715 
Fraud examiners can use copies in preparing their case reports, but at trial, the original must 
be produced if it is available. Thus, when public records are involved in a fraud examination, 
examiners should always obtain certified copies. 
 
With regard to computerized data, the best evidence rule does not require the party offering 
ESI as evidence to bring the original custodian’s computer, monitor, and other equipment to 
display the information at trial. Rather, Rule 1001(3) provides that an original writing includes 
any printout or other “output readable by sight, shown to reflect the data accurately.” Thus, 
hard-copy printouts of documents, e-mail, and other ESI qualify as originals under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence.  
 
Objections to Exhibits 
Just because an exhibit is authenticated does not mean it is automatically admitted. If the 
evidence violates some other rule of evidence — such as the rules against hearsay, prejudice, or 
relevance — the exhibit will likely be barred. 
 
If an objection is made, the admissibility of some exhibits require separate hearings for the 
judge to consider the issue. Fraud trials can be bogged down with lengthy challenges to the 
sometimes mountainous stacks of documents offered as evidence. In deciding on the 
admissibility of exhibits, judges can decide to admit the material just as it is, admit it with 
alterations (such as expurgating parts of a text or obscuring certain images), or deny the 
admission altogether. 
 
Chain of Custody 
If evidence is subject to change over time, or is susceptible to alteration, the offering party 
may need to establish that the evidence has not been altered or changed from the time it was 
collected through its production in court. This is done by establishing a chain of custody. The 
chain of custody is both a process and a document that memorializes (1) who has had possession 
of an object, and (2) what they have done with it; it is simply a means of establishing that 
there has not been a material change or alteration to a piece of evidence. 
 
Chain of custody issues are paramount issues in any case, affecting every piece of physical 
evidence. When parties present evidence to a court, they must be ready to show that the item 
they are offering is the same item that was seized. When that evidence is not distinctive but 
fungible (e.g., bags of cash, bullet shell casings, or electronic data), the process or system 
which authenticates the item is to maintain a chain of custody. 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.716  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, establishing the chain of custody consists of documenting each person who had 
control or custody of the evidence; how and when it was received; how it was maintained or 
stored while in each person’s possession; what changes, if any, it underwent in that person’s 
custody; and how it left that person’s custody.  The end result is a chain of testimony that 
accounts for the movement and location of physical evidence from the time it is obtained to 
the time it is proffered at trial. The goal is to show that access to the evidence was limited to 
those who testified in the chain of custody and thereby demonstrate that the evidence has not 
been materially altered. 
 
Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred with a set of records) or 
outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was not properly sealed), can 
dishevel a case but not wreck it outright. Courts have found in some cases that even though 
there have been mistakes in the chain of custody, the mistake affects the “weight,” though 
not the “admissibility,” of evidence. That is to say, the evidence will still be allowed into the 
record, but it is accompanied by a forthright description of any improprieties that have 
occurred in the chain of custody. The jury and judge are supposed to consider the 
improprieties when they deliberate, “weighing” the case for guilt or innocence.  
 
In fraud cases, the array of physical evidence, all the paper documents, audio and video 
recordings, and information-processing equipment, such as computers, demands some close 
monitoring in the chain of custody. This is an area of the law which either side — plaintiff or 
defendant — can manipulate to avoid talking about the evidence itself, rambling instead like a 
filibustering senator over “who touched what and when and why that means we will not see 
or discuss the item in question.”  
 
The following are some general guidelines that will help examiners demonstrate the chain of 
custody. They will also help examiners in authenticating obtained evidence: 
• If records are received via mail or courier-receipted delivery (such as FedEx or UPS), 
keep copies of the postmarked envelope or the delivery receipts. 
• If a cover letter is included, make sure you keep it. 
• If the cover letter or transmittal letter includes a list of the documents, check the package 
immediately to ensure all documents are there. If something is missing, make a note in the 
file and notify the sender immediately.  
• If you receive documents in person, create a memo stating the date and time the 
documents were received, who gave you the documents, where that individual obtained 
the documents, and a complete list of the documents received. 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.717 
• If you obtained the documents yourself from the original source (desk, file cabinet, etc.), 
create a memo describing the date, time, exact location of where the documents were 
found, and a complete list of the documents obtained. 
• Keep the originals of these memos or delivery receipts in the case file and keep a copy 
with the documents (it will be much easier to identify where the documents came from if 
you have the information with the documents). 
 
Additionally, because digital evidence can be easily altered or destroyed, a chain of custody 
must be maintained for all electronic evidence gathered and analyzed in an investigation. ”At 
a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
 
Hearsay 
Simply put, hearsay refers to a statement that repeats what some other person said while 
outside of court. FRE 801 defines hearsay as “a statement, other than one made … at the trial 
or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted.” Basically, hearsay 
involves the following elements: 
• A statement (anything intended to be an assertion; statements can be oral, written, or 
nonverbal conduct, such as nodding a head) 
• That is made outside the court’s supervision (statements made at trial or during deposition are 
not hearsay because they are made during court proceedings, but a statement made at 
work or at a crime scene is outside the court’s supervision and could be hearsay if the 
other elements are also present) 
• That is offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted (a party is offering a statement to prove the 
truth of the matter asserted if the party is trying to prove that the assertion made by the 
declarant [the person who made the out-of-court statement] is true) 
 
This sets apart virtually anything said outside the courtroom or outside an officially 
designated function of the court such as a deposition.  
 
Under the general rule, hearsay is not admissible in court, but this rule is subject to numerous 
exceptions. Excluding hearsay on one level means witnesses cannot say, “He said … she 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.718  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
said.” Each person testifies to his own experience.  This is designed to protect the credibility 
and condition of testimony and to preserve each side’s right to cross-examine witnesses.  
 
Each witness in the trial will be questioned about personal, firsthand encounters. Unless their 
statements satisfy one of the exceptions discussed below, witnesses will speak only about 
things they have experienced themselves. If possible, evidence should be presented in the 
courtroom so that the jury can determine the weight to give each piece of evidence.  
 
The hearsay rule often creates admissibility issues for electronically stored information (ESI) 
because such evidence is often made out of court and offered to prove the truth of the matter 
asserted.  
 
Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule 
The general rule against hearsay is full of exceptions — ways to get information into the 
record — which accounts for the rule’s infamy in courtroom dramas and in real courtrooms. 
The rules of evidence exempts several categories of statements that are not to be considered 
hearsay, and there are many circumstances in which evidence, although hearsay, is admissible.  
 
The Truth of the Statement Is Not at Issue 
The hearsay rule only applies if the statement is being offered to prove the truth of the matter 
contained in the statement. Therefore, if the statement is offered for some other purpose, it 
technically is not hearsay. Any out-of-court statement can be admitted if it (1) is relevant to 
some aspect of the proceedings and (2) is not offered for the truth of its contents. Such 
statements are most often used to show a person’s knowledge or state of mind at a particular 
time. For instance, a witness will be allowed to testify that she heard the defendant say, “I 
can’t stand this company. They owe me big time.” The statement cannot be used to prove 
that the defendant actually stole from the company; however, it can be admitted to show the 
defendant’s state of mind — that he was disgruntled. 
 
Admissions by an Adverse Party 
Generally, the statement of an adverse party is not hearsay. Such statements are called 
“admissions” and can be very powerful evidence. More specifically, an admission is an out-of-court 
statement or conduct by a party to the lawsuit that tends to support the other side’s 
position or diminish the declarant’s own position. Thus, anything spoken or written by a 
party to a lawsuit can be entered into the record, provided that the statement can be  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.719 
corroborated and is relevant. Each side can use its adversary’s out-of-court statements as 
evidence.  
 
For example, during your investigation of the case prior to trial, you interviewed the 
defendant. During the interview, he tells you that he falsified the invoices. Later he denies 
making the statement. If you take the stand and tell the jury that the defendant told you he 
falsified invoices, technically that statement is hearsay. However, since it is an admission, it 
will be admitted under this exception to the rule.  
 
An admission is not necessarily an outright confession. A witness may testify that a bank 
officer told her, “I have ways of getting loans approved that no one else knows about.” The 
statement alone does not prove loan fraud against the officer, but it does establish, by his 
own admission, his stated intent to subvert the security controls of the institution. 
 
In cases involving corporations, large groups, or government agencies, any statement made by 
a member of the organization is potentially an admission. The person who made the 
statement has to be directly authorized to speak for the organization or perform a job related 
to the issue under discussion. For example, an agent employed by Jefferson Realtors who 
says, “You’ve been defrauded here” to an aggrieved client has made an admission on behalf 
of the company. A janitor at Jefferson Realtors, however, cannot make the same admission 
because janitorial duties are not related to the formation of contracts, and chances are the 
janitor is not authorized to make corporate declarations. Since an agent makes contracts on 
the company’s behalf, the statement is an admission even if the agent is not the official 
spokesperson for Jefferson’s legal affairs.  
 
Former Testimony Under Oath 
Testimony given by the declarant at another hearing is admissible if the party against whom 
the testimony is now offered had an opportunity and motive to examine the witness similar to 
that in the present trial. 
 
Business and Government Records 
We commonly think of invoices, receipts, and official documents as the final legal word, but 
like statements made outside of court, business and government records are hearsay; they are 
prepared outside the courtroom. A special exception for these materials, however, makes 
them admissible if they are provided with a legal foundation. The admissibility of such 
records rests on two criteria:  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.720  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Have they been prepared during “regularly conducted business activity”? 
• Are they verifiably trustworthy? 
 
Materials prepared specifically for trial are not admissible as business records. Anything that 
casts doubt on the veracity of these documents can bar them. In situations where the charge 
involves altered documents, the materials are admitted to prove the charge of alteration — not 
for their truth-value — so the hearsay rule does not apply.  
 
Computerized records have had no trouble being accepted as evidence. Generally, the hearsay 
exception for business records applies (i.e., they are admissible as long as the records have 
been compiled as a regular facet of doing business).  
 
However, it should be noted that a minority of courts follow a different approach when 
addressing hearsay within computerized records, which has recently garnered much acclaim. 
These courts distinguish between computer-stored records and computer-generated records 
and hold that ESI containing only computer-generated records (such as log-in records from 
ISPs, telephone records, and ATM receipts) untouched by human hands do not contain 
hearsay. In such cases, there is no need to establish that a hearsay exception applies. 
Alternatively, computer-stored records are created or maintained by a human and therefore 
are deemed hearsay. Thus, they must meet a hearsay exception to be admitted. 
 
Statement Against Interest 
A statement against interest is a special form of admission in which a prior statement is at odds 
with the declarant’s current claim. To be admissible under this exception, the statement must 
meet three requirements:  
• The declarant must be unavailable to testify. 
• The statement must have been against important interests of the declarant when made. 
• Corroborating circumstances must clearly establish the trustworthiness of the statement. 
 
In prosecuting a tax evasion charge, for example, prosecutors may present a financial 
statement used by the defendant to obtain a loan; this is a statement against interest because 
the document declares a higher net worth than the defendant now claims to have. 
 
Absence of an Entry in Business Records 
Evidence that a matter is not included in the memoranda or reports kept in the regular course 
of business may be admissible to prove that a certain event did not occur if the matter was 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.721 
one about which a memorandum or report regularly was made and preserved. However, this 
does not hold true if the source of information or the circumstances indicate a lack of 
trustworthiness. 
 
Recorded Recollections 
A memorandum or record may be admissible if it concerns a matter that the witness once had 
knowledge of but now has forgotten, if it was made or adopted by the witness when the 
matter was fresh in memory, and if it is shown to be accurate. Such memoranda or records 
also may be shown to a witness who has temporarily forgotten the events to refresh the 
witness’s recollection and allow the testimony to be more complete or accurate. 
 
Present Sense Impressions 
Courts assume statements that are made during or immediately after significant events or 
conditions and that describe or explain the events or conditions are reliable, so present sense 
impressions are admissible. For example, a witness can report that he first suspected fraud at 
Securities Plus by noting that his superior said, “Oh my God! This can’t be happening!” when 
he was informed that there would be an audit. In a similar example, Mr. Whistler notices 
Jenny Moore, a co-worker, in John Smith’s office and overhears her say, “Oh, here are some 
bid sheets in the trash can.” If the government prosecutes Smith for bid rigging, which is 
demonstrated by the bid sheets, Mr. Whistler can testify about Moore’s statement as a present 
sense impression because the words described the scene before her. 
 
Excited Utterances 
There is also an exception for statements relating to a startling event or condition made while 
the declarant was under the stress of its excitement. Unlike statements of present sense 
impressions, excited utterances require an occurrence that is startling enough to produce 
excitement.  In the Mr. Whistler scenario, for example, Moore’s statements might qualify as 
an excited utterance if she discovered the bid sheets after months of searching for 
incriminating evidence and told Whistler, while jumping up and down in excitement, “I’ve 
found the evidence I’ve been waiting for a long time!” Here, the successful conclusion of the 
search was sufficiently exciting.  
 
Then Existing Mental, Emotional, or Physical Condition  
Statements of the declarant’s then-existing state of mind, emotion, or physical condition are 
also admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule. Specifically, the Federal Rule of Evidence 
803 lists “state of mind, emotion, sensation, or physical condition …, pain, and bodily health” 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.722  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
as acceptable subject matter, along with extremely personalized thought processes such as 
“intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling ….”  
 
Defense attorneys at a fraud trial sometimes use arguments about what their client intended, or 
the confusion and stress the person was suffering. For instance, the defendant was seen 
shredding documents, and he was overheard to say, “They’ll never prove anything now.” The 
statement may be admitted to show the defendant’s state of mind at the time he was 
shredding the documents. It also shows that the defendant acted with the intent to destroy 
the documents. Hearsay statements that help establish this intention are admissible as 
exceptions. 
 
Statements for Purposes of Medical Diagnosis or Treatment 
Anything first communicated during a medical examination is admissible as a hearsay 
exception. This includes medical history, symptoms, pain, and the general character of the 
medical condition. These statements do not even have to have been made by the patient. 
They can involve someone (parent or spouse) accompanying the patient.  
 
Printed Matter, Learned Treatises, and Refresher Writings 
Written materials that add to the court’s knowledge of an issue are excepted from the hearsay 
rule. This exception often bears on the testimony of expert witnesses who often use 
published material in their work. 
 
Printed materials  that support technical or professional assertions, such as commodity market 
reports, stock market quotes, mortality tables, cost of living indexes, etc., are admissible if 
they are “generally used and relied upon by the public or by persons in particular 
occupations.” The Federal Rules of Evidence specifically mentions market reports and 
commercial publications. 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence also creates a hearsay exception for learned treatises, providing 
that an authoritative work is admissible to either support or attack the opinion of an expert 
witness and that the works are established as reliable authority. However, some courts limit 
the rule. In these jurisdictions, specialized “treatises, periodicals, or pamphlets” can be 
referenced only during cross-examination. In a world of proliferating and sometimes 
contradictory sources of information, just what counts as a learned treatise and what is a 
fringe group’s manifesto is not immediately clear. 
Writing used to refresh a witness’s memory is admissible under special circumstances. Basically, 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.723 
courts may permit testifying witnesses to refresh or revive their memory by referring to a 
writing or anything else if the witnesses will thereafter be able to testify without depending on 
the terms of the writing. For example, Whistler, who is serving as a witness at a fraud trial, 
wants to see some notes he wrote two years ago to make sure he got the numbers right in his 
testimony. He is allowed to consult the notes and continue with his testimony. There is a 
lawyerly aspect to this rule—the text of the notes is admissible, too, but only if the opposing 
attorney requests the admission.  
 
Other Exceptions 
Miscellaneous exceptions to the hearsay rule include things like dying declarations  and ancient 
documents. For those instances not specified in any rule, there remains the judge’s discretion: 
Anything the judge deems trustworthy for the purposes of its presentation is admissible. This is 
the cornerstone of the rule. Hearsay is excluded in the first place because it supposedly lacks 
trustworthiness. However, other kinds of hearsay that do not fall within any specific hearsay 
exceptions may be admissible if they meet the same standards of trustworthiness as required 
for the listed exceptions.   
 
 
Excluding Illegally Seized Evidence 
In general, evidence obtained improperly is tainted and unfit for trial. The Fourth 
Amendment sets out this cornerstone exclusionary rule, barring anything obtained by 
authorities without proper authorization from the owner or possessor, or through a court-ordered 
search warrant. Generally, this rule applies only in criminal cases, But it also applies 
to government employers. Therefore, a public employer cannot use illegally seized evidence 
to discipline an employee. There is no Fourth Amendment prohibition against a private  
employer using illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee, however. But if a private 
employer does use illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee, the employer might be 
exposing itself to litigation for invasion of privacy, trespass, or other common law causes of 
action, even though the evidence may still be admitted in court. 
 
 
Impeachment 
The above discussion concerns the manner in which evidence is introduced at trial, usually 
during direct examination. There is, of course, another side to testimony: cross-examination. 
Under the Rules of Evidence and the Sixth Amendment — which guarantees a defendant the 
right to confront witnesses — the adverse party is entitled to offer evidence to impeach the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.724  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
testimony or credibility of a witness. Impeachment is the practice of bringing out matters that 
attack a witness’s credibility.  
 
There are numerous ways an attorney might impeach a witness, but the most common ways 
include efforts to show that the witness:  
• Is influenced by bias or self-interest 
• Has an impaired ability to observe   
• Made prior inconsistent statements 
• Has been convicted of a felony 
• Has a reputation for untruthfulness 
 
Impeachment by bias shows that the witness has reason, or at least opportunity, to skew the 
evidence against one of the parties in the litigation. Questioning on cross-examination will 
cover any pecuniary interest the witness has in the case, any connection the witness might 
have to any matter or litigant, and any other information that will make the witness appear to 
have some interest in favoring one party over another. 
 
Another way to impeach witnesses is to show that their ability to observe was impaired. Matters of 
observance include the ability to see, hear, smell, or feel some item in question.  
 
Nothing overturns a witness’s statements like inconsistency. Opposing lawyers will always 
confront any witness on cross-examination with any apparent inconsistencies between the 
trial testimony and statements, testimony, or information given by the witness on other 
occasions.  
 
A witness’s credibility may be challenged, though not automatically impeached, by showing that 
the person has been convicted of a felony crime. The governing rule, Rule 609 of the Federal Rules of 
Evidence, offers a few basic instructions. First, convictions for acts involving dishonesty, 
such as larceny, theft, or fraud, are especially harmful to a witness’s testimony. Second, any 
witness may be impeached with any prior felony conviction. Third, evidence of any prior 
conviction is presumably inadmissible if the conviction is more than 10 years old. 
 
Finally, any witness may be impeached by proof of reputation for untruthfulness.  
 
Certified Fraud Examiners should keep in mind that the above methods of impeachment may 
be used not only on the defendant and defense witnesses, but also on witnesses for the 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.725 
prosecution or defense. Inquiries should be made before trial to determine if a prosecution or 
defense witness is subject to impeachment, and, if so, appropriate steps should be taken. 
 
 
Privileges 
 
Introduction 
There are certain evidentiary privileges that protect certain types of evidence from being 
discovered or produced. Invoking a privilege for a piece of testimony or other evidence in a 
legal encounter keeps the material outside trial proceedings. If a privilege applies, the court 
and its petitioners are denied access to the privileged information, and judges and juries must 
disregard any evidence they do actually hear if it is deemed privileged afterward.  
 
The most important privileges are discussed below. 
 
Attorney-Client Privilege 
The attorney-client privilege precludes disclosure of communications between an attorney 
and client, but only if the following conditions are met: 
• The client retained the attorney 
• To provide legal advice 
• And thereafter communicated with the attorney on a confidential basis, and 
• The privilege has not been waived 
 
The attorney-client privilege applies to individuals as well as corporations or other business 
entities. In the context of an investigation of a company, communications generally will be 
protected under the attorney-client privilege if the following elements are present: 
• The communications were made by corporate employees to counsel. 
• The communications were made at the direction of corporate superiors in order for the 
company to obtain legal advice from counsel. 
• The employees were aware that the communications were being made in order for the 
company to obtain legal advice. 
• The information needed was not available from upper management. 
• The communications concerned matters within the scope of the employees’ corporate 
duties. 
  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.726  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The communications were confidential when made and were kept confidential by the 
company. 
 
A general counsel’s participation in an investigation conducted by management does not 
automatically create an attorney-client privilege. The key element is that the attorney (whether 
in-house counsel or outside counsel) is conducting the investigation for the purpose of 
providing legal advice to the company. The privilege generally extends to information 
gathered by investigators if the investigator is acting at the direction of the attorney. 
 
The attorney-client privilege prevents disclosure of the communications—the letters, memos, 
or contents of telephone calls—b etween the attorney and client, not of the underlying facts 
or documentary evidence in the case. A client may not refuse to produce documents or other 
relevant evidence merely because such evidence was previously given to the attorney. 
 
Similarly, the attorney-client privilege does not prevent disclosure of communications that 
relate to business rather than legal advice. Corporate counsel is often consulted to give advice 
on matters related to business conduct rather than legal issues. Such communications would 
be discoverable. 
 
Finally, the attorney-client privilege may not be asserted if the communication involved the 
attempted or actual commission of a present crime or fraud. The attorney does not have to be 
a participant in the fraud for the waiver to apply. 
 
Waiver 
Special care should be taken to ensure that the attorney-client privilege is not waived 
inadvertently by giving documents or communicating information to anyone outside the 
investigation team, including members of law enforcement. If information gathered during an 
investigation is shared with law enforcement, then the privilege may be waived not only as to 
the information given, but also to any other information relating to the same subject matter.  
 
For example, if an investigator submits a copy of his report to the prosecutor who initiates 
criminal proceedings based on the findings in the report, the criminal defendant may be able 
to require the investigator to provide all the documents he used in writing the report. In such 
an instance, the investigator may be considered to have waived the privilege. Likewise, if law 
enforcement requests the results of an investigation or information gathered during an 
investigation, the attorney should be consulted before turning over the information. Some 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.727 
courts have held that the privilege is not waived if a company is subpoenaed to produce the 
information. 
 
Inadvertent Waiver 
Moreover, some courts have held that inadvertent disclosure of a single privileged document, 
including digital documents, waives the privilege as to all documents concerning the same 
subject matter. For this reason, special care must also be taken to avoid inadvertent disclosure 
from the use of electronic communications, including e-mail, cell phones, faxes, text 
messages, instant messages, etc. It is clear that the attorney-client privilege extends to 
electronic communications, and it is also clear that a matter voluntarily communicated to a 
third-party who is not an agent of your counsel is not confidential and, therefore, not 
privileged. Thus, when a party chooses to use a form of electronic communication, which is 
vulnerable to interception and inadvertent disclosure, you run the risk that your messages 
might be intercepted by, or disclosed to, an unintended third-party.  
 
To illustrate how easily inadvertent disclosure of electronic communications may occur, 
consider a few ways that an e-mail may unwittingly end up in the hands of an unintended 
third-party. E-mails may be forwarded to additional unintended employees, indicating a lack 
of confidential subject matter; they may be distributed to a large number of persons, 
suggesting a lack of confidentiality; or the sender could mistakenly hit the wrong key on the 
keyboard and send the e-mail to the wrong recipient. Therefore, fraud examiners must be 
concerned about the risks of inadvertent disclosure of electronic communications and should 
take cautionary measures to preserve the attorney-client privilege. 
 
Unfortunately, fear over the consequences of subject-matter waiver has led to dramatic 
litigation cost increases in today’s digital environment, where reviewing tens, hundreds, and 
even thousands of gigabytes of information for privilege is time consuming and expensive.  
 
Federal Rule of Evidence 502 
In an effort to protect against inadvertent waiver of the attorney-client privilege or the work 
product protection, President Bush signed into law S. 2450, a bill adding Evidence Rule 502 
to the Federal Rules of Evidence. The legislation resolves conflict between courts throughout 
the country on whether an inadvertent production of privileged material results in waiver. 
Simply stated, under Rule 502, an inadvertent disclosure of a privileged communication can 
no longer waive protection for all documents concerning the same subject matter. 
 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.728  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Among other things, Rule 502 provides the following protections: 
• If disclosure is made, then the privilege is waived to any other undisclosed information 
only if (1) the waiver is intentional; (2) the other information relates to the same subject 
matter; and (3) “fairness” requires further disclosure (Rule 502(a)).  
• If disclosure is inadvertent, it does not result in waiver when the privilege holder “took 
reasonable steps to prevent disclosure” and “promptly took reasonable steps to rectify the 
error” (Rule 502(b)).  
• If the disclosure was made in a state court proceeding, the disclosure does not waive 
protection in a federal proceeding if one of two conditions is met: (1) the disclosure 
would not have been a waiver under Rule 502; or (2) the disclosure is not a waiver under 
state law (Rule 502(c)).  
 
The McNulty Memorandum and the DOJ Guidelines 
On December 12, 2006, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines (in the form of 
the McNulty Memorandum) for federal investigation and prosecution of business 
organizations. The McNulty Memorandum, which addressed the practice of federal 
prosecutors investigating and charging business organization misconduct, revised the DOJ’s 
prior guidance outlined in the much maligned Thompson Memorandum, which provided that 
federal prosecutors could seek waiver of the attorney-client privileges and attorney work 
product protections as an element of a company’s cooperation. Specifically, the McNulty 
Memorandum provided specific criteria that prosecutors were required to consider and 
procedures they were required to follow before seeking waiver of privileges or work product 
protection. 
 
On August 28, 2008, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines, which revised the 
McNulty Memorandum, on how federal prosecutors investigate, charge, and prosecute 
corporate crimes. Unlike the McNulty Memorandum, the guidelines are a part of the U.S. 
attorney’s manual, which provides internal DOJ guidance but does not create any enforceable 
law. 
 
In an effort to stop congressional action, such that proposed by S. 445, the guidelines bar 
prosecutors from judging corporate cooperation for leniency on whether an entity is willing 
to waive the attorney-client privilege or work product protection. The guidelines also state 
that prosecutors can no longer seek disclosure of information that is either privileged or 
protected work product. In addition, the guidelines provide that when evaluating a 
corporation’s cooperation, prosecutors may no longer consider whether a company is 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.729 
advancing legal fees for its employees, whether a corporation has sanctioned or retained 
culpable employees, or whether a corporation has entered into joint defense agreements.  
 
Even though most observers agree that the guidelines are a significant improvement over the 
McNulty Memorandum, many contend that comprehensive legislation is still needed to make 
the DOJ’s reforms permanent and prevent a relapse in department policy, as well as to bar 
similar waiver policies adopted by other federal agencies such as the Securities Exchange 
Commission and the Internal Revenue Service. For this reason, the DOJ’s guidelines may 
stop interested parties from supporting the enactment of legislation that would further 
protect corporations and their employees from government-coerced waiver. 
 
Selective Waiver 
Under the selective waiver doctrine, a corporation seeking to cooperate with a government 
investigation, pursuant to a confidentiality agreement, can disclose material protected by the 
attorney-client privilege to the government without waiving those protections as to 
nongovernmental parties, such as private plaintiffs. But it should be noted that most federal 
circuit courts have rejected the selective waiver doctrine. In addition, Rule 502 of the Federal 
Rules of Evidence does not explicitly acknowledge selective waiver, but it does not explicitly 
eliminate selective waiver as a viable doctrine.  
 
The Attorney Work Product Doctrine 
Under Rule 26(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and under comparable state 
rules, documents and tangible things that are prepared in anticipation of litigation are 
protected by the attorney’s work product doctrine or privilege. The privilege is conditional in part: 
The opposing party may obtain access to otherwise privileged investigative documents and 
things through pre-trial discovery if it can show substantial need  for the protected information 
and that the information cannot be obtained from another source. However, the attorney’s 
mental impressions, opinions, and strategies concerning the litigation are absolutely privileged 
and cannot be discovered even with a showing of substantial need. The privilege extends to not 
only information and documents prepared by a party or the party’s attorneys, but also by the 
consultants and examiners hired by the attorneys. For instance, communications with the 
attorney and any work or analysis done by an expert with whom the attorney has consulted is 
privileged as work product, although that privilege will be waived if the expert is called to 
testify as an expert witness at trial.  
 
Work product protection applies only to documents and things prepared  in anticipation of 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.730  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
litigation or for trial. Thus, documents and tangible things prepared in the course of an in-house 
or other pre-litigation investigation, even if at the direction of an attorney, may not be 
privileged if they were not prepared in anticipation of litigation. Just because there is a possibility 
of future litigation does not mean that the investigation is in anticipation thereof. Litigation 
must be actually planned and the work for which protection is sought must have been 
undertaken for the specific purpose of preparing for that litigation. But if the work to be 
protected was done in anticipation of litigation, then it does not matter in most jurisdictions that 
no lawsuit has been filed yet. 
 
The privilege protects documents and things prepared in anticipation of litigation from 
compelled disclosure. Nevertheless, it does not render the facts themselves confidential, 
privileged, or non-discoverable. Thus, while reports, interview notes, and transcripts might 
not be discoverable under the privilege, the facts learned may have to be provided in response 
to properly phrased discovery requests. Similarly, the privilege does not prevent discovery of 
the identity of witnesses and the existence of interview notes, tapes, or transcripts. The extent 
to which interview notes, transcripts, and other factual reports prepared in anticipation of 
litigation are actually protected from discovery by a party opponent may vary between 
jurisdictions and may depend on the facts and circumstances of a given case. 
 
Waiver of Work Product Protection 
Like the attorney-client privilege, work product protection can be waived. Moreover, the 
Federal Rule of Evidence 502 expressly applies to disclosure of a communication or 
information covered by work product protection. Therefore, the examiner should abide by 
the same rules governing disclosure of materials protected by the attorney-client privilege.  
 
Work Product Protection and Outside Auditors 
In late 2004, a federal district judge in New York, under the work product doctrine, protected 
the results of an internal investigation of a large company given to an outside auditor (Merrill 
Lynch & Co., Inc. v. Allegheny Energy, Inc., 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21543). However, courts 
continue to disagree as to whether such disclosure waives work product protection under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence. 
  
Before disclosing work product to an outside auditor, a company should determine whether 
the outside auditor is an “adversary.” Some courts consider auditors to be the “watchdogs” of 
companies, and therefore inherently adversary to their corporate clients. Certainly, the role of 
outside auditors is to independently ensure the accuracy of a company’s financials, find 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.731 
inaccuracies, and detect fraud. However, the court in Merrill Lynch distinguished this kind of 
adversary from a “litigation adversary.” A company’s auditor is not necessarily a “litigation 
adversary” (which is required to invalidate the work product privilege). Rather, “[a] business 
and its auditor can and should be aligned insofar as they both seek to prevent, detect, and 
root out corporate fraud.”  
 
The court also emphasized that a blanket waiver of privilege in this kind of situation would 
likely discourage ethical disclosure and conduct by companies. Thus, the trend in litigation 
seems to review the facts on a case-by-case basis to determine whether an auditor and 
company share common interests and therefore are non-adversarial.  
 
The following principles should aid companies in determining whether they should provide 
work product to outside auditors: (1) ensure a common interest between the company and 
the outside auditor; (2) only disclose information necessary to help the auditor assess 
sufficiency of the company’s controls and the accuracy of the company’s audit/accounting 
procedures; and (3) when disclosing informati on, always include a confidentiality agreement 
acknowledging that the documents were prepared by counsel and therefore privileged, as well 
as a covenant that the outside auditor is to maintain the strictest confidence of the 
documents.  
 
Self-Evaluation Privilege 
The self-evaluation privilege (also referred to as the self-critical privilege) may provide some 
protection for the investigative work product. This privilege is based on the need to 
encourage voluntary internal reviews and compliance programs. It applies if an organization 
can demonstrate that it is attempting to police itself in an area of public interest, and that 
disclosure of the work product would prejudice such efforts. The privilege is a relatively new 
concept and is not recognized in all jurisdictions. It is much weaker than the attorney-client 
and attorney work product privileges. 
 
Marital Privilege 
Additionally, the marital privilege protects communications between husbands and wives. 
There are two forms of the marital or spousal privilege: (1) the confidential communications 
privilege, enabling either spouse to prevent the other from testifying regarding a 
communication during marriage between the two that was intended to be in confidence, and 
(2) the adverse testimony privilege, protecting spouses from being compelled to testify against each 
other while they are married. Usually, the confidential communications privilege continues 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.732  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
after the termination of the marriage; the adverse testimony privilege does not.  
 
There is no privilege that permits a person not to testify against other family members, 
although, as a matter of policy, many law enforcement agencies will not compel testimony 
from immediate family members. 
 
Law Enforcement Privilege to Withhold the Identity of an Informant 
Law enforcement agencies may legitimately withhold the identity of an informant unless 
disclosure is necessary to ensure that the defendant receives a fair trial. In such circumstances, 
the prosecution has to decide whether to forego prosecution or disclose the identity of the 
informant. In the private sector, there is no equivalent privilege. Certified Fraud Examiners or 
others who are investigating on behalf of a private client may be compelled by court order to 
disclose the identity of an informant or any other witness. This possibility should be disclosed 
to potential witnesses who may request confidentiality. See the Investigation Section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual for more information. 
 
Accountant-Client Privilege 
A few states have a weak accountant-client privilege that allows an accountant to resist 
production of a client’s work papers or documents. No such privilege is recognized in federal 
court, and the state privileges may be overcome by a showing of need or by the service of a 
subpoena.  
 
There is, however, a Federally Authorized Tax Practitioner Privilege under section 7525 of 
the Internal Revenue Code. This privilege is a evidentiary privilege that provides limited 
protection in federal tax law.  It applies only in situations where a CPA is providing tax advice  
in noncriminal proceedings before the IRS or before a federal court.  
 
Nevertheless, as discussed above, in federal proceedings, communications between a client 
and a third-party, such as an accountant, may be protected under the attorney-client privilege 
or the attorney work product doctrine.  
 
The attorney-client privilege extends to accountants if the attorney hired the accountant to 
assist in rendering legal advice. Additionally, the privilege extends to an accountant’s 
documents, which were made at the attorney’s request, used to render legal advice. This 
privilege was clarified in U.S. v. Cote, which concluded that there is no protection for 
accounting services if no legal advice was sought. In Cote, the client engaged the accountant 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.733 
before retaining the lawyer, the client and accountant had a long-standing professional 
relationship, and the attorney did not control or supervise the accountant’s efforts or work 
product.  
 
In addition, the attorney work product protection extends to information and documents 
prepared by the consultants and examiners hired by the attorneys, including accountants. 
However, any protection will be waived if the accountant is called to testify as an expert 
witness at trial.  
 
In cases where accountants serve as expert witnesses, the work product doctrine may apply. 
Protection under the work product doctrine generally depends on whether the accountant 
serves as a testifying expert or a non-testifying (consulting) expert. Nothing created by the 
testifying expert is privileged from discovery. Conversely, the rules of discovery generally 
protect communications between a non-testifying expert, the attorney, and the party from 
disclosure to adversaries. However, the protection against disclosure of communications with 
non-testifying experts can be lost, and this commonly occurs when the non-testifying expert’s 
communications are released to others, particularly to testifying experts. This topic is 
discussed in further detail below.  
 
There are a number of other privileges that are less likely to be asserted in fraud actions, 
including the priest-penitent  and physician-patient  privileges. 
 
 
  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.801 



:


basic principl of evid
definit of evid
black law dictionari defin evid as
anyth perceiv by the five sens and ani proof such as testimoni of wit record
document fact data or tangibl object legal present at trial to prove a content and
induc a belief in the mind of a juri
evid refer to an intric rule develop and refin over hundr of year that is
design to ensur that onli relev and prob evid is admit in court proceed
and that irrelev unreli and prejudici evid is exclud so that case can be fairli
and expediti decid
everi aspect of try a case from file the complaint through discoveri into the
present of wit and exhibit is affect by rule of evid thi bodi of law
cover not just what count as evid but how that evid is gather handl and
present
evid in feder court is govern by the feder rule of evid fre these rule
set out what can and cannot be introduc dure a disput in the late 1960 a us suprem
court panel began codifi centuri of common law into the fre what had previous
been a farflung set of preced buri in local jurisdict and lengthi appeal decis
wa gather into a singular bodi of inform congress pass the uniform code of
evid in 1974 as public law no 93595 state and local court often have some
special rule of evid but these rule ar themselv base on feder guidelin
the rule of evid ar complex and counsel should be contact if an import question
of evid aris thi part focus on the more import rule and those of greatest
interest to fraud examin
three basic form of evid
evid is anyth percept by the five sens which is invok in the process of
argu a case document spoken recollect data of variou sort and physic object
ar all potenti evid evid is simpli anyth that relat to the prove or
basic principl of evid law
2702 2011 fraud examin manual
disprov of a fact or consequ with the known univers avail for court inspect
legal author have narrow the field by set up categori to evalu evidentiari
signific
there ar three basic form as distinguish from type of evid testimoni real and
demonstr testimoni refer to the oral statement made by wit under oath in
gener there ar two type of testimoni wit lai wit and expert wit a lai
or fact wit is a nonexpert wit who must testifi from person knowledg about a
matter at issu an expert wit is a person who by reason of educ train skill or
experi is qualifi to render an opinion or otherwis testifi in area relev to resolut
of a legal disput
real evid describ physic object that plai a part in the issu be litig the term
includ both documentari evid such as cancel check invoic ledger and
letter as well as other type of physic evid therefor a typewrit or printer in a case
involv question document is clearli real evid as is a tape record sinc member
of the court can experi the sound firsthand
demonstr evid is a tangibl item that illustr some materi proposit eg a map a
chart or a summari it differ from real evid in that demonstr evid wa not
part of the underli event it wa creat specif for the trial it purpos is to provid a
visual aid for the juri nonetheless it is evid and can be consid by the juri in
reach a verdict
direct versu circumstanti evid
there ar two basic type of admiss evid direct evid and circumstanti evid
direct evid includ testimoni that tend to prove or disprov a fact in issu directli such
as eyewit testimoni or a confess circumstanti evid is evid that tend to prove
or disprov fact in issu indirectli by infer mani fraud case ar prove entir by
circumstanti evid or by a combin of circumstanti and direct evid but
seldom by direct evid alon the most difficult element to prove in mani fraud case
fraudul intent is usual prove circumstanti and necessarili so becaus direct proof
of the defend state of mind absent a confess or the testimoni of a coconspir is
imposs
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2703
in a circumstanti case the court mai instruct the juri that the prosecut must exclud all
infer from the fact other than it determin of guilt even if no such instruct is
given the certifi fraud examin should appli the same standard in prepar a
circumstanti case
admiss of evid
question involv the admiss of evid occur when on parti object to anoth
parti offer of evid if a judg sustain an object the evid is not admit if
howev the judg overrul the object the evid is admit and can be consid by
the fact finder
the admiss of evid depend on a wide varieti of factor and in larg part on the
discret of the trial judg
relev
although the admiss of evid depend on a number of factor the most import
factor is relev the gener rule of evid provid that all relev evid is
admiss rule 401 of the feder rule of evid defin relev evid as evid
have ani tendenc to make the exist of ani fact that is of consequ to
determin of the action more probabl or less probabl than it would be without the
evid in other word evid is relev if it tend to make some fact in issu more or
less like than it would be without the evid the fact in issu of cours vari accord
to the case but gener can be said to be those that tend to prove the essenti element of
the offens or claim as well as relat matter such as motiv opportun ident of the
parti and credibl
whether a particular piec of evid is relev or not depend on what the evid is
offer to prove an item of evid might be relev and admiss if offer to prove
on thing but not relev and inadmiss if offer to prove someth els for exampl
under rule 404b of the feder rule of evid evid of other crime wrong or act
commit by the defend would not be admiss if offer to prove that the defend is
gener a bad person and therefor is like to have commit the crime with which he is
charg howev evid would be admiss if offer to prove motiv intent ident
absenc of mistak or modu operandi if such factor ar at issu if evid of other
wrong or act is admit the judg will instruct the juri that thei mai consid the evid
basic principl of evid law
2704 2011 fraud examin manual
onli as it relat to the narrow issu for which it wa admit and mai not consid it for
ani other purpos
that evid is relev doe not howev automat mean that it will be admit
under rule 403 of the feder rule of evid relev evid still might be exclud if
it is unduli prejudici threaten to confus or mislead the juri threaten to caus
unnecessari delai or wast of time or is mere cumul relev evid also might be
exclud if it is subject to certain privileg as note below thu evid of drug addict
technic might be relev to prove motiv for embezzl or fraud but the judg still
might exclud the evid if he believ that it prob valu is outweigh by the danger
of prejudic to the defend evid of other crime and act as discuss abov that ar
otherwis relev also might be exclud for the same reason
special rule concern some type of circumstanti evid
special rule govern certain type of evid that have been found over the year to be so
mislead and prejudici that thei have been categor exclud such evid is alwai
exclud unless an except appli
charact evid
in civil and crimin trial there is strong polici against charact evid fre 404
charact evid sometim call propens evid is testimoni or exhibit that
purport to establish a trait of charact or propens to behav in a particular wai such as
care honesti violenc or cowardic there ar some good reason to leav charact
out of the discuss whenev possibl such as the subject natur of the descript
on person gruff is anoth viewer aggress
addition charact is not an absolut indic of behavior that is it is pretti common
to remark how out of charact somebodi action were in a given situat so there is
alwai a chanc someon wa act out of charact make the behavior propens if
there wa on useless in the legal exchang
final testimoni about charact ha a reckless potenti to be mistakenli found misl
or concoct it is alwai possibl to misjudg someon especi if we onli know the
person in limit circumst like work or a social club moreov it is exceedingli easi to
fabric incid about charact and for shrewd talker to manipul percept of
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2705
person in a fraud case it must be shown that the defend commit the act in
question there is too great a danger of prejud the juri if you allow testimoni about the
defend just be a bad person whether he is a bad person or not ought to have no
bear on whether or not he commit the act in question
in gener charact evid is not admiss in civil case charact evid is rare
admiss and the gener rule in crimin case provid that evid of a defend bad
charact is not admiss at trial for exampl the govern cannot offer evid of a
defend prior crime or other bad act to prove the defend bad charact
there ar howev some instanc where charact evid mai be admit in crimin
trial some of the except for us of charact evid in crimin case includ
the accus mai offer evid of hi good charact in which case the prosecut mai
introduc evid of the accus bad charact
charact evid mai be admiss to reflect on the credibl of a wit
under rule 404b of the feder rule of evid evid of other crime wrong or
act is not admiss to prove the charact of a person in other word such evid is not
admiss to prove that the defend is gener a bad person and therefor is like to
have commit the crime with which he is charg for exampl if a defend is charg
with steal monei from hi employ safe the prosecut would not be permit to
offer evid that the defend had previous stolen monei from anoth employ to
show the defend had a propens to steal
howev there ar some us of charact evid that mai be admiss becaus thei ar
offer for a purpos other than show charact some of the except for us of
charact evid in crimin case includ
to show the accus knowledg intent or motiv for the crime
to prove the exist of a larger plan of which the charg crime is a part
to show the accus prepar to commit the charg crime
to show the accus abil and mean of commit the crime possess of a
weapon tool or skill us in the commiss of the act
to show the accus opportun to commit the crime
threat or express of ill will by the accus
to link the accus to physic evid at the scene
the suspect conduct and comment dure arrest
basic principl of evid law
2706 2011 fraud examin manual
attempt to conceal ident
attempt to destroi evid
valid confess
opinion testimoni
dure trial most evid is introduc through the testimoni of wit evid on
which the juri can make factual determin must be introduc in the form of admiss
testimoni or documentari evid by law or fact ie nonexpert wit
the rule of evid howev limit the testimoni of lai wit lai wit ar onli
allow to testifi about what thei have actual experienc firsthand and their factual
observ fre 701 in gener wit provid a report on what thei know and must
keep their opinion and conclus to themselv
despit the gener rule there ar wai to get a nonexpert witnesss opinion into the record
a lai wit mai give opinion if the statement is ration base on their own
percept and if the opinion is help to a clear understand of their testimoni or the
determin of a fact
opinion ar admiss if thei pass a threepart test
the wit must have direct person knowledg of the fact to which the opinion
pertain
the opinion must be of the common everydai sort ie doe not involv special
knowledg or test
the opinion is not part of a legal judgment reserv for the juri or judg to decid
opinion from ordinari wit must be base on person experi and have some
bear on the fact as oppos to the judgment of the case thi distinct is further refin
in situat involv hearsai and person judgment discuss below
in contrast to lai wit expert wit ar exempt from the opinion rule becaus
expert ar hire to render a profession opinion thei possess educ train skill or
experi in draw conclus from certain type of data or inform that lai
wit do not possess expert testimoni howev mai be exclud if it embrac a legal
conclus therefor expert opinion address guilt or innoc will like be exclud in
crimin case
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2707
exhibit
exhibit ar the tangibl object present as evid therefor both real evid and
demonstr evid ar enter into the record as exhibit thi includ document such
as contract letter and receipt as well as photograph xrai basebal bat knive
fountain pen and comput file in short anyth that is not testimoni is an exhibit
testimoni is what peopl sai exhibit ar the prop
authent typic exhibit
at the most basic level evid must be establish as reliabl or authent thu evid
other than testimoni evid must be properli authent that is the parti offer the
evid must produc some evid to show it is in fact what the parti sai it is if a piec
of real evid cannot be authent the evid will not be admit even if it is plainli
relev
for proper authent the parti offer the evid must produc some evid eg
testimoni from a person with firsthand knowledg to show it is in fact what the parti sai
it is and that it ha remain in the same condit from the moment it wa seiz until it is
us in court
similar to the authent requir for tangibl evid there is a similar sort of
credibl test for wit if testimoni is to becom admiss evid the wit
must demonstr that the knowledg be commun is believ and gain by
person experi
below ar some of the issu you will encount in prove to the judg that a particular
exhibit is authent
demonstr evid
again demonstr evid refer to a tangibl item that illustr some materi proposit
it differ from real evid in that demonstr evid is not part of the underli
event it is creat specif for the trial it purpos is to provid a visual aid for the juri
an exhibit us for pure illustr purpos is a type of demonstr evid
demonstr evid includ chart graph and summari that help to simplifi
complic evid for the juri in complex fraud case such evid is extrem us
but it must be simpl and easi to understand
basic principl of evid law
2708 2011 fraud examin manual
demonstr evid is admiss if the court decid that it present a fair and balanc
summari or pictur of the evid and is not unduli prejudici and if offer for it truth
valu and not just to illustr a point demonstr evid must be authent to
show that the evid is in fact what it is claim to be
also demonstr evid must be made avail to the other parti and the court mai
order that the inform us to creat the exhibit be produc in court
diagram
a diagram is a schemat or technic draw that is us to help make someth easier to
understand a diagram on paper or some other tangibl displai can be admit as evid
with no more foundat than the assent of a wit is thi a fair represent of the
suit where you work it doe not have to be true to scale or particularli detail a diagram
can be prepar befor trial dure trial or prep outsid the court and finish dure
question if a parti object to the admiss of a diagram the offer parti mai need to
establish that it is reliabl diagram can be us in tandem with photo or other
represent evid or as assist in demonstr to the juri
write
in gener authent of a write consist of establish who author the document
depend on the document and situat thi is done in on of sever wai 1 the author
testifi and claim authorship 2 a wit testifi to see the author write the document
3 with handwritten letter a wit verifi the author penmanship 4 with type or
machinewritten document the wit verifi the author signatur 5 a wit testifi
that the content of the document point decis to the author these and mani other
document issu mai requir the particip of a question document expert
busi record and other document
busi record can encompass a broad rang of document from all sort of organ
includ corpor small busi nonprofit oper and commun group like
other evid a parti offer busi record must provid testimoni that the exhibit is
the busi record in question for proper authent the parti offer the evid
should be abl to establish the follow two thing
the content of the document is complet and unalt
the document origin from the name place of origin
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2709
certain document such as busi record ar selfauthent and mai be receiv into
evid without independ proof of authent under the feder rule of evid
busi record ar selfauthent if a custodian or other qualifi person certifi that
the record meet the follow requir
the record were prepar reason near the time of the event it describ
the record were made by or base on inform transmit from a person with
knowledg
the document wa prepar as a usual part of do busi ie it wa not prepar
specif for litig
busi record ar also vulner to hearsai object put differ offer the
content of busi record to establish the truth of their content can constitut hearsai
thu such materi can be bar as unreli outofcourt statement unless a trustworthi
foundat can be establish if howev there is certif that compli with the selfauthent
rule list abov the record will not onli be selfauthent but the
content of the record will be admiss to the prove the truth of the content as an
except to the rule against hearsai
govern document
the requir for govern document ar the same as for other busi record the
distinct between govern and busi record aros becaus of narrow interpret
of the law that separ nonprofit from forprofit enterpris todai most record
regardless of origin ar call busi record
phone record
to be admit into evid phone record must meet the busi record authent test
howev investig must also be awar of the feder telephon record and privaci
protect act of 2006 trppa which crimin the practic of obtain and attempt
to obtain confidenti phone record inform through pretext gain access through
the us of fals statement unless it is otherwis permit by law violat of the act ar
crimin and if convict a violat face up to 10 year in prison and up to 100000 in
fine
electron store inform
current there is still much controversi regard how to authent electron store
inform esi the us depart of justic comput crime and intellectu
basic principl of evid law
2710 2011 fraud examin manual
properti section ha develop a manual for electron search and seizur which judg have
us as a guid as to whether digit evid ha been properli seiz if digit evid
need to be seiz it is vital that examin engag the servic of a train comput forens
technician a properli train technician should know the procedur to follow to ensur that
the file can be authent
gener to be admiss esi evid must meet the same authent standard as
hard copi document ie to show that the item is what the propon claim howev
court have recogn that the authent of esi evid mai requir greater scrutini
becaus esi can easili be alter after creation thu to prove that a particular electron
document is authent those offer the evid must demonstr that the origin
document wa not modifi after it creation
rule 901 of the feder rule of evid provid a nonexclus explic list of
method by which evid can be authent and some of the method mai be us to
authent esi rule 901b1 allow authent through testimoni of a wit with
knowledg that a matter is what it is claim to be addition rule 901b3 allow for
authent by comparison to alreadi authent evid by an expert wit or the
trier of fact similarli rule 901b4 allow authent by circumstanti evid of
distinct characterist eg hash valu or metadata
furthermor under rule 902 some document ar selfauthent which mean that thei
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent for esi purpos
the three most relev categori of selfauthent document ar offici public
trade inscript and certifi copi of busi record
in addit differ form of esi evid mai requir differ authent approach
therefor it is help to examin a few common type
email
unlik tradit busi letter written on formal letterhead email ar more prone to
authent issu and mai be more difficult to properli authent for exampl the judg
in lorrain v markel 241 frd 534 d md 2007 refus to allow either parti to offer email
of an arbitr negoti as evid find that neither parti authent the email
by simpli attach them to their motion as exhibit
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2711
email authent issu usual aris becaus email system ar unreli and inher
unsecur make email suscept to alter moreov email can lack reliabl
becaus the ident of sender can be corrupt through unauthor access and us
even so there ar numer wai email can be authent includ
wit with person knowledg eg a wit testifi that he recogn a copi of an
email that he receiv or draft
comparison with authent exampl eg if on email ha been properli
authent a second email could by authent by compar it with the first
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg the presenc of a parti name
and email address or the presenc of metadata
trade inscript purport to have been affix in the cours of busi and
indic ownership control or origin eg an automat busi signatur at the end of
the email
certifi copi of busi record eg email is accompani by a written certif
by it custodian
text and instant messag
as the us of text and instant messag continu to grow parti ar offer thi esi as
evid in an increas number of case howev given the natur of thi type of
evid parti often encount foundat issu when authent text and instant
messag notwithstand the novel technolog involv these type of esi can be
admiss when the propon offer direct or circumstanti evid as to it authent
the most like authent chat room and text messag ar
wit with person knowledg eg a wit testifi that he recogn a copi
messag that he receiv or draft
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg the us of the defend name
in the text messag and the subject matter of the messag
comput record
court typic accept comput file and document as evid in fact court themselv
ar us more electron resourc becaus mani aspect of litig can now be conduct
electron
tradition to be admit as evid computer record need onli meet the usual
businessrecord authent which requir that the computer record be
basic principl of evid law
2712 2011 fraud examin manual
accompani by certif by a qualifi person state that 1 the record were prepar
reason near the time of the event thei describ 2 the record were prepar as a usual
part of do busi and 3 the organ wai of keep record is demonstr
reliabl
the requir support materi to authent comput record will includ inform
on the comput machin us ani softwar and the recordkeep process a busi
record electron or otherwis is legal as long as it kept in the normal cours of busi
when there ar clear routin for compil inform admit the record into court will
be routin
recent howev court have recogn that authent of computer record mai
requir greater scrutini becaus unlik other esi evid the primari authent issu
regard computer record is what ha or mai have happen to the record in the time
between when it wa enter in the file and the time of trial base upon thi view the most
like method of authent computer record ar
wit with person knowledg eg an authent wit attest to the process by
which the computer record ar creat acquir maintain and preserv
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg a person busi habit is
consist with the document
certifi copi of busi record eg computer record ar accompani by
custodian written certif
websit data
a grow number of peopl ar us social network site like linkedin facebook
myspac and twitter and as a result the legal us of inform obtain from social
media site ha increas mani user dont give much thought to what thei post onlin and
becaus most of the inform that get post onlin becom a perman record
somewher investig attornei and employ ar increasingli mine these site for
inform photo and video that can becom evid in civil and crimin litig
as with all evid the propon of social media evid must be prepar to establish
that the evid is authent the standard for authent evid from social media
site is no differ than for ani other type of evid that is there must be suffici
evid to support a find that the evid is what the propon claim
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2713
in some court authent can be establish by the testimoni of a wit like ani other
demonstr exhibit parti can authent a websit with the testimoni of a wit who
verifi that the exhibit at issu accur reflect what he observ after log on to the
site and review what wa there
altern the propon mai be abl authent a websit by provid testimoni from
the webmast or someon with person knowleg to show that the data wa post by the
person to whom the inform is attribut for exampl if websit data is attribut to
the websit owner the webmast can testifi that a particular file or content wa enter on a
site at a specif time thi is similar to authent write by show that the item wa
written by the person to whom it is attribut but becaus facebook myspac and twittertyp
evid typic come from third parti who sometim us pseudonym
attribut thi type of evid to a certain person can be challeng
final some websit data mai be selfauthent to review selfauthent evid
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent the type of
websit evid that mai fall under thi categori includ govern materi that appear
on offici govern websit or businessrel materi that appear on an organ
websit
photograph
concern photograph it is necessari to establish their fidel to the object thei claim to
repres thi mean that the offer parti must prove that the pictur is unalt and
show what the propon claim it show gener it is enough to have a wit familiar
with the object or space in a photo to corrobor it eg ye that the hallwai run
between our two build the matter get more complic when a photo is
controversi thi can requir technic specif for proper foundat in the most
famou trial sinc sam sheppard oj simpson lawyer challeng a photo of the defend
wear bruno mali shoe as doctor both side introduc expert to discuss whether
the photo had been alter what sort of camera len and environment condit were
involv etc the same issu can aris with photo in ani trial
in some unusu situat a photo mai reveal inform that no wit can corrobor
there ha been at least on instanc where the background of a photo show a stab that
took place in a crowd no on not even the photograph saw the stab at the time in
unusu situat where a photo commun evid not substanti elsewher the
basic principl of evid law
2714 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat of the photograph will need more strength includ technic detail on the
camera the film who took the shot why and where etc
the except make photo seem more legal fraught than thei ar thei usual ar
admit with littl object photo do not even have to be contemporari with the crime or
grievanc to which thei pertain if a photograph is establish as accur in it portray it
can be shot after the origin act
gener point
either side can enter exhibit into the record given the proper foundat onc admit
the evid is avail for us by either side it doe not matter who enter the item into
evid either side can us it dure question
it also doe not matter when exhibit ar admit thei mai be introduc into evid
dure direct examin oppos counsel is allow to inspect the exhibit and then the
wit confirm the exhibit which ha been mark exhibit a or exhibit 1 some court
us letter for exhibit while some court us number usual the exhibit is identifi by
which side enter it eg plaintiff exhibit 1
when everyon agre exhibit can be directli enter into the record without foundat
review by stipul both parti sign the stipul form describ and acknowledg
the exhibit
the best evid rule
sometim testimoni mai be reject becaus of the best evid rule which prohibit a
parti from testifi about the content of a document without produc the document
itself thi rule howev onli appli when an origin or copi is be us to prove the
content of a write
also known as the origin write rule the best evid rule provid that when a wit
testifi about the content of a document at least a fair copi of the origin must be avail
for inspect if there is no origin a copi of the proven authent document will do but
the court must be assur that the copi ar reliabl and accur if the document is lost
no origin no copi the judg will have to be convinc there is good reason to forgo the
exhibit and admit the testimoni
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2715
fraud examin can us copi in prepar their case report but at trial the origin must
be produc if it is avail thu when public record ar involv in a fraud examin
examin should alwai obtain certifi copi
with regard to computer data the best evid rule doe not requir the parti offer
esi as evid to bring the origin custodian comput monitor and other equip to
displai the inform at trial rather rule 10013 provid that an origin write includ
ani printout or other output readabl by sight shown to reflect the data accur thu
hardcopi printout of document email and other esi qualifi as origin under the
feder rule of evid
object to exhibit
just becaus an exhibit is authent doe not mean it is automat admit if the
evid violat some other rule of evid such as the rule against hearsai prejudic or
relev the exhibit will like be bar
if an object is made the admiss of some exhibit requir separ hear for the
judg to consid the issu fraud trial can be bog down with lengthi challeng to the
sometim mountain stack of document offer as evid in decid on the
admiss of exhibit judg can decid to admit the materi just as it is admit it with
alter such as expurg part of a text or obscur certain imag or deni the
admiss altogeth
chain of custodi
if evid is subject to chang over time or is suscept to alter the offer parti
mai need to establish that the evid ha not been alter or chang from the time it wa
collect through it product in court thi is done by establish a chain of custodi the
chain of custodi is both a process and a document that memori 1 who ha had possess
of an object and 2 what thei have done with it it is simpli a mean of establish that
there ha not been a materi chang or alter to a piec of evid
chain of custodi issu ar paramount issu in ani case affect everi piec of physic
evid when parti present evid to a court thei must be readi to show that the item
thei ar offer is the same item that wa seiz when that evid is not distinct but
fungibl eg bag of cash bullet shell case or electron data the process or system
which authent the item is to maintain a chain of custodi
basic principl of evid law
2716 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener establish the chain of custodi consist of document each person who had
control or custodi of the evid how and when it wa receiv how it wa maintain or
store while in each person possess what chang if ani it underw in that person
custodi and how it left that person custodi the end result is a chain of testimoni that
account for the movement and locat of physic evid from the time it is obtain to
the time it is proffer at trial the goal is to show that access to the evid wa limit to
those who testifi in the chain of custodi and therebi demonstr that the evid ha not
been materi alter
gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur with a set of record or
outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa not properli seal can
dishevel a case but not wreck it outright court have found in some case that even though
there have been mistak in the chain of custodi the mistak affect the weight though
not the admiss of evid that is to sai the evid will still be allow into the
record but it is accompani by a forthright descript of ani improprieti that have
occur in the chain of custodi the juri and judg ar suppos to consid the
improprieti when thei deliber weigh the case for guilt or innoc
in fraud case the arrai of physic evid all the paper document audio and video
record and informationprocess equip such as comput demand some close
monitor in the chain of custodi thi is an area of the law which either side plaintiff or
defend can manipul to avoid talk about the evid itself rambl instead like a
filibust senat over who touch what and when and why that mean we will not see
or discuss the item in question
the follow ar some gener guidelin that will help examin demonstr the chain of
custodi thei will also help examin in authent obtain evid
if record ar receiv via mail or courierreceipt deliveri such as fedex or up
keep copi of the postmark envelop or the deliveri receipt
if a cover letter is includ make sure you keep it
if the cover letter or transmitt letter includ a list of the document check the packag
immedi to ensur all document ar there if someth is miss make a note in the
file and notifi the sender immedi
if you receiv document in person creat a memo state the date and time the
document were receiv who gave you the document where that individu obtain
the document and a complet list of the document receiv
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2717
if you obtain the document yourself from the origin sourc desk file cabinet etc
creat a memo describ the date time exact locat of where the document were
found and a complet list of the document obtain
keep the origin of these memo or deliveri receipt in the case file and keep a copi
with the document it will be much easier to identifi where the document came from if
you have the inform with the document
addition becaus digit evid can be easili alter or destroi a chain of custodi
must be maintain for all electron evid gather and analyz in an investig at
a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
hearsai
simpli put hearsai refer to a statement that repeat what some other person said while
outsid of court fre 801 defin hearsai as a statement other than on made at the trial
or hear offer in evid to prove the truth of the matter assert basic hearsai
involv the follow element
a statement anyth intend to be an assert statement can be oral written or
nonverb conduct such as nod a head
that is made outsid the court supervis statement made at trial or dure deposit ar
not hearsai becaus thei ar made dure court proceed but a statement made at
work or at a crime scene is outsid the court supervis and could be hearsai if the
other element ar also present
that is offer to prove the truth of the matter assert a parti is offer a statement to prove the
truth of the matter assert if the parti is try to prove that the assert made by the
declar the person who made the outofcourt statement is true
thi set apart virtual anyth said outsid the courtroom or outsid an offici
design function of the court such as a deposit
under the gener rule hearsai is not admiss in court but thi rule is subject to numer
except exclud hearsai on on level mean wit cannot sai he said she
basic principl of evid law
2718 2011 fraud examin manual
said each person testifi to hi own experi thi is design to protect the credibl
and condit of testimoni and to preserv each side right to crossexamin wit
each wit in the trial will be question about person firsthand encount unless their
statement satisfi on of the except discuss below wit will speak onli about
thing thei have experienc themselv if possibl evid should be present in the
courtroom so that the juri can determin the weight to give each piec of evid
the hearsai rule often creat admiss issu for electron store inform esi
becaus such evid is often made out of court and offer to prove the truth of the matter
assert
except to the hearsai rule
the gener rule against hearsai is full of except wai to get inform into the
record which account for the rule infami in courtroom drama and in real courtroom
the rule of evid exempt sever categori of statement that ar not to be consid
hearsai and there ar mani circumst in which evid although hearsai is admiss
the truth of the statement is not at issu
the hearsai rule onli appli if the statement is be offer to prove the truth of the matter
contain in the statement therefor if the statement is offer for some other purpos it
technic is not hearsai ani outofcourt statement can be admit if it 1 is relev to
some aspect of the proceed and 2 is not offer for the truth of it content such
statement ar most often us to show a person knowledg or state of mind at a particular
time for instanc a wit will be allow to testifi that she heard the defend sai i
cant stand thi compani thei ow me big time the statement cannot be us to prove
that the defend actual stole from the compani howev it can be admit to show the
defend state of mind that he wa disgruntl
admiss by an advers parti
gener the statement of an advers parti is not hearsai such statement ar call
admiss and can be veri power evid more specif an admiss is an outofcourt
statement or conduct by a parti to the lawsuit that tend to support the other side
posit or diminish the declar own posit thu anyth spoken or written by a
parti to a lawsuit can be enter into the record provid that the statement can be
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2719
corrobor and is relev each side can us it adversari outofcourt statement as
evid
for exampl dure your investig of the case prior to trial you interview the
defend dure the interview he tell you that he falsifi the invoic later he deni
make the statement if you take the stand and tell the juri that the defend told you he
falsifi invoic technic that statement is hearsai howev sinc it is an admiss it
will be admit under thi except to the rule
an admiss is not necessarili an outright confess a wit mai testifi that a bank
offic told her i have wai of get loan approv that no on els know about the
statement alon doe not prove loan fraud against the offic but it doe establish by hi
own admiss hi state intent to subvert the secur control of the institut
in case involv corpor larg group or govern agenc ani statement made by
a member of the organ is potenti an admiss the person who made the
statement ha to be directli author to speak for the organ or perform a job relat
to the issu under discuss for exampl an agent emploi by jefferson realtor who
sai youv been defraud here to an aggriev client ha made an admiss on behalf
of the compani a janitor at jefferson realtor howev cannot make the same admiss
becaus janitori duti ar not relat to the format of contract and chanc ar the
janitor is not author to make corpor declar sinc an agent make contract on
the compani behalf the statement is an admiss even if the agent is not the offici
spokesperson for jefferson legal affair
former testimoni under oath
testimoni given by the declar at anoth hear is admiss if the parti against whom
the testimoni is now offer had an opportun and motiv to examin the wit similar to
that in the present trial
busi and govern record
we commonli think of invoic receipt and offici document as the final legal word but
like statement made outsid of court busi and govern record ar hearsai thei ar
prepar outsid the courtroom a special except for these materi howev make
them admiss if thei ar provid with a legal foundat the admiss of such
record rest on two criteria
basic principl of evid law
2720 2011 fraud examin manual
have thei been prepar dure regularli conduct busi activ
ar thei verifi trustworthi
materi prepar specif for trial ar not admiss as busi record anyth that
cast doubt on the verac of these document can bar them in situat where the charg
involv alter document the materi ar admit to prove the charg of alter not
for their truthvalu so the hearsai rule doe not appli
computer record have had no troubl be accept as evid gener the hearsai
except for busi record appli ie thei ar admiss as long as the record have
been compil as a regular facet of do busi
howev it should be note that a minor of court follow a differ approach when
address hearsai within computer record which ha recent garner much acclaim
these court distinguish between computerstor record and computergener record
and hold that esi contain onli computergener record such as login record from
isp telephon record and atm receipt untouch by human hand do not contain
hearsai in such case there is no need to establish that a hearsai except appli
altern computerstor record ar creat or maintain by a human and therefor
ar deem hearsai thu thei must meet a hearsai except to be admit
statement against interest
a statement against interest is a special form of admiss in which a prior statement is at odd
with the declar current claim to be admiss under thi except the statement must
meet three requir
the declar must be unavail to testifi
the statement must have been against import interest of the declar when made
corrobor circumst must clearli establish the trustworthi of the statement
in prosecut a tax evas charg for exampl prosecutor mai present a financi
statement us by the defend to obtain a loan thi is a statement against interest becaus
the document declar a higher net worth than the defend now claim to have
absenc of an entri in busi record
evid that a matter is not includ in the memoranda or report kept in the regular cours
of busi mai be admiss to prove that a certain event did not occur if the matter wa
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2721
on about which a memorandum or report regularli wa made and preserv howev thi
doe not hold true if the sourc of inform or the circumst indic a lack of
trustworthi
record recollect
a memorandum or record mai be admiss if it concern a matter that the wit onc had
knowledg of but now ha forgotten if it wa made or adopt by the wit when the
matter wa fresh in memori and if it is shown to be accur such memoranda or record
also mai be shown to a wit who ha temporarili forgotten the event to refresh the
witnesss recollect and allow the testimoni to be more complet or accur
present sens impress
court assum statement that ar made dure or immedi after signific event or
condit and that describ or explain the event or condit ar reliabl so present sens
impress ar admiss for exampl a wit can report that he first suspect fraud at
secur plu by note that hi superior said oh my god thi cant be happen when
he wa inform that there would be an audit in a similar exampl mr whistler notic
jenni moor a cowork in john smith offic and overhear her sai oh here ar some
bid sheet in the trash can if the govern prosecut smith for bid rig which is
demonstr by the bid sheet mr whistler can testifi about moor statement as a present
sens impress becaus the word describ the scene befor her
excit utter
there is also an except for statement relat to a startl event or condit made while
the declar wa under the stress of it excit unlik statement of present sens
impress excit utter requir an occurr that is startl enough to produc
excit in the mr whistler scenario for exampl moor statement might qualifi as
an excit utter if she discov the bid sheet after month of search for
incrimin evid and told whistler while jump up and down in excit iv
found the evid iv been wait for a long time here the success conclus of the
search wa suffici excit
then exist mental emot or physic condit
statement of the declar thenexist state of mind emot or physic condit ar
also admiss as except to the hearsai rule specif the feder rule of evid
803 list state of mind emot sensat or physic condit pain and bodili health
basic principl of evid law
2722 2011 fraud examin manual
as accept subject matter along with extrem person thought process such as
intent plan motiv design mental feel
defens attornei at a fraud trial sometim us argument about what their client intend or
the confus and stress the person wa suffer for instanc the defend wa seen
shred document and he wa overheard to sai theyll never prove anyth now the
statement mai be admit to show the defend state of mind at the time he wa
shred the document it also show that the defend act with the intent to destroi
the document hearsai statement that help establish thi intent ar admiss as
except
statement for purpos of medic diagnosi or treatment
anyth first commun dure a medic examin is admiss as a hearsai
except thi includ medic histori symptom pain and the gener charact of the
medic condit these statement do not even have to have been made by the patient
thei can involv someon parent or spous accompani the patient
print matter learn treatis and refresh write
written materi that add to the court knowledg of an issu ar except from the hearsai
rule thi except often bear on the testimoni of expert wit who often us
publish materi in their work
print materi that support technic or profession assert such as commod market
report stock market quot mortal tabl cost of live index etc ar admiss if
thei ar gener us and reli upon by the public or by person in particular
occup the feder rule of evid specif mention market report and
commerci public
the feder rule of evid also creat a hearsai except for learn treatis provid
that an authorit work is admiss to either support or attack the opinion of an expert
wit and that the work ar establish as reliabl author howev some court limit
the rule in these jurisdict special treatis period or pamphlet can be
referenc onli dure crossexamin in a world of prolifer and sometim
contradictori sourc of inform just what count as a learn treatis and what is a
fring group manifesto is not immedi clear
write us to refresh a witnesss memori is admiss under special circumst basic
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2723
court mai permit testifi wit to refresh or reviv their memori by refer to a
write or anyth els if the wit will thereaft be abl to testifi without depend on
the term of the write for exampl whistler who is serv as a wit at a fraud trial
want to see some note he wrote two year ago to make sure he got the number right in hi
testimoni he is allow to consult the note and continu with hi testimoni there is a
lawyerli aspect to thi ruleth text of the note is admiss too but onli if the oppos
attornei request the admiss
other except
miscellan except to the hearsai rule includ thing like dy declar and ancient
document for those instanc not specifi in ani rule there remain the judg discret
anyth the judg deem trustworthi for the purpos of it present is admiss thi is
the cornerston of the rule hearsai is exclud in the first place becaus it supposedli lack
trustworthi howev other kind of hearsai that do not fall within ani specif hearsai
except mai be admiss if thei meet the same standard of trustworthi as requir
for the list except
exclud illeg seiz evid
in gener evid obtain improperli is taint and unfit for trial the fourth
amend set out thi cornerston exclusionari rule bar anyth obtain by
author without proper author from the owner or possessor or through a courtord
search warrant gener thi rule appli onli in crimin case but it also appli
to govern employ therefor a public employ cannot us illeg seiz evid
to disciplin an employe there is no fourth amend prohibit against a privat
employ us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe howev but if a privat
employ doe us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe the employ might be
expos itself to litig for invas of privaci trespass or other common law caus of
action even though the evid mai still be admit in court
impeach
the abov discuss concern the manner in which evid is introduc at trial usual
dure direct examin there is of cours anoth side to testimoni crossexamin
under the rule of evid and the sixth amend which guarante a defend the
right to confront wit the advers parti is entitl to offer evid to impeach the
basic principl of evid law
2724 2011 fraud examin manual
testimoni or credibl of a wit impeach is the practic of bring out matter that
attack a witnesss credibl
there ar numer wai an attornei might impeach a wit but the most common wai
includ effort to show that the wit
is influenc by bia or selfinterest
ha an impair abil to observ
made prior inconsist statement
ha been convict of a feloni
ha a reput for untruth
impeach by bia show that the wit ha reason or at least opportun to skew the
evid against on of the parti in the litig question on crossexamin will
cover ani pecuniari interest the wit ha in the case ani connect the wit might
have to ani matter or litig and ani other inform that will make the wit appear to
have some interest in favor on parti over anoth
anoth wai to impeach wit is to show that their abil to observ wa impair matter of
observ includ the abil to see hear smell or feel some item in question
noth overturn a witnesss statement like inconsist oppos lawyer will alwai
confront ani wit on crossexamin with ani appar inconsist between the
trial testimoni and statement testimoni or inform given by the wit on other
occas
a witnesss credibl mai be challeng though not automat impeach by show that
the person ha been convict of a feloni crime the govern rule rule 609 of the feder rule of
evid offer a few basic instruct first convict for act involv dishonesti
such as larceni theft or fraud ar especi harm to a witnesss testimoni second ani
wit mai be impeach with ani prior feloni convict third evid of ani prior
convict is presum inadmiss if the convict is more than 10 year old
final ani wit mai be impeach by proof of reput for untruth
certifi fraud examin should keep in mind that the abov method of impeach mai
be us not onli on the defend and defens wit but also on wit for the
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2725
prosecut or defens inquiri should be made befor trial to determin if a prosecut or
defens wit is subject to impeach and if so appropri step should be taken
privileg
introduct
there ar certain evidentiari privileg that protect certain type of evid from be
discov or produc invok a privileg for a piec of testimoni or other evid in a
legal encount keep the materi outsid trial proceed if a privileg appli the court
and it petition ar deni access to the privileg inform and judg and juri must
disregard ani evid thei do actual hear if it is deem privileg afterward
the most import privileg ar discuss below
attorneycli privileg
the attorneycli privileg preclud disclosur of commun between an attornei
and client but onli if the follow condit ar met
the client retain the attornei
to provid legal advic
and thereaft commun with the attornei on a confidenti basi and
the privileg ha not been waiv
the attorneycli privileg appli to individu as well as corpor or other busi
entiti in the context of an investig of a compani commun gener will be
protect under the attorneycli privileg if the follow element ar present
the commun were made by corpor employe to counsel
the commun were made at the direct of corpor superior in order for the
compani to obtain legal advic from counsel
the employe were awar that the commun were be made in order for the
compani to obtain legal advic
the inform need wa not avail from upper manag
the commun concern matter within the scope of the employe corpor
duti
basic principl of evid law
2726 2011 fraud examin manual
the commun were confidenti when made and were kept confidenti by the
compani
a gener counsel particip in an investig conduct by manag doe not
automat creat an attorneycli privileg the kei element is that the attornei whether
inhous counsel or outsid counsel is conduct the investig for the purpos of
provid legal advic to the compani the privileg gener extend to inform
gather by investig if the investig is act at the direct of the attornei
the attorneycli privileg prevent disclosur of the communicationsth letter memo
or content of telephon callsb etween the attornei and client not of the underli fact
or documentari evid in the case a client mai not refus to produc document or other
relev evid mere becaus such evid wa previous given to the attornei
similarli the attorneycli privileg doe not prevent disclosur of commun that
relat to busi rather than legal advic corpor counsel is often consult to give advic
on matter relat to busi conduct rather than legal issu such commun would
be discover
final the attorneycli privileg mai not be assert if the commun involv the
attempt or actual commiss of a present crime or fraud the attornei doe not have to be
a particip in the fraud for the waiver to appli
waiver
special care should be taken to ensur that the attorneycli privileg is not waiv
inadvert by give document or commun inform to anyon outsid the
investig team includ member of law enforc if inform gather dure an
investig is share with law enforc then the privileg mai be waiv not onli as to
the inform given but also to ani other inform relat to the same subject matter
for exampl if an investig submit a copi of hi report to the prosecutor who initi
crimin proceed base on the find in the report the crimin defend mai be abl
to requir the investig to provid all the document he us in write the report in such
an instanc the investig mai be consid to have waiv the privileg likewis if law
enforc request the result of an investig or inform gather dure an
investig the attornei should be consult befor turn over the inform some
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2727
court have held that the privileg is not waiv if a compani is subpoena to produc the
inform
inadvert waiver
moreov some court have held that inadvert disclosur of a singl privileg document
includ digit document waiv the privileg as to all document concern the same
subject matter for thi reason special care must also be taken to avoid inadvert disclosur
from the us of electron commun includ email cell phone fax text
messag instant messag etc it is clear that the attorneycli privileg extend to
electron commun and it is also clear that a matter voluntarili commun to a
thirdparti who is not an agent of your counsel is not confidenti and therefor not
privileg thu when a parti choos to us a form of electron commun which is
vulner to intercept and inadvert disclosur you run the risk that your messag
might be intercept by or disclos to an unintend thirdparti
to illustr how easili inadvert disclosur of electron commun mai occur
consid a few wai that an email mai unwittingli end up in the hand of an unintend
thirdparti email mai be forward to addit unintend employe indic a lack
of confidenti subject matter thei mai be distribut to a larg number of person
suggest a lack of confidenti or the sender could mistakenli hit the wrong kei on the
keyboard and send the email to the wrong recipi therefor fraud examin must be
concern about the risk of inadvert disclosur of electron commun and should
take cautionari measur to preserv the attorneycli privileg
unfortun fear over the consequ of subjectmatt waiver ha led to dramat
litig cost increas in todai digit environ where review ten hundr and
even thousand of gigabyt of inform for privileg is time consum and expens
feder rule of evid 502
in an effort to protect against inadvert waiver of the attorneycli privileg or the work
product protect presid bush sign into law s 2450 a bill ad evid rule 502
to the feder rule of evid the legisl resolv conflict between court throughout
the countri on whether an inadvert product of privileg materi result in waiver
simpli state under rule 502 an inadvert disclosur of a privileg commun can
no longer waiv protect for all document concern the same subject matter
basic principl of evid law
2728 2011 fraud examin manual
among other thing rule 502 provid the follow protect
if disclosur is made then the privileg is waiv to ani other undisclos inform
onli if 1 the waiver is intent 2 the other inform relat to the same subject
matter and 3 fair requir further disclosur rule 502a
if disclosur is inadvert it doe not result in waiver when the privileg holder took
reason step to prevent disclosur and promptli took reason step to rectifi the
error rule 502b
if the disclosur wa made in a state court proceed the disclosur doe not waiv
protect in a feder proceed if on of two condit is met 1 the disclosur
would not have been a waiver under rule 502 or 2 the disclosur is not a waiver under
state law rule 502c
the mcnulti memorandum and the doj guidelin
on decemb 12 2006 the depart of justic doj issu guidelin in the form of
the mcnulti memorandum for feder investig and prosecut of busi
organ the mcnulti memorandum which address the practic of feder
prosecutor investig and charg busi organ misconduct revis the doj
prior guidanc outlin in the much malign thompson memorandum which provid that
feder prosecutor could seek waiver of the attorneycli privileg and attornei work
product protect as an element of a compani cooper specif the mcnulti
memorandum provid specif criteria that prosecutor were requir to consid and
procedur thei were requir to follow befor seek waiver of privileg or work product
protect
on august 28 2008 the depart of justic doj issu guidelin which revis the
mcnulti memorandum on how feder prosecutor investig charg and prosecut
corpor crime unlik the mcnulti memorandum the guidelin ar a part of the us
attornei manual which provid intern doj guidanc but doe not creat ani enforc
law
in an effort to stop congression action such that propos by s 445 the guidelin bar
prosecutor from judg corpor cooper for lenienc on whether an entiti is will
to waiv the attorneycli privileg or work product protect the guidelin also state
that prosecutor can no longer seek disclosur of inform that is either privileg or
protect work product in addit the guidelin provid that when evalu a
corpor cooper prosecutor mai no longer consid whether a compani is
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2729
advanc legal fee for it employe whether a corpor ha sanction or retain
culpabl employe or whether a corpor ha enter into joint defens agreement
even though most observ agre that the guidelin ar a signific improv over the
mcnulti memorandum mani contend that comprehens legisl is still need to make
the doj reform perman and prevent a relaps in depart polici as well as to bar
similar waiver polici adopt by other feder agenc such as the secur exchang
commiss and the intern revenu servic for thi reason the doj guidelin mai
stop interest parti from support the enact of legisl that would further
protect corpor and their employe from governmentcoerc waiver
select waiver
under the select waiver doctrin a corpor seek to cooper with a govern
investig pursuant to a confidenti agreement can disclos materi protect by the
attorneycli privileg to the govern without waiv those protect as to
nongovernment parti such as privat plaintiff but it should be note that most feder
circuit court have reject the select waiver doctrin in addit rule 502 of the feder
rule of evid doe not explicitli acknowledg select waiver but it doe not explicitli
elimin select waiver as a viabl doctrin
the attornei work product doctrin
under rule 26b3 of the feder rule of civil procedur and under compar state
rule document and tangibl thing that ar prepar in anticip of litig ar
protect by the attornei work product doctrin or privileg the privileg is condit in part
the oppos parti mai obtain access to otherwis privileg investig document and
thing through pretrial discoveri if it can show substanti need for the protect inform
and that the inform cannot be obtain from anoth sourc howev the attornei
mental impress opinion and strategi concern the litig ar absolut privileg
and cannot be discov even with a show of substanti need the privileg extend to not
onli inform and document prepar by a parti or the parti attornei but also by the
consult and examin hire by the attornei for instanc commun with the
attornei and ani work or analysi done by an expert with whom the attornei ha consult is
privileg as work product although that privileg will be waiv if the expert is call to
testifi as an expert wit at trial
work product protect appli onli to document and thing prepar in anticip of
basic principl of evid law
2730 2011 fraud examin manual
litig or for trial thu document and tangibl thing prepar in the cours of an inhous
or other prelitig investig even if at the direct of an attornei mai not be
privileg if thei were not prepar in anticip of litig just becaus there is a possibl
of futur litig doe not mean that the investig is in anticip thereof litig
must be actual plan and the work for which protect is sought must have been
undertaken for the specif purpos of prepar for that litig but if the work to be
protect wa done in anticip of litig then it doe not matter in most jurisdict that
no lawsuit ha been file yet
the privileg protect document and thing prepar in anticip of litig from
compel disclosur nevertheless it doe not render the fact themselv confidenti
privileg or nondiscover thu while report interview note and transcript might
not be discover under the privileg the fact learn mai have to be provid in respons
to properli phrase discoveri request similarli the privileg doe not prevent discoveri of
the ident of wit and the exist of interview note tape or transcript the extent
to which interview note transcript and other factual report prepar in anticip of
litig ar actual protect from discoveri by a parti oppon mai vari between
jurisdict and mai depend on the fact and circumst of a given case
waiver of work product protect
like the attorneycli privileg work product protect can be waiv moreov the
feder rule of evid 502 expressli appli to disclosur of a commun or
inform cover by work product protect therefor the examin should abid by
the same rule govern disclosur of materi protect by the attorneycli privileg
work product protect and outsid auditor
in late 2004 a feder district judg in new york under the work product doctrin protect
the result of an intern investig of a larg compani given to an outsid auditor merril
lynch co inc v allegheni energi inc 2004 us dist lexi 21543 howev court
continu to disagre as to whether such disclosur waiv work product protect under the
feder rule of evid
befor disclos work product to an outsid auditor a compani should determin whether
the outsid auditor is an adversari some court consid auditor to be the watchdog of
compani and therefor inher adversari to their corpor client certainli the role of
outsid auditor is to independ ensur the accuraci of a compani financi find
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2731
inaccuraci and detect fraud howev the court in merril lynch distinguish thi kind of
adversari from a litig adversari a compani auditor is not necessarili a litig
adversari which is requir to invalid the work product privileg rather a busi
and it auditor can and should be align insofar as thei both seek to prevent detect and
root out corpor fraud
the court also emphas that a blanket waiver of privileg in thi kind of situat would
like discourag ethic disclosur and conduct by compani thu the trend in litig
seem to review the fact on a casebycas basi to determin whether an auditor and
compani share common interest and therefor ar nonadversari
the follow principl should aid compani in determin whether thei should provid
work product to outsid auditor 1 ensur a common interest between the compani and
the outsid auditor 2 onli disclos inform necessari to help the auditor assess
suffici of the compani control and the accuraci of the compani auditaccount
procedur and 3 when disclos informati on alwai includ a confidenti agreement
acknowledg that the document were prepar by counsel and therefor privileg as well
as a coven that the outsid auditor is to maintain the strictest confid of the
document
selfevalu privileg
the selfevalu privileg also refer to as the selfcrit privileg mai provid some
protect for the investig work product thi privileg is base on the need to
encourag voluntari intern review and complianc program it appli if an organ
can demonstr that it is attempt to polic itself in an area of public interest and that
disclosur of the work product would prejudic such effort the privileg is a rel new
concept and is not recogn in all jurisdict it is much weaker than the attorneycli
and attornei work product privileg
marit privileg
addition the marit privileg protect commun between husband and wive
there ar two form of the marit or spousal privileg 1 the confidenti commun
privileg enabl either spous to prevent the other from testifi regard a
commun dure marriag between the two that wa intend to be in confid and
2 the advers testimoni privileg protect spous from be compel to testifi against each
other while thei ar marri usual the confidenti commun privileg continu
basic principl of evid law
2732 2011 fraud examin manual
after the termin of the marriag the advers testimoni privileg doe not
there is no privileg that permit a person not to testifi against other famili member
although as a matter of polici mani law enforc agenc will not compel testimoni
from immedi famili member
law enforc privileg to withhold the ident of an inform
law enforc agenc mai legitim withhold the ident of an inform unless
disclosur is necessari to ensur that the defend receiv a fair trial in such circumst
the prosecut ha to decid whether to forego prosecut or disclos the ident of the
inform in the privat sector there is no equival privileg certifi fraud examin or
other who ar investig on behalf of a privat client mai be compel by court order to
disclos the ident of an inform or ani other wit thi possibl should be disclos
to potenti wit who mai request confidenti see the investig section of the
fraud examin manual for more inform
accountantcli privileg
a few state have a weak accountantcli privileg that allow an account to resist
product of a client work paper or document no such privileg is recogn in feder
court and the state privileg mai be overcom by a show of need or by the servic of a
subpoena
there is howev a feder author tax practition privileg under section 7525 of
the intern revenu code thi privileg is a evidentiari privileg that provid limit
protect in feder tax law it appli onli in situat where a cpa is provid tax advic
in noncrimin proceed befor the ir or befor a feder court
nevertheless as discuss abov in feder proceed commun between a client
and a thirdparti such as an account mai be protect under the attorneycli privileg
or the attornei work product doctrin
the attorneycli privileg extend to account if the attornei hire the account to
assist in render legal advic addition the privileg extend to an account
document which were made at the attornei request us to render legal advic thi
privileg wa clarifi in us v cote which conclud that there is no protect for
account servic if no legal advic wa sought in cote the client engag the account
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2733
befor retain the lawyer the client and account had a longstand profession
relationship and the attornei did not control or supervis the account effort or work
product
in addit the attornei work product protect extend to inform and document
prepar by the consult and examin hire by the attornei includ account
howev ani protect will be waiv if the account is call to testifi as an expert
wit at trial
in case where account serv as expert wit the work product doctrin mai appli
protect under the work product doctrin gener depend on whether the account
serv as a testifi expert or a nontestifi consult expert noth creat by the
testifi expert is privileg from discoveri convers the rule of discoveri gener
protect commun between a nontestifi expert the attornei and the parti from
disclosur to adversari howev the protect against disclosur of commun with
nontestifi expert can be lost and thi commonli occur when the nontestifi expert
commun ar releas to other particularli to testifi expert thi topic is
discuss in further detail below
there ar a number of other privileg that ar less like to be assert in fraud action
includ the priestpenit and physicianpati privileg
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2801
