2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Three Basic Forms of Evidence


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Three Basic Forms of Evidence 
Evidence is anything perceptible by the five senses, which is invoked in the process of 
arguing a case. Documents, spoken recollections, data of various sorts, and physical objects 
are all potentially evidence. Evidence is simply anything that relates to the proving or 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.702  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
disproving of a fact or consequence. With the known universe available for court inspection, 
legal authorities have narrowed the field by setting up categories to evaluate evidentiary 
significance.  
 
There are three basic forms, as distinguished from types, of evidence: testimonial, real, and 
demonstrative. Testimony refers to the oral statements made by witnesses under oath. In 
general, there are two types of testimonial witnesses: lay witnesses and expert witnesses. A lay  
(or fact) witness is a non-expert witness who must testify from personal knowledge about a 
matter at issue. An expert witness is a person who, by reason of education, training, skill, or 
experience, is qualified to render an opinion or otherwise testify in areas relevant to resolution 
of a legal dispute. 
 
Real evidence describes physical objects that played a part in the issues being litigated. The term 
includes both documentary evidence — such as canceled checks, invoices, ledgers, and 
letters — as well as other types of physical evidence.  Therefore, a typewriter or printer in a case 
involving questioned documents is clearly real evidence, as is a tape recording since members 
of the court can experience the sounds firsthand.  
 
Demonstrative evidence is a tangible item that illustrates some material proposition (e.g., a map, a 
chart, or a summary). It differs from real evidence in that demonstrative evidence was not 
part of the underlying event; it was created specifically for the trial. Its purpose is to provide a 
visual aid for the jury. Nonetheless, it is evidence and can be considered by the jury in 
reaching a verdict. 
 
 



:


three basic form of evid
evid is anyth percept by the five sens which is invok in the process of
argu a case document spoken recollect data of variou sort and physic object
ar all potenti evid evid is simpli anyth that relat to the prove or
basic principl of evid law
2702 2011 fraud examin manual
disprov of a fact or consequ with the known univers avail for court inspect
legal author have narrow the field by set up categori to evalu evidentiari
signific
there ar three basic form as distinguish from type of evid testimoni real and
demonstr testimoni refer to the oral statement made by wit under oath in
gener there ar two type of testimoni wit lai wit and expert wit a lai
or fact wit is a nonexpert wit who must testifi from person knowledg about a
matter at issu an expert wit is a person who by reason of educ train skill or
experi is qualifi to render an opinion or otherwis testifi in area relev to resolut
of a legal disput
real evid describ physic object that plai a part in the issu be litig the term
includ both documentari evid such as cancel check invoic ledger and
letter as well as other type of physic evid therefor a typewrit or printer in a case
involv question document is clearli real evid as is a tape record sinc member
of the court can experi the sound firsthand
demonstr evid is a tangibl item that illustr some materi proposit eg a map a
chart or a summari it differ from real evid in that demonstr evid wa not
part of the underli event it wa creat specif for the trial it purpos is to provid a
visual aid for the juri nonetheless it is evid and can be consid by the juri in
reach a verdict
