2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Exhibits


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Exhibits 
Exhibits are the tangible objects presented as evidence. Therefore, both real evidence and 
demonstrative evidence are entered into the record as exhibits. This includes documents such 
as contracts, letters, and receipts, as well as photographs, X-rays, baseball bats, knives, 
fountain pens and computer files. In short, anything that is not testimony is an exhibit. 
Testimony is what people say. Exhibits are the “props.” 
 
Authenticating Typical Exhibits 
At the most basic level, evidence must be established as reliable or authentic. Thus, evidence, 
other than testimonial evidence, must be properly authenticated; that is, the party offering the 
evidence must produce some evidence to show it is, in fact, what the party says it is. If a piece 
of real evidence cannot be authenticated, the evidence will not be admitted even if it is plainly 
relevant.  
 
For proper authentication, the party offering the evidence must produce some evidence (e.g., 
testimony from a person with first-hand knowledge) to show it is, in fact, what the party says 
it is and that it has remained in the same condition from the moment it was seized until it is 
used in court. 
 
Similar to the authentication requirement for tangible evidence, there is a similar sort of 
“credibility test” for witnesses. If testimony is to become admissible evidence, the witness 
must demonstrate that the knowledge being communicated is believable and gained by 
personal experience.  
 
Below are some of the issues you will encounter in proving to the judge that a particular 
exhibit is authentic. 
 
Demonstrative Evidence 
Again, demonstrative evidence refers to a tangible item that illustrates some material proposition. 
It differs from real evidence in that demonstrative evidence is not part of the underlying 
event; it is created specifically for the trial. Its purpose is to provide a visual aid for the jury. 
 
An exhibit used for purely “illustrative purposes” is a type of demonstrative evidence. 
Demonstrative evidence includes charts, graphs, and summaries that help to simplify 
complicated evidence for the jury. In complex fraud cases, such evidence is extremely useful, 
but it must be simple and easy to understand.   
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.708  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Demonstrative evidence is admissible if the court decides that it presents a fair and balanced 
summary or picture of the evidence and is not unduly prejudicial, and if offered for its truth 
value (and not just to illustrate a point), demonstrative evidence must be authenticated to 
show that the evidence is in fact what it is claimed to be.  
 
Also, demonstrative evidence must be made available to the other party, and the court may 
order that the information used to create the exhibit be produced in court. 
 
Diagrams 
A diagram  is a schematic or technical drawing that is used to help make something easier to 
understand. A diagram (on paper or some other tangible display) can be admitted as evidence 
with no more foundation than the assent of a witness: “Is this a fair representation of the 
suite where you work?” It does not have to be true to scale or particularly detailed. A diagram 
can be prepared before trial, during trial, or prepped outside the court and finished during 
questioning. If a party objects to the admission of a diagram, the offering party may need to 
establish that it is reliable. Diagrams can be used in tandem with photos or other 
representational evidence, or as assistance in demonstrations to the jury. 
 
Writings 
In general, authentication of a writing consists of establishing who authored the document. 
Depending on the document and situation, this is done in one of several ways: (1) the author 
testifies and claims authorship; (2) a witness testifies to seeing the author write the document; 
(3) with handwritten letters, a witness verifies the author’s penmanship; (4) with typed or 
machine-written documents, the witness verifies the author’s signature; (5) a witness testifies 
that the contents of the document point decisively to the author. These and many other 
document issues may require the participation of a questioned documents expert.  
 
Business Records and Other Documents 
Business records can encompass a broad range of documents, from all sorts of organizations, 
including corporations, small businesses, nonprofit operations, and community groups. Like 
other evidence, a party offering business records must provide testimony that the exhibit is 
the business record in question. For proper authentication, the party offering the evidence 
should be able to establish the following two things: 
• The content of the document is complete and unaltered 
• The document originated from the named place of origination 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.709 
Certain documents, such as business records, are self-authenticating and may be received into 
evidence without independent proof of authenticity. Under the Federal Rules of Evidence, 
business records are self-authenticating if a custodian or other qualified person certifies that 
the records meet the following requirements:  
• The records were prepared reasonably near the time of the event it describes. 
• The records were made by, or based on information transmitted from, a person with 
knowledge 
• The document was prepared as a usual part of doing business (i.e., it was not prepared 
specifically for litigation). 
 
Business records are also vulnerable to hearsay objections. Put differently, offering the 
contents of business records to establish the truth of their contents can constitute hearsay. 
Thus, such materials can be barred as unreliable out-of-court statements unless a trustworthy 
foundation can be established. If, however, there is certification that complies with the self-authenticating 
rules listed above, the records will not only be self-authenticating, but the 
contents of the records will be admissible to the prove the truth of the contents as an 
exception to the rule against hearsay.  
 
Government Documents 
The requirements for government documents are the same as for other business records. The 
distinction between government and business records arose because of narrow interpretations 
of the law that separated nonprofit from for-profit enterprises. Today, most records, 
regardless of origin, are called business records. 
 
Phone Records 
To be admitted into evidence, phone records  must meet the business records authentication test. 
However, investigators must also be aware of the federal Telephone Records and Privacy 
Protection Act of 2006 (TRPPA), which criminalizes the practice of obtaining and attempting 
to obtain confidential phone record information through pretexting (gaining access through 
the use of false statements) unless it is otherwise permitted by law. Violations of the Act are 
criminal, and if convicted, a violator faces up to 10 years in prison and up to $100,000 in 
fines.  
 
Electronically Stored Information 
Currently, there is still much controversy regarding how to authenticate electronically stored 
information (ESI). The U.S. Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.710  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Property Section has developed a manual for electronic search and seizure, which judges have 
used as a guide as to whether digital evidence has been properly seized. If digital evidence 
needs to be seized, it is vital that examiners engage the services of a trained computer forensic 
technician. A properly trained technician should know the procedures to follow to ensure that 
the files can be authenticated. 
 
Generally, to be admissible, ESI evidence must meet the same authentication standards as 
hard copy documents (i.e., to show that the item is what the proponent claims); however, 
courts have recognized that the authentication of ESI evidence may require greater scrutiny 
because ESI can easily be altered after creation. Thus, to prove that a particular electronic 
document is authentic, those offering the evidence must demonstrate that the original 
document was not modified after its creation.  
 
Rule 901 of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides a non-exclusive, explicative list of 
methods by which evidence can be authenticated, and some of the methods may be used to 
authenticate ESI. Rule 901(b)(1) allows authentication through testimony of a witness with 
knowledge that a matter is what it is claimed to be. Additionally, Rule 901(b)(3) allows for 
authentication by comparison to already authenticated evidence by an expert witness or the 
trier of fact. Similarly, Rule 901(b)(4) allows authentication by circumstantial evidence of 
distinctive characteristics (e.g., hash values or metadata).  
 
Furthermore, under Rule 902, some documents are self-authenticating, which means that they 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. For ESI purposes, 
the three most relevant categories of self-authenticating documents are official publications, 
trade inscriptions, and certified copies of business records.  
 
In addition, different forms of ESI evidence may require different authentication approaches. 
Therefore, it is helpful to examine a few common types.  
 
E-MAIL 
Unlike traditional business letters written on formal letterhead, e-mails are more prone to 
authenticity issues and may be more difficult to properly authenticate. For example, the judge 
in Lorraine v. Markel, 241 F.R.D. 534 (D. Md. 2007) refused to allow either party to offer e-mails
of an arbitration negotiation as evidence, finding that neither party authenticated the e-mails 
by simply attaching them to their motions as exhibits. 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.711 
E-mail authenticity issues usually arise because e-mail systems are unreliable and inherently 
unsecure, making e-mails susceptible to alteration. Moreover, e-mails can lack reliability 
because the identities of senders can be corrupted through unauthorized access and use.  
 
Even so, there are numerous ways e-mail can be authenticated, including:  
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., a witness testifies that he recognizes a copy of an 
e-mail that he received or drafted) 
• Comparison with authenticated examples (e.g., if one e-mail has been properly 
authenticated, a second e-mail could by authenticated by comparing it with the first) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., the presence of a party’s name 
and e-mail address or the presence of metadata) 
• Trade inscriptions purporting to have been affixed in the course of business and 
indicating ownership, control, or origin (e.g., an automatic business signature at the end of 
the e-mail) 
• Certified copies of business records (e.g., e-mail is accompanied by a written certification 
by its custodian) 
 
TEXT AND INSTANT MESSAGES 
As the use of text and instant messages continues to grow, parties are offering this ESI as 
evidence in an increasing number of cases. However, given the nature of this type of 
evidence, parties often encounter foundational issues when authenticating text and instant 
messages. Notwithstanding the novel technology involved, these types of ESI can be 
admissible when the proponent offers direct or circumstantial evidence as to its authenticity. 
The most likely authenticate chat room and text messages are: 
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., a witness testifies that he recognizes a copy 
messages that he received or drafted) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., the use of the defendant’s name 
in the text messages and the subject matter of the messages) 
 
COMPUTER RECORDS  
Courts typically accept computer files and documents as evidence. In fact, courts themselves 
are using more electronic resources because many aspects of litigation can now be conducted 
electronically. 
 
Traditionally, to be admitted as evidence, computerized records need only meet the usual 
business-records authentication, which requires that the computerized records be 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.712  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
accompanied by certification by a qualified person stating that (1) the records were prepared 
reasonably near the time of the event they describe, (2) the records were prepared as a usual 
part of doing business, and (3) the organization’s way of keeping records is demonstrably 
reliable.  
 
The required supporting material to authenticate computer records will include information 
on the computing machine used, any software, and the record-keeping process. A business 
record, electronic or otherwise, is legal as long as it’s kept in the normal course of business. 
When there are clear routines for compiling information, admitting the record into court will 
be routine.  
 
Recently, however, courts have recognized that authentication of computerized records may 
require greater scrutiny because, unlike other ESI evidence, the primary authentication issue 
regarding computerized records is what has, or may have, happened to the record in the time 
between when it was entered in the files and the time of trial. Based upon this view, the most 
likely methods of authenticating computerized records are: 
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., an authenticating witness attests to the process by 
which the computerized records are created, acquired, maintained, and preserved) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., a person’s business habit is 
consistent with the document) 
• Certified copies of business records (e.g., computerized records are accompanied by 
custodian’s written certification)  
 
Website Data 
A growing number of people are using social networking sites like LinkedIn, Facebook, 
MySpace, and Twitter, and, as a result, the legal use of information obtained from social 
media sites has increased. Many users don’t give much thought to what they post online. And 
because most of the information that gets posted online becomes a permanent record 
somewhere, investigators, attorneys, and employers are increasingly mining these sites for 
information, photos, and videos that can become evidence in civil and criminal litigation. 
 
As with all evidence, the proponent of social media evidence must be prepared to establish 
that the evidence is authentic. The standard for authenticating evidence from social media 
sites is no different than for any other types of evidence. That is, there must be sufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the evidence is what the proponent claims.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.713 
In some courts, authenticity can be established by the testimony of a witness. Like any other 
demonstrative exhibit, parties can authenticate a website with the testimony of a witness who 
verifies that the exhibit at issue accurately reflects what he observed after logging on to the 
site and reviewing what was there.  
 
Alternately, the proponent may be able authenticate a website by providing testimony from 
the webmaster or someone with personal knowlege to show that the data was posted by the 
person to whom the information is attributed. For example, if website data is attributated to 
the website owner, the webmaster can testify that a particular file or content was entered on a 
site at a specific time. This is similar to authenticating writings by showing that the item was 
written by the person to whom it is attributed. But because Facebook, MySpace, and Twitter-type
evidence typically comes from third parties, who sometimes uses pseudonyms, 
attributing this type of evidence to a certain person can be challenging.  
 
Finally, some website data may be self-authenticated. To review, self-authenticating evidence 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. The types of 
website evidence that may fall under this category include government material that appears 
on official government websites or business-related material that appears on an organization’s 
website. 
 
Photographs 
Concerning photographs, it is necessary to establish their fidelity to the object they claim to 
represent. This means that the offering party must prove that the picture is unaltered and 
shows what the proponent claims it shows. Generally it is enough to have a witness familiar 
with the object or space in a photo to corroborate it (e.g., “Yes, that’s the hallway running 
between our two buildings.”). The matter gets more complicated when a photo is 
controversial. This can require technical specifications for proper foundation. In the most 
famous trial since Sam Sheppard, O.J. Simpson’s lawyers challenged a photo of the defendant 
wearing Bruno Mali shoes as “doctored.” Both sides introduced experts to discuss whether 
the photo had been altered, what sort of camera, lens, and environmental conditions were 
involved, etc. The same issues can arise with photos in any trial.   
 
In some unusual situations, a photo may reveal information that no witness can corroborate. 
There has been at least one instance where the background of a photo showed a stabbing that 
took place in a crowd. No one, not even the photographer, saw the stabbing at the time. In 
unusual situations where a photo communicates evidence not substantiated elsewhere, the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.714  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation of the photograph will need more strength — including technical details on the 
camera, the film, who took the shot, why and where, etc.  
 
The exceptions make photos seem more legally fraught than they are. They usually are 
admitted with little objection. Photos do not even have to be contemporary with the crime or 
grievance to which they pertain. If a photograph is established as accurate in its portrayal, it 
can be shot after the original act.  
 
General Points 
Either side can enter exhibits into the record, given the proper foundation. Once admitted, 
the evidence is available for use by either side. It does not matter who entered the item into 
evidence; either side can use it during questioning.  
 
It also does not matter when exhibits are admitted. They may be introduced into evidence 
during direct examination: opposing counsel is allowed to inspect the exhibit and then the 
witness confirms the exhibit, which has been marked Exhibit A (or Exhibit 1). Some courts 
use letters for exhibits while some court use numbers. Usually the exhibit is identified by 
which side enters it (e.g., Plaintiff’s Exhibit 1.)  
 
When everyone agrees, exhibits can be directly entered into the record, without foundational 
review, by stipulation — both parties sign the stipulation form, describing and acknowledging 
the exhibit. 
 
The “Best Evidence” Rule 
Sometimes testimony may be rejected because of the “best evidence” rule, which prohibits a 
party from testifying about the contents of a document without producing the document 
itself. This rule, however, only applies when an original or copy is being used to prove the 
contents of a writing.  
 
Also known as the “original writing” rule, the best evidence rule provides that when a witness 
testifies about the contents of a document, at least a fair copy of the original must be available 
for inspection. If there is no original, a copy of the proven authentic document will do, but 
the court must be assured that the copies are reliable and accurate. If the document is lost —
no original, no copies — the judge will have to be convinced there is good reason to forgo the 
exhibit and admit the testimony.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.715 
Fraud examiners can use copies in preparing their case reports, but at trial, the original must 
be produced if it is available. Thus, when public records are involved in a fraud examination, 
examiners should always obtain certified copies. 
 
With regard to computerized data, the best evidence rule does not require the party offering 
ESI as evidence to bring the original custodian’s computer, monitor, and other equipment to 
display the information at trial. Rather, Rule 1001(3) provides that an original writing includes 
any printout or other “output readable by sight, shown to reflect the data accurately.” Thus, 
hard-copy printouts of documents, e-mail, and other ESI qualify as originals under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence.  
 
Objections to Exhibits 
Just because an exhibit is authenticated does not mean it is automatically admitted. If the 
evidence violates some other rule of evidence — such as the rules against hearsay, prejudice, or 
relevance — the exhibit will likely be barred. 
 
If an objection is made, the admissibility of some exhibits require separate hearings for the 
judge to consider the issue. Fraud trials can be bogged down with lengthy challenges to the 
sometimes mountainous stacks of documents offered as evidence. In deciding on the 
admissibility of exhibits, judges can decide to admit the material just as it is, admit it with 
alterations (such as expurgating parts of a text or obscuring certain images), or deny the 
admission altogether. 
 
Chain of Custody 
If evidence is subject to change over time, or is susceptible to alteration, the offering party 
may need to establish that the evidence has not been altered or changed from the time it was 
collected through its production in court. This is done by establishing a chain of custody. The 
chain of custody is both a process and a document that memorializes (1) who has had possession 
of an object, and (2) what they have done with it; it is simply a means of establishing that 
there has not been a material change or alteration to a piece of evidence. 
 
Chain of custody issues are paramount issues in any case, affecting every piece of physical 
evidence. When parties present evidence to a court, they must be ready to show that the item 
they are offering is the same item that was seized. When that evidence is not distinctive but 
fungible (e.g., bags of cash, bullet shell casings, or electronic data), the process or system 
which authenticates the item is to maintain a chain of custody. 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.716  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, establishing the chain of custody consists of documenting each person who had 
control or custody of the evidence; how and when it was received; how it was maintained or 
stored while in each person’s possession; what changes, if any, it underwent in that person’s 
custody; and how it left that person’s custody.  The end result is a chain of testimony that 
accounts for the movement and location of physical evidence from the time it is obtained to 
the time it is proffered at trial. The goal is to show that access to the evidence was limited to 
those who testified in the chain of custody and thereby demonstrate that the evidence has not 
been materially altered. 
 
Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred with a set of records) or 
outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was not properly sealed), can 
dishevel a case but not wreck it outright. Courts have found in some cases that even though 
there have been mistakes in the chain of custody, the mistake affects the “weight,” though 
not the “admissibility,” of evidence. That is to say, the evidence will still be allowed into the 
record, but it is accompanied by a forthright description of any improprieties that have 
occurred in the chain of custody. The jury and judge are supposed to consider the 
improprieties when they deliberate, “weighing” the case for guilt or innocence.  
 
In fraud cases, the array of physical evidence, all the paper documents, audio and video 
recordings, and information-processing equipment, such as computers, demands some close 
monitoring in the chain of custody. This is an area of the law which either side — plaintiff or 
defendant — can manipulate to avoid talking about the evidence itself, rambling instead like a 
filibustering senator over “who touched what and when and why that means we will not see 
or discuss the item in question.”  
 
The following are some general guidelines that will help examiners demonstrate the chain of 
custody. They will also help examiners in authenticating obtained evidence: 
• If records are received via mail or courier-receipted delivery (such as FedEx or UPS), 
keep copies of the postmarked envelope or the delivery receipts. 
• If a cover letter is included, make sure you keep it. 
• If the cover letter or transmittal letter includes a list of the documents, check the package 
immediately to ensure all documents are there. If something is missing, make a note in the 
file and notify the sender immediately.  
• If you receive documents in person, create a memo stating the date and time the 
documents were received, who gave you the documents, where that individual obtained 
the documents, and a complete list of the documents received. 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.717 
• If you obtained the documents yourself from the original source (desk, file cabinet, etc.), 
create a memo describing the date, time, exact location of where the documents were 
found, and a complete list of the documents obtained. 
• Keep the originals of these memos or delivery receipts in the case file and keep a copy 
with the documents (it will be much easier to identify where the documents came from if 
you have the information with the documents). 
 
Additionally, because digital evidence can be easily altered or destroyed, a chain of custody 
must be maintained for all electronic evidence gathered and analyzed in an investigation. ”At 
a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
 



:


exhibit
exhibit ar the tangibl object present as evid therefor both real evid and
demonstr evid ar enter into the record as exhibit thi includ document such
as contract letter and receipt as well as photograph xrai basebal bat knive
fountain pen and comput file in short anyth that is not testimoni is an exhibit
testimoni is what peopl sai exhibit ar the prop
authent typic exhibit
at the most basic level evid must be establish as reliabl or authent thu evid
other than testimoni evid must be properli authent that is the parti offer the
evid must produc some evid to show it is in fact what the parti sai it is if a piec
of real evid cannot be authent the evid will not be admit even if it is plainli
relev
for proper authent the parti offer the evid must produc some evid eg
testimoni from a person with firsthand knowledg to show it is in fact what the parti sai
it is and that it ha remain in the same condit from the moment it wa seiz until it is
us in court
similar to the authent requir for tangibl evid there is a similar sort of
credibl test for wit if testimoni is to becom admiss evid the wit
must demonstr that the knowledg be commun is believ and gain by
person experi
below ar some of the issu you will encount in prove to the judg that a particular
exhibit is authent
demonstr evid
again demonstr evid refer to a tangibl item that illustr some materi proposit
it differ from real evid in that demonstr evid is not part of the underli
event it is creat specif for the trial it purpos is to provid a visual aid for the juri
an exhibit us for pure illustr purpos is a type of demonstr evid
demonstr evid includ chart graph and summari that help to simplifi
complic evid for the juri in complex fraud case such evid is extrem us
but it must be simpl and easi to understand
basic principl of evid law
2708 2011 fraud examin manual
demonstr evid is admiss if the court decid that it present a fair and balanc
summari or pictur of the evid and is not unduli prejudici and if offer for it truth
valu and not just to illustr a point demonstr evid must be authent to
show that the evid is in fact what it is claim to be
also demonstr evid must be made avail to the other parti and the court mai
order that the inform us to creat the exhibit be produc in court
diagram
a diagram is a schemat or technic draw that is us to help make someth easier to
understand a diagram on paper or some other tangibl displai can be admit as evid
with no more foundat than the assent of a wit is thi a fair represent of the
suit where you work it doe not have to be true to scale or particularli detail a diagram
can be prepar befor trial dure trial or prep outsid the court and finish dure
question if a parti object to the admiss of a diagram the offer parti mai need to
establish that it is reliabl diagram can be us in tandem with photo or other
represent evid or as assist in demonstr to the juri
write
in gener authent of a write consist of establish who author the document
depend on the document and situat thi is done in on of sever wai 1 the author
testifi and claim authorship 2 a wit testifi to see the author write the document
3 with handwritten letter a wit verifi the author penmanship 4 with type or
machinewritten document the wit verifi the author signatur 5 a wit testifi
that the content of the document point decis to the author these and mani other
document issu mai requir the particip of a question document expert
busi record and other document
busi record can encompass a broad rang of document from all sort of organ
includ corpor small busi nonprofit oper and commun group like
other evid a parti offer busi record must provid testimoni that the exhibit is
the busi record in question for proper authent the parti offer the evid
should be abl to establish the follow two thing
the content of the document is complet and unalt
the document origin from the name place of origin
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2709
certain document such as busi record ar selfauthent and mai be receiv into
evid without independ proof of authent under the feder rule of evid
busi record ar selfauthent if a custodian or other qualifi person certifi that
the record meet the follow requir
the record were prepar reason near the time of the event it describ
the record were made by or base on inform transmit from a person with
knowledg
the document wa prepar as a usual part of do busi ie it wa not prepar
specif for litig
busi record ar also vulner to hearsai object put differ offer the
content of busi record to establish the truth of their content can constitut hearsai
thu such materi can be bar as unreli outofcourt statement unless a trustworthi
foundat can be establish if howev there is certif that compli with the selfauthent
rule list abov the record will not onli be selfauthent but the
content of the record will be admiss to the prove the truth of the content as an
except to the rule against hearsai
govern document
the requir for govern document ar the same as for other busi record the
distinct between govern and busi record aros becaus of narrow interpret
of the law that separ nonprofit from forprofit enterpris todai most record
regardless of origin ar call busi record
phone record
to be admit into evid phone record must meet the busi record authent test
howev investig must also be awar of the feder telephon record and privaci
protect act of 2006 trppa which crimin the practic of obtain and attempt
to obtain confidenti phone record inform through pretext gain access through
the us of fals statement unless it is otherwis permit by law violat of the act ar
crimin and if convict a violat face up to 10 year in prison and up to 100000 in
fine
electron store inform
current there is still much controversi regard how to authent electron store
inform esi the us depart of justic comput crime and intellectu
basic principl of evid law
2710 2011 fraud examin manual
properti section ha develop a manual for electron search and seizur which judg have
us as a guid as to whether digit evid ha been properli seiz if digit evid
need to be seiz it is vital that examin engag the servic of a train comput forens
technician a properli train technician should know the procedur to follow to ensur that
the file can be authent
gener to be admiss esi evid must meet the same authent standard as
hard copi document ie to show that the item is what the propon claim howev
court have recogn that the authent of esi evid mai requir greater scrutini
becaus esi can easili be alter after creation thu to prove that a particular electron
document is authent those offer the evid must demonstr that the origin
document wa not modifi after it creation
rule 901 of the feder rule of evid provid a nonexclus explic list of
method by which evid can be authent and some of the method mai be us to
authent esi rule 901b1 allow authent through testimoni of a wit with
knowledg that a matter is what it is claim to be addition rule 901b3 allow for
authent by comparison to alreadi authent evid by an expert wit or the
trier of fact similarli rule 901b4 allow authent by circumstanti evid of
distinct characterist eg hash valu or metadata
furthermor under rule 902 some document ar selfauthent which mean that thei
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent for esi purpos
the three most relev categori of selfauthent document ar offici public
trade inscript and certifi copi of busi record
in addit differ form of esi evid mai requir differ authent approach
therefor it is help to examin a few common type
email
unlik tradit busi letter written on formal letterhead email ar more prone to
authent issu and mai be more difficult to properli authent for exampl the judg
in lorrain v markel 241 frd 534 d md 2007 refus to allow either parti to offer email
of an arbitr negoti as evid find that neither parti authent the email
by simpli attach them to their motion as exhibit
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2711
email authent issu usual aris becaus email system ar unreli and inher
unsecur make email suscept to alter moreov email can lack reliabl
becaus the ident of sender can be corrupt through unauthor access and us
even so there ar numer wai email can be authent includ
wit with person knowledg eg a wit testifi that he recogn a copi of an
email that he receiv or draft
comparison with authent exampl eg if on email ha been properli
authent a second email could by authent by compar it with the first
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg the presenc of a parti name
and email address or the presenc of metadata
trade inscript purport to have been affix in the cours of busi and
indic ownership control or origin eg an automat busi signatur at the end of
the email
certifi copi of busi record eg email is accompani by a written certif
by it custodian
text and instant messag
as the us of text and instant messag continu to grow parti ar offer thi esi as
evid in an increas number of case howev given the natur of thi type of
evid parti often encount foundat issu when authent text and instant
messag notwithstand the novel technolog involv these type of esi can be
admiss when the propon offer direct or circumstanti evid as to it authent
the most like authent chat room and text messag ar
wit with person knowledg eg a wit testifi that he recogn a copi
messag that he receiv or draft
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg the us of the defend name
in the text messag and the subject matter of the messag
comput record
court typic accept comput file and document as evid in fact court themselv
ar us more electron resourc becaus mani aspect of litig can now be conduct
electron
tradition to be admit as evid computer record need onli meet the usual
businessrecord authent which requir that the computer record be
basic principl of evid law
2712 2011 fraud examin manual
accompani by certif by a qualifi person state that 1 the record were prepar
reason near the time of the event thei describ 2 the record were prepar as a usual
part of do busi and 3 the organ wai of keep record is demonstr
reliabl
the requir support materi to authent comput record will includ inform
on the comput machin us ani softwar and the recordkeep process a busi
record electron or otherwis is legal as long as it kept in the normal cours of busi
when there ar clear routin for compil inform admit the record into court will
be routin
recent howev court have recogn that authent of computer record mai
requir greater scrutini becaus unlik other esi evid the primari authent issu
regard computer record is what ha or mai have happen to the record in the time
between when it wa enter in the file and the time of trial base upon thi view the most
like method of authent computer record ar
wit with person knowledg eg an authent wit attest to the process by
which the computer record ar creat acquir maintain and preserv
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg a person busi habit is
consist with the document
certifi copi of busi record eg computer record ar accompani by
custodian written certif
websit data
a grow number of peopl ar us social network site like linkedin facebook
myspac and twitter and as a result the legal us of inform obtain from social
media site ha increas mani user dont give much thought to what thei post onlin and
becaus most of the inform that get post onlin becom a perman record
somewher investig attornei and employ ar increasingli mine these site for
inform photo and video that can becom evid in civil and crimin litig
as with all evid the propon of social media evid must be prepar to establish
that the evid is authent the standard for authent evid from social media
site is no differ than for ani other type of evid that is there must be suffici
evid to support a find that the evid is what the propon claim
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2713
in some court authent can be establish by the testimoni of a wit like ani other
demonstr exhibit parti can authent a websit with the testimoni of a wit who
verifi that the exhibit at issu accur reflect what he observ after log on to the
site and review what wa there
altern the propon mai be abl authent a websit by provid testimoni from
the webmast or someon with person knowleg to show that the data wa post by the
person to whom the inform is attribut for exampl if websit data is attribut to
the websit owner the webmast can testifi that a particular file or content wa enter on a
site at a specif time thi is similar to authent write by show that the item wa
written by the person to whom it is attribut but becaus facebook myspac and twittertyp
evid typic come from third parti who sometim us pseudonym
attribut thi type of evid to a certain person can be challeng
final some websit data mai be selfauthent to review selfauthent evid
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent the type of
websit evid that mai fall under thi categori includ govern materi that appear
on offici govern websit or businessrel materi that appear on an organ
websit
photograph
concern photograph it is necessari to establish their fidel to the object thei claim to
repres thi mean that the offer parti must prove that the pictur is unalt and
show what the propon claim it show gener it is enough to have a wit familiar
with the object or space in a photo to corrobor it eg ye that the hallwai run
between our two build the matter get more complic when a photo is
controversi thi can requir technic specif for proper foundat in the most
famou trial sinc sam sheppard oj simpson lawyer challeng a photo of the defend
wear bruno mali shoe as doctor both side introduc expert to discuss whether
the photo had been alter what sort of camera len and environment condit were
involv etc the same issu can aris with photo in ani trial
in some unusu situat a photo mai reveal inform that no wit can corrobor
there ha been at least on instanc where the background of a photo show a stab that
took place in a crowd no on not even the photograph saw the stab at the time in
unusu situat where a photo commun evid not substanti elsewher the
basic principl of evid law
2714 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat of the photograph will need more strength includ technic detail on the
camera the film who took the shot why and where etc
the except make photo seem more legal fraught than thei ar thei usual ar
admit with littl object photo do not even have to be contemporari with the crime or
grievanc to which thei pertain if a photograph is establish as accur in it portray it
can be shot after the origin act
gener point
either side can enter exhibit into the record given the proper foundat onc admit
the evid is avail for us by either side it doe not matter who enter the item into
evid either side can us it dure question
it also doe not matter when exhibit ar admit thei mai be introduc into evid
dure direct examin oppos counsel is allow to inspect the exhibit and then the
wit confirm the exhibit which ha been mark exhibit a or exhibit 1 some court
us letter for exhibit while some court us number usual the exhibit is identifi by
which side enter it eg plaintiff exhibit 1
when everyon agre exhibit can be directli enter into the record without foundat
review by stipul both parti sign the stipul form describ and acknowledg
the exhibit
the best evid rule
sometim testimoni mai be reject becaus of the best evid rule which prohibit a
parti from testifi about the content of a document without produc the document
itself thi rule howev onli appli when an origin or copi is be us to prove the
content of a write
also known as the origin write rule the best evid rule provid that when a wit
testifi about the content of a document at least a fair copi of the origin must be avail
for inspect if there is no origin a copi of the proven authent document will do but
the court must be assur that the copi ar reliabl and accur if the document is lost
no origin no copi the judg will have to be convinc there is good reason to forgo the
exhibit and admit the testimoni
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2715
fraud examin can us copi in prepar their case report but at trial the origin must
be produc if it is avail thu when public record ar involv in a fraud examin
examin should alwai obtain certifi copi
with regard to computer data the best evid rule doe not requir the parti offer
esi as evid to bring the origin custodian comput monitor and other equip to
displai the inform at trial rather rule 10013 provid that an origin write includ
ani printout or other output readabl by sight shown to reflect the data accur thu
hardcopi printout of document email and other esi qualifi as origin under the
feder rule of evid
object to exhibit
just becaus an exhibit is authent doe not mean it is automat admit if the
evid violat some other rule of evid such as the rule against hearsai prejudic or
relev the exhibit will like be bar
if an object is made the admiss of some exhibit requir separ hear for the
judg to consid the issu fraud trial can be bog down with lengthi challeng to the
sometim mountain stack of document offer as evid in decid on the
admiss of exhibit judg can decid to admit the materi just as it is admit it with
alter such as expurg part of a text or obscur certain imag or deni the
admiss altogeth
chain of custodi
if evid is subject to chang over time or is suscept to alter the offer parti
mai need to establish that the evid ha not been alter or chang from the time it wa
collect through it product in court thi is done by establish a chain of custodi the
chain of custodi is both a process and a document that memori 1 who ha had possess
of an object and 2 what thei have done with it it is simpli a mean of establish that
there ha not been a materi chang or alter to a piec of evid
chain of custodi issu ar paramount issu in ani case affect everi piec of physic
evid when parti present evid to a court thei must be readi to show that the item
thei ar offer is the same item that wa seiz when that evid is not distinct but
fungibl eg bag of cash bullet shell case or electron data the process or system
which authent the item is to maintain a chain of custodi
basic principl of evid law
2716 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener establish the chain of custodi consist of document each person who had
control or custodi of the evid how and when it wa receiv how it wa maintain or
store while in each person possess what chang if ani it underw in that person
custodi and how it left that person custodi the end result is a chain of testimoni that
account for the movement and locat of physic evid from the time it is obtain to
the time it is proffer at trial the goal is to show that access to the evid wa limit to
those who testifi in the chain of custodi and therebi demonstr that the evid ha not
been materi alter
gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur with a set of record or
outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa not properli seal can
dishevel a case but not wreck it outright court have found in some case that even though
there have been mistak in the chain of custodi the mistak affect the weight though
not the admiss of evid that is to sai the evid will still be allow into the
record but it is accompani by a forthright descript of ani improprieti that have
occur in the chain of custodi the juri and judg ar suppos to consid the
improprieti when thei deliber weigh the case for guilt or innoc
in fraud case the arrai of physic evid all the paper document audio and video
record and informationprocess equip such as comput demand some close
monitor in the chain of custodi thi is an area of the law which either side plaintiff or
defend can manipul to avoid talk about the evid itself rambl instead like a
filibust senat over who touch what and when and why that mean we will not see
or discuss the item in question
the follow ar some gener guidelin that will help examin demonstr the chain of
custodi thei will also help examin in authent obtain evid
if record ar receiv via mail or courierreceipt deliveri such as fedex or up
keep copi of the postmark envelop or the deliveri receipt
if a cover letter is includ make sure you keep it
if the cover letter or transmitt letter includ a list of the document check the packag
immedi to ensur all document ar there if someth is miss make a note in the
file and notifi the sender immedi
if you receiv document in person creat a memo state the date and time the
document were receiv who gave you the document where that individu obtain
the document and a complet list of the document receiv
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2717
if you obtain the document yourself from the origin sourc desk file cabinet etc
creat a memo describ the date time exact locat of where the document were
found and a complet list of the document obtain
keep the origin of these memo or deliveri receipt in the case file and keep a copi
with the document it will be much easier to identifi where the document came from if
you have the inform with the document
addition becaus digit evid can be easili alter or destroi a chain of custodi
must be maintain for all electron evid gather and analyz in an investig at
a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
