2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Hearsay


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Hearsay 
Simply put, hearsay refers to a statement that repeats what some other person said while 
outside of court. FRE 801 defines hearsay as “a statement, other than one made … at the trial 
or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted.” Basically, hearsay 
involves the following elements: 
• A statement (anything intended to be an assertion; statements can be oral, written, or 
nonverbal conduct, such as nodding a head) 
• That is made outside the court’s supervision (statements made at trial or during deposition are 
not hearsay because they are made during court proceedings, but a statement made at 
work or at a crime scene is outside the court’s supervision and could be hearsay if the 
other elements are also present) 
• That is offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted (a party is offering a statement to prove the 
truth of the matter asserted if the party is trying to prove that the assertion made by the 
declarant [the person who made the out-of-court statement] is true) 
 
This sets apart virtually anything said outside the courtroom or outside an officially 
designated function of the court such as a deposition.  
 
Under the general rule, hearsay is not admissible in court, but this rule is subject to numerous 
exceptions. Excluding hearsay on one level means witnesses cannot say, “He said … she 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.718  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
said.” Each person testifies to his own experience.  This is designed to protect the credibility 
and condition of testimony and to preserve each side’s right to cross-examine witnesses.  
 
Each witness in the trial will be questioned about personal, firsthand encounters. Unless their 
statements satisfy one of the exceptions discussed below, witnesses will speak only about 
things they have experienced themselves. If possible, evidence should be presented in the 
courtroom so that the jury can determine the weight to give each piece of evidence.  
 
The hearsay rule often creates admissibility issues for electronically stored information (ESI) 
because such evidence is often made out of court and offered to prove the truth of the matter 
asserted.  
 
Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule 
The general rule against hearsay is full of exceptions — ways to get information into the 
record — which accounts for the rule’s infamy in courtroom dramas and in real courtrooms. 
The rules of evidence exempts several categories of statements that are not to be considered 
hearsay, and there are many circumstances in which evidence, although hearsay, is admissible.  
 
The Truth of the Statement Is Not at Issue 
The hearsay rule only applies if the statement is being offered to prove the truth of the matter 
contained in the statement. Therefore, if the statement is offered for some other purpose, it 
technically is not hearsay. Any out-of-court statement can be admitted if it (1) is relevant to 
some aspect of the proceedings and (2) is not offered for the truth of its contents. Such 
statements are most often used to show a person’s knowledge or state of mind at a particular 
time. For instance, a witness will be allowed to testify that she heard the defendant say, “I 
can’t stand this company. They owe me big time.” The statement cannot be used to prove 
that the defendant actually stole from the company; however, it can be admitted to show the 
defendant’s state of mind — that he was disgruntled. 
 
Admissions by an Adverse Party 
Generally, the statement of an adverse party is not hearsay. Such statements are called 
“admissions” and can be very powerful evidence. More specifically, an admission is an out-of-court 
statement or conduct by a party to the lawsuit that tends to support the other side’s 
position or diminish the declarant’s own position. Thus, anything spoken or written by a 
party to a lawsuit can be entered into the record, provided that the statement can be  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.719 
corroborated and is relevant. Each side can use its adversary’s out-of-court statements as 
evidence.  
 
For example, during your investigation of the case prior to trial, you interviewed the 
defendant. During the interview, he tells you that he falsified the invoices. Later he denies 
making the statement. If you take the stand and tell the jury that the defendant told you he 
falsified invoices, technically that statement is hearsay. However, since it is an admission, it 
will be admitted under this exception to the rule.  
 
An admission is not necessarily an outright confession. A witness may testify that a bank 
officer told her, “I have ways of getting loans approved that no one else knows about.” The 
statement alone does not prove loan fraud against the officer, but it does establish, by his 
own admission, his stated intent to subvert the security controls of the institution. 
 
In cases involving corporations, large groups, or government agencies, any statement made by 
a member of the organization is potentially an admission. The person who made the 
statement has to be directly authorized to speak for the organization or perform a job related 
to the issue under discussion. For example, an agent employed by Jefferson Realtors who 
says, “You’ve been defrauded here” to an aggrieved client has made an admission on behalf 
of the company. A janitor at Jefferson Realtors, however, cannot make the same admission 
because janitorial duties are not related to the formation of contracts, and chances are the 
janitor is not authorized to make corporate declarations. Since an agent makes contracts on 
the company’s behalf, the statement is an admission even if the agent is not the official 
spokesperson for Jefferson’s legal affairs.  
 
Former Testimony Under Oath 
Testimony given by the declarant at another hearing is admissible if the party against whom 
the testimony is now offered had an opportunity and motive to examine the witness similar to 
that in the present trial. 
 
Business and Government Records 
We commonly think of invoices, receipts, and official documents as the final legal word, but 
like statements made outside of court, business and government records are hearsay; they are 
prepared outside the courtroom. A special exception for these materials, however, makes 
them admissible if they are provided with a legal foundation. The admissibility of such 
records rests on two criteria:  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.720  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Have they been prepared during “regularly conducted business activity”? 
• Are they verifiably trustworthy? 
 
Materials prepared specifically for trial are not admissible as business records. Anything that 
casts doubt on the veracity of these documents can bar them. In situations where the charge 
involves altered documents, the materials are admitted to prove the charge of alteration — not 
for their truth-value — so the hearsay rule does not apply.  
 
Computerized records have had no trouble being accepted as evidence. Generally, the hearsay 
exception for business records applies (i.e., they are admissible as long as the records have 
been compiled as a regular facet of doing business).  
 
However, it should be noted that a minority of courts follow a different approach when 
addressing hearsay within computerized records, which has recently garnered much acclaim. 
These courts distinguish between computer-stored records and computer-generated records 
and hold that ESI containing only computer-generated records (such as log-in records from 
ISPs, telephone records, and ATM receipts) untouched by human hands do not contain 
hearsay. In such cases, there is no need to establish that a hearsay exception applies. 
Alternatively, computer-stored records are created or maintained by a human and therefore 
are deemed hearsay. Thus, they must meet a hearsay exception to be admitted. 
 
Statement Against Interest 
A statement against interest is a special form of admission in which a prior statement is at odds 
with the declarant’s current claim. To be admissible under this exception, the statement must 
meet three requirements:  
• The declarant must be unavailable to testify. 
• The statement must have been against important interests of the declarant when made. 
• Corroborating circumstances must clearly establish the trustworthiness of the statement. 
 
In prosecuting a tax evasion charge, for example, prosecutors may present a financial 
statement used by the defendant to obtain a loan; this is a statement against interest because 
the document declares a higher net worth than the defendant now claims to have. 
 
Absence of an Entry in Business Records 
Evidence that a matter is not included in the memoranda or reports kept in the regular course 
of business may be admissible to prove that a certain event did not occur if the matter was 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.721 
one about which a memorandum or report regularly was made and preserved. However, this 
does not hold true if the source of information or the circumstances indicate a lack of 
trustworthiness. 
 
Recorded Recollections 
A memorandum or record may be admissible if it concerns a matter that the witness once had 
knowledge of but now has forgotten, if it was made or adopted by the witness when the 
matter was fresh in memory, and if it is shown to be accurate. Such memoranda or records 
also may be shown to a witness who has temporarily forgotten the events to refresh the 
witness’s recollection and allow the testimony to be more complete or accurate. 
 
Present Sense Impressions 
Courts assume statements that are made during or immediately after significant events or 
conditions and that describe or explain the events or conditions are reliable, so present sense 
impressions are admissible. For example, a witness can report that he first suspected fraud at 
Securities Plus by noting that his superior said, “Oh my God! This can’t be happening!” when 
he was informed that there would be an audit. In a similar example, Mr. Whistler notices 
Jenny Moore, a co-worker, in John Smith’s office and overhears her say, “Oh, here are some 
bid sheets in the trash can.” If the government prosecutes Smith for bid rigging, which is 
demonstrated by the bid sheets, Mr. Whistler can testify about Moore’s statement as a present 
sense impression because the words described the scene before her. 
 
Excited Utterances 
There is also an exception for statements relating to a startling event or condition made while 
the declarant was under the stress of its excitement. Unlike statements of present sense 
impressions, excited utterances require an occurrence that is startling enough to produce 
excitement.  In the Mr. Whistler scenario, for example, Moore’s statements might qualify as 
an excited utterance if she discovered the bid sheets after months of searching for 
incriminating evidence and told Whistler, while jumping up and down in excitement, “I’ve 
found the evidence I’ve been waiting for a long time!” Here, the successful conclusion of the 
search was sufficiently exciting.  
 
Then Existing Mental, Emotional, or Physical Condition  
Statements of the declarant’s then-existing state of mind, emotion, or physical condition are 
also admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule. Specifically, the Federal Rule of Evidence 
803 lists “state of mind, emotion, sensation, or physical condition …, pain, and bodily health” 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.722  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
as acceptable subject matter, along with extremely personalized thought processes such as 
“intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling ….”  
 
Defense attorneys at a fraud trial sometimes use arguments about what their client intended, or 
the confusion and stress the person was suffering. For instance, the defendant was seen 
shredding documents, and he was overheard to say, “They’ll never prove anything now.” The 
statement may be admitted to show the defendant’s state of mind at the time he was 
shredding the documents. It also shows that the defendant acted with the intent to destroy 
the documents. Hearsay statements that help establish this intention are admissible as 
exceptions. 
 
Statements for Purposes of Medical Diagnosis or Treatment 
Anything first communicated during a medical examination is admissible as a hearsay 
exception. This includes medical history, symptoms, pain, and the general character of the 
medical condition. These statements do not even have to have been made by the patient. 
They can involve someone (parent or spouse) accompanying the patient.  
 
Printed Matter, Learned Treatises, and Refresher Writings 
Written materials that add to the court’s knowledge of an issue are excepted from the hearsay 
rule. This exception often bears on the testimony of expert witnesses who often use 
published material in their work. 
 
Printed materials  that support technical or professional assertions, such as commodity market 
reports, stock market quotes, mortality tables, cost of living indexes, etc., are admissible if 
they are “generally used and relied upon by the public or by persons in particular 
occupations.” The Federal Rules of Evidence specifically mentions market reports and 
commercial publications. 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence also creates a hearsay exception for learned treatises, providing 
that an authoritative work is admissible to either support or attack the opinion of an expert 
witness and that the works are established as reliable authority. However, some courts limit 
the rule. In these jurisdictions, specialized “treatises, periodicals, or pamphlets” can be 
referenced only during cross-examination. In a world of proliferating and sometimes 
contradictory sources of information, just what counts as a learned treatise and what is a 
fringe group’s manifesto is not immediately clear. 
Writing used to refresh a witness’s memory is admissible under special circumstances. Basically, 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.723 
courts may permit testifying witnesses to refresh or revive their memory by referring to a 
writing or anything else if the witnesses will thereafter be able to testify without depending on 
the terms of the writing. For example, Whistler, who is serving as a witness at a fraud trial, 
wants to see some notes he wrote two years ago to make sure he got the numbers right in his 
testimony. He is allowed to consult the notes and continue with his testimony. There is a 
lawyerly aspect to this rule—the text of the notes is admissible, too, but only if the opposing 
attorney requests the admission.  
 
Other Exceptions 
Miscellaneous exceptions to the hearsay rule include things like dying declarations  and ancient 
documents. For those instances not specified in any rule, there remains the judge’s discretion: 
Anything the judge deems trustworthy for the purposes of its presentation is admissible. This is 
the cornerstone of the rule. Hearsay is excluded in the first place because it supposedly lacks 
trustworthiness. However, other kinds of hearsay that do not fall within any specific hearsay 
exceptions may be admissible if they meet the same standards of trustworthiness as required 
for the listed exceptions.   
 
 
Excluding Illegally Seized Evidence 
In general, evidence obtained improperly is tainted and unfit for trial. The Fourth 
Amendment sets out this cornerstone exclusionary rule, barring anything obtained by 
authorities without proper authorization from the owner or possessor, or through a court-ordered 
search warrant. Generally, this rule applies only in criminal cases, But it also applies 
to government employers. Therefore, a public employer cannot use illegally seized evidence 
to discipline an employee. There is no Fourth Amendment prohibition against a private  
employer using illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee, however. But if a private 
employer does use illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee, the employer might be 
exposing itself to litigation for invasion of privacy, trespass, or other common law causes of 
action, even though the evidence may still be admitted in court. 
 
 



:


hearsai
simpli put hearsai refer to a statement that repeat what some other person said while
outsid of court fre 801 defin hearsai as a statement other than on made at the trial
or hear offer in evid to prove the truth of the matter assert basic hearsai
involv the follow element
a statement anyth intend to be an assert statement can be oral written or
nonverb conduct such as nod a head
that is made outsid the court supervis statement made at trial or dure deposit ar
not hearsai becaus thei ar made dure court proceed but a statement made at
work or at a crime scene is outsid the court supervis and could be hearsai if the
other element ar also present
that is offer to prove the truth of the matter assert a parti is offer a statement to prove the
truth of the matter assert if the parti is try to prove that the assert made by the
declar the person who made the outofcourt statement is true
thi set apart virtual anyth said outsid the courtroom or outsid an offici
design function of the court such as a deposit
under the gener rule hearsai is not admiss in court but thi rule is subject to numer
except exclud hearsai on on level mean wit cannot sai he said she
basic principl of evid law
2718 2011 fraud examin manual
said each person testifi to hi own experi thi is design to protect the credibl
and condit of testimoni and to preserv each side right to crossexamin wit
each wit in the trial will be question about person firsthand encount unless their
statement satisfi on of the except discuss below wit will speak onli about
thing thei have experienc themselv if possibl evid should be present in the
courtroom so that the juri can determin the weight to give each piec of evid
the hearsai rule often creat admiss issu for electron store inform esi
becaus such evid is often made out of court and offer to prove the truth of the matter
assert
except to the hearsai rule
the gener rule against hearsai is full of except wai to get inform into the
record which account for the rule infami in courtroom drama and in real courtroom
the rule of evid exempt sever categori of statement that ar not to be consid
hearsai and there ar mani circumst in which evid although hearsai is admiss
the truth of the statement is not at issu
the hearsai rule onli appli if the statement is be offer to prove the truth of the matter
contain in the statement therefor if the statement is offer for some other purpos it
technic is not hearsai ani outofcourt statement can be admit if it 1 is relev to
some aspect of the proceed and 2 is not offer for the truth of it content such
statement ar most often us to show a person knowledg or state of mind at a particular
time for instanc a wit will be allow to testifi that she heard the defend sai i
cant stand thi compani thei ow me big time the statement cannot be us to prove
that the defend actual stole from the compani howev it can be admit to show the
defend state of mind that he wa disgruntl
admiss by an advers parti
gener the statement of an advers parti is not hearsai such statement ar call
admiss and can be veri power evid more specif an admiss is an outofcourt
statement or conduct by a parti to the lawsuit that tend to support the other side
posit or diminish the declar own posit thu anyth spoken or written by a
parti to a lawsuit can be enter into the record provid that the statement can be
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2719
corrobor and is relev each side can us it adversari outofcourt statement as
evid
for exampl dure your investig of the case prior to trial you interview the
defend dure the interview he tell you that he falsifi the invoic later he deni
make the statement if you take the stand and tell the juri that the defend told you he
falsifi invoic technic that statement is hearsai howev sinc it is an admiss it
will be admit under thi except to the rule
an admiss is not necessarili an outright confess a wit mai testifi that a bank
offic told her i have wai of get loan approv that no on els know about the
statement alon doe not prove loan fraud against the offic but it doe establish by hi
own admiss hi state intent to subvert the secur control of the institut
in case involv corpor larg group or govern agenc ani statement made by
a member of the organ is potenti an admiss the person who made the
statement ha to be directli author to speak for the organ or perform a job relat
to the issu under discuss for exampl an agent emploi by jefferson realtor who
sai youv been defraud here to an aggriev client ha made an admiss on behalf
of the compani a janitor at jefferson realtor howev cannot make the same admiss
becaus janitori duti ar not relat to the format of contract and chanc ar the
janitor is not author to make corpor declar sinc an agent make contract on
the compani behalf the statement is an admiss even if the agent is not the offici
spokesperson for jefferson legal affair
former testimoni under oath
testimoni given by the declar at anoth hear is admiss if the parti against whom
the testimoni is now offer had an opportun and motiv to examin the wit similar to
that in the present trial
busi and govern record
we commonli think of invoic receipt and offici document as the final legal word but
like statement made outsid of court busi and govern record ar hearsai thei ar
prepar outsid the courtroom a special except for these materi howev make
them admiss if thei ar provid with a legal foundat the admiss of such
record rest on two criteria
basic principl of evid law
2720 2011 fraud examin manual
have thei been prepar dure regularli conduct busi activ
ar thei verifi trustworthi
materi prepar specif for trial ar not admiss as busi record anyth that
cast doubt on the verac of these document can bar them in situat where the charg
involv alter document the materi ar admit to prove the charg of alter not
for their truthvalu so the hearsai rule doe not appli
computer record have had no troubl be accept as evid gener the hearsai
except for busi record appli ie thei ar admiss as long as the record have
been compil as a regular facet of do busi
howev it should be note that a minor of court follow a differ approach when
address hearsai within computer record which ha recent garner much acclaim
these court distinguish between computerstor record and computergener record
and hold that esi contain onli computergener record such as login record from
isp telephon record and atm receipt untouch by human hand do not contain
hearsai in such case there is no need to establish that a hearsai except appli
altern computerstor record ar creat or maintain by a human and therefor
ar deem hearsai thu thei must meet a hearsai except to be admit
statement against interest
a statement against interest is a special form of admiss in which a prior statement is at odd
with the declar current claim to be admiss under thi except the statement must
meet three requir
the declar must be unavail to testifi
the statement must have been against import interest of the declar when made
corrobor circumst must clearli establish the trustworthi of the statement
in prosecut a tax evas charg for exampl prosecutor mai present a financi
statement us by the defend to obtain a loan thi is a statement against interest becaus
the document declar a higher net worth than the defend now claim to have
absenc of an entri in busi record
evid that a matter is not includ in the memoranda or report kept in the regular cours
of busi mai be admiss to prove that a certain event did not occur if the matter wa
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2721
on about which a memorandum or report regularli wa made and preserv howev thi
doe not hold true if the sourc of inform or the circumst indic a lack of
trustworthi
record recollect
a memorandum or record mai be admiss if it concern a matter that the wit onc had
knowledg of but now ha forgotten if it wa made or adopt by the wit when the
matter wa fresh in memori and if it is shown to be accur such memoranda or record
also mai be shown to a wit who ha temporarili forgotten the event to refresh the
witnesss recollect and allow the testimoni to be more complet or accur
present sens impress
court assum statement that ar made dure or immedi after signific event or
condit and that describ or explain the event or condit ar reliabl so present sens
impress ar admiss for exampl a wit can report that he first suspect fraud at
secur plu by note that hi superior said oh my god thi cant be happen when
he wa inform that there would be an audit in a similar exampl mr whistler notic
jenni moor a cowork in john smith offic and overhear her sai oh here ar some
bid sheet in the trash can if the govern prosecut smith for bid rig which is
demonstr by the bid sheet mr whistler can testifi about moor statement as a present
sens impress becaus the word describ the scene befor her
excit utter
there is also an except for statement relat to a startl event or condit made while
the declar wa under the stress of it excit unlik statement of present sens
impress excit utter requir an occurr that is startl enough to produc
excit in the mr whistler scenario for exampl moor statement might qualifi as
an excit utter if she discov the bid sheet after month of search for
incrimin evid and told whistler while jump up and down in excit iv
found the evid iv been wait for a long time here the success conclus of the
search wa suffici excit
then exist mental emot or physic condit
statement of the declar thenexist state of mind emot or physic condit ar
also admiss as except to the hearsai rule specif the feder rule of evid
803 list state of mind emot sensat or physic condit pain and bodili health
basic principl of evid law
2722 2011 fraud examin manual
as accept subject matter along with extrem person thought process such as
intent plan motiv design mental feel
defens attornei at a fraud trial sometim us argument about what their client intend or
the confus and stress the person wa suffer for instanc the defend wa seen
shred document and he wa overheard to sai theyll never prove anyth now the
statement mai be admit to show the defend state of mind at the time he wa
shred the document it also show that the defend act with the intent to destroi
the document hearsai statement that help establish thi intent ar admiss as
except
statement for purpos of medic diagnosi or treatment
anyth first commun dure a medic examin is admiss as a hearsai
except thi includ medic histori symptom pain and the gener charact of the
medic condit these statement do not even have to have been made by the patient
thei can involv someon parent or spous accompani the patient
print matter learn treatis and refresh write
written materi that add to the court knowledg of an issu ar except from the hearsai
rule thi except often bear on the testimoni of expert wit who often us
publish materi in their work
print materi that support technic or profession assert such as commod market
report stock market quot mortal tabl cost of live index etc ar admiss if
thei ar gener us and reli upon by the public or by person in particular
occup the feder rule of evid specif mention market report and
commerci public
the feder rule of evid also creat a hearsai except for learn treatis provid
that an authorit work is admiss to either support or attack the opinion of an expert
wit and that the work ar establish as reliabl author howev some court limit
the rule in these jurisdict special treatis period or pamphlet can be
referenc onli dure crossexamin in a world of prolifer and sometim
contradictori sourc of inform just what count as a learn treatis and what is a
fring group manifesto is not immedi clear
write us to refresh a witnesss memori is admiss under special circumst basic
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2723
court mai permit testifi wit to refresh or reviv their memori by refer to a
write or anyth els if the wit will thereaft be abl to testifi without depend on
the term of the write for exampl whistler who is serv as a wit at a fraud trial
want to see some note he wrote two year ago to make sure he got the number right in hi
testimoni he is allow to consult the note and continu with hi testimoni there is a
lawyerli aspect to thi ruleth text of the note is admiss too but onli if the oppos
attornei request the admiss
other except
miscellan except to the hearsai rule includ thing like dy declar and ancient
document for those instanc not specifi in ani rule there remain the judg discret
anyth the judg deem trustworthi for the purpos of it present is admiss thi is
the cornerston of the rule hearsai is exclud in the first place becaus it supposedli lack
trustworthi howev other kind of hearsai that do not fall within ani specif hearsai
except mai be admiss if thei meet the same standard of trustworthi as requir
for the list except
exclud illeg seiz evid
in gener evid obtain improperli is taint and unfit for trial the fourth
amend set out thi cornerston exclusionari rule bar anyth obtain by
author without proper author from the owner or possessor or through a courtord
search warrant gener thi rule appli onli in crimin case but it also appli
to govern employ therefor a public employ cannot us illeg seiz evid
to disciplin an employe there is no fourth amend prohibit against a privat
employ us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe howev but if a privat
employ doe us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe the employ might be
expos itself to litig for invas of privaci trespass or other common law caus of
action even though the evid mai still be admit in court
