2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Exhibits/Electronically Stored Information


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Electronically Stored Information 
Currently, there is still much controversy regarding how to authenticate electronically stored 
information (ESI). The U.S. Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.710  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Property Section has developed a manual for electronic search and seizure, which judges have 
used as a guide as to whether digital evidence has been properly seized. If digital evidence 
needs to be seized, it is vital that examiners engage the services of a trained computer forensic 
technician. A properly trained technician should know the procedures to follow to ensure that 
the files can be authenticated. 
 
Generally, to be admissible, ESI evidence must meet the same authentication standards as 
hard copy documents (i.e., to show that the item is what the proponent claims); however, 
courts have recognized that the authentication of ESI evidence may require greater scrutiny 
because ESI can easily be altered after creation. Thus, to prove that a particular electronic 
document is authentic, those offering the evidence must demonstrate that the original 
document was not modified after its creation.  
 
Rule 901 of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides a non-exclusive, explicative list of 
methods by which evidence can be authenticated, and some of the methods may be used to 
authenticate ESI. Rule 901(b)(1) allows authentication through testimony of a witness with 
knowledge that a matter is what it is claimed to be. Additionally, Rule 901(b)(3) allows for 
authentication by comparison to already authenticated evidence by an expert witness or the 
trier of fact. Similarly, Rule 901(b)(4) allows authentication by circumstantial evidence of 
distinctive characteristics (e.g., hash values or metadata).  
 
Furthermore, under Rule 902, some documents are self-authenticating, which means that they 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. For ESI purposes, 
the three most relevant categories of self-authenticating documents are official publications, 
trade inscriptions, and certified copies of business records.  
 
In addition, different forms of ESI evidence may require different authentication approaches. 
Therefore, it is helpful to examine a few common types.  
 



:


electron store inform
current there is still much controversi regard how to authent electron store
inform esi the us depart of justic comput crime and intellectu
basic principl of evid law
2710 2011 fraud examin manual
properti section ha develop a manual for electron search and seizur which judg have
us as a guid as to whether digit evid ha been properli seiz if digit evid
need to be seiz it is vital that examin engag the servic of a train comput forens
technician a properli train technician should know the procedur to follow to ensur that
the file can be authent
gener to be admiss esi evid must meet the same authent standard as
hard copi document ie to show that the item is what the propon claim howev
court have recogn that the authent of esi evid mai requir greater scrutini
becaus esi can easili be alter after creation thu to prove that a particular electron
document is authent those offer the evid must demonstr that the origin
document wa not modifi after it creation
rule 901 of the feder rule of evid provid a nonexclus explic list of
method by which evid can be authent and some of the method mai be us to
authent esi rule 901b1 allow authent through testimoni of a wit with
knowledg that a matter is what it is claim to be addition rule 901b3 allow for
authent by comparison to alreadi authent evid by an expert wit or the
trier of fact similarli rule 901b4 allow authent by circumstanti evid of
distinct characterist eg hash valu or metadata
furthermor under rule 902 some document ar selfauthent which mean that thei
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent for esi purpos
the three most relev categori of selfauthent document ar offici public
trade inscript and certifi copi of busi record
in addit differ form of esi evid mai requir differ authent approach
therefor it is help to examin a few common type
