2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Privileges/Work Product Protection and Outside Auditors


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Work Product Protection and Outside Auditors 
In late 2004, a federal district judge in New York, under the work product doctrine, protected 
the results of an internal investigation of a large company given to an outside auditor (Merrill 
Lynch & Co., Inc. v. Allegheny Energy, Inc., 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21543). However, courts 
continue to disagree as to whether such disclosure waives work product protection under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence. 
  
Before disclosing work product to an outside auditor, a company should determine whether 
the outside auditor is an “adversary.” Some courts consider auditors to be the “watchdogs” of 
companies, and therefore inherently adversary to their corporate clients. Certainly, the role of 
outside auditors is to independently ensure the accuracy of a company’s financials, find 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.731 
inaccuracies, and detect fraud. However, the court in Merrill Lynch distinguished this kind of 
adversary from a “litigation adversary.” A company’s auditor is not necessarily a “litigation 
adversary” (which is required to invalidate the work product privilege). Rather, “[a] business 
and its auditor can and should be aligned insofar as they both seek to prevent, detect, and 
root out corporate fraud.”  
 
The court also emphasized that a blanket waiver of privilege in this kind of situation would 
likely discourage ethical disclosure and conduct by companies. Thus, the trend in litigation 
seems to review the facts on a case-by-case basis to determine whether an auditor and 
company share common interests and therefore are non-adversarial.  
 
The following principles should aid companies in determining whether they should provide 
work product to outside auditors: (1) ensure a common interest between the company and 
the outside auditor; (2) only disclose information necessary to help the auditor assess 
sufficiency of the company’s controls and the accuracy of the company’s audit/accounting 
procedures; and (3) when disclosing informati on, always include a confidentiality agreement 
acknowledging that the documents were prepared by counsel and therefore privileged, as well 
as a covenant that the outside auditor is to maintain the strictest confidence of the 
documents.  
 



:


work product protect and outsid auditor
in late 2004 a feder district judg in new york under the work product doctrin protect
the result of an intern investig of a larg compani given to an outsid auditor merril
lynch co inc v allegheni energi inc 2004 us dist lexi 21543 howev court
continu to disagre as to whether such disclosur waiv work product protect under the
feder rule of evid
befor disclos work product to an outsid auditor a compani should determin whether
the outsid auditor is an adversari some court consid auditor to be the watchdog of
compani and therefor inher adversari to their corpor client certainli the role of
outsid auditor is to independ ensur the accuraci of a compani financi find
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2731
inaccuraci and detect fraud howev the court in merril lynch distinguish thi kind of
adversari from a litig adversari a compani auditor is not necessarili a litig
adversari which is requir to invalid the work product privileg rather a busi
and it auditor can and should be align insofar as thei both seek to prevent detect and
root out corpor fraud
the court also emphas that a blanket waiver of privileg in thi kind of situat would
like discourag ethic disclosur and conduct by compani thu the trend in litig
seem to review the fact on a casebycas basi to determin whether an auditor and
compani share common interest and therefor ar nonadversari
the follow principl should aid compani in determin whether thei should provid
work product to outsid auditor 1 ensur a common interest between the compani and
the outsid auditor 2 onli disclos inform necessari to help the auditor assess
suffici of the compani control and the accuraci of the compani auditaccount
procedur and 3 when disclos informati on alwai includ a confidenti agreement
acknowledg that the document were prepar by counsel and therefor privileg as well
as a coven that the outsid auditor is to maintain the strictest confid of the
document
