2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Federal Regulation/The Sarbanes-Oxley Act


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


The Sarbanes-Oxley Act  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 is one of the most significant changes in the securities field 
since the 1934 Act was passed. It was designed to restore investor confidence in capital 
markets and help eliminate financial statement fraud in publicly traded companies while at 
the same time significantly increasing the penalties for corporate accounting fraud.  
 
The most significant changes brought on by the Act include:  
• The creation of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board. 
• Requirements for senior financial officers to certify SEC filings. 
• Standards for audit committee independence. 
• Standards for auditor independence. 
• Enhanced financial disclosure requirements. 
• Protections for corporate whistleblowers. 
• Enhanced penalties for white-collar crime. 
 
The Act is discussed in detail in the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law section of 
the Fraud Examiners Manual. However, some of the more important provisions as they relate 
to corporate governance are reproduced here. 
 



:


the sarbanesoxlei act
the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 is on of the most signific chang in the secur field
sinc the 1934 act wa pass it wa design to restor investor confid in capit
market and help elimin financi statement fraud in publicli trade compani while at
the same time significantli increas the penalti for corpor account fraud
the most signific chang brought on by the act includ
the creation of the public compani account oversight board
requir for senior financi offic to certifi sec file
standard for audit committe independ
standard for auditor independ
enhanc financi disclosur requir
protect for corpor whistleblow
enhanc penalti for whitecollar crime
the act is discuss in detail in the law relat to fraud chapter in the law section of
the fraud examin manual howev some of the more import provis as thei relat
to corpor govern ar reproduc here
