2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Federal Regulation/Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act establishes broad protections for corporate whistleblowers. There 
are two sections of the Act that address whistleblower protections: Section 806 deals with 
civil protections and section 1107 establishes criminal liability for those who retaliate against 
whistleblowers.  
 
CIVIL LIABILITY WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 
Section 806 of the Act, which is codified at Title 18, U.S.C., § 1514A, creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it  only protects employees of publicly traded 
companies. Section 806 makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. In order to trigger § 806 protections, the employee must 
report the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a 
member of Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also 
protected against retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1510                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceeding filed or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or  
SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections cover retaliatory acts not only by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
If a public company is found to have violated § 806, the Act provides for an award of 
compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties include 
reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages including 
litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
CRIMINAL SANCTION WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION  
Section 1107 of Sarbanes-Oxley ? codified at Title 18, U.S.C., § 1513 ? makes it a crime to 
knowingly, with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for providing 
truthful information relating to the commission or possible commission of any Federal 
offense. This protection is only triggered when information is provided to a law enforcement 
officer, it does not apply to reports made to supervisors or to members of Congress, as is 
the case under § 806.  
 
Additionally, the Act codified three criminal offenses to Title 18 of the Code. First, it is a 
criminal offense to alter, destroy, mutilate, conceal, cover-up, or falsify any record or 
document “with the intent to impede, obstruct, or influence” a federal investigation or 
bankruptcy proceeding, carrying a maximum sentence of 20 years imprisonment. (18, U.S.C., 
§ 1519). Secondly, all auditing accountants of securities issuers must “maintain all audit or 
review workpapers for a period of 5 years.” Where  there is a knowing and willful violation of 
this offense, a sentence of up to 10 years may be imposed. (18, U.S.C., § 1520). Finally, the 
Act made codified an additional securities fraud offence that can carry a maximum sentence 
of 25 years’ imprisonment. (18, U.S.C., § 1348). 
 
In general, the coverage of § 1107 is much  broader than the civil liability whistleblower 
protections of § 806. While the § 806 protections apply only to employees of publicly traded 
companies, § 1107’s criminal whistleblower protections cover all individuals (and 
organizations) regardless of where they work. Also, § 806 only applies to violations of 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1511 
securities laws or SEC rules and regulations. Section 1107, on the other hand, protects 
individuals who provide truthful information about the commission or possible commission 
of any Federal offense.  
 
Violations of § 1107 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and up to 10 years in prison 
for individuals. Corporations that violate the Act can be fined up to $500,000.  
 



:


protect for corpor whistleblow under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act establish broad protect for corpor whistleblow there
ar two section of the act that address whistleblow protect section 806 deal with
civil protect and section 1107 establish crimin liabil for those who retali against
whistleblow
civil liabil whistleblow protect
section 806 of the act which is codifi at titl 18 usc 1514a creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 806 make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud in order to trigger 806 protect the employe must
report the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a
member of congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also
protect against retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a
secur fraud financi transact
11510 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or
sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect cover retaliatori act not onli by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
if a public compani is found to have violat 806 the act provid for an award of
compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti includ
reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag includ
litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction whistleblow protect
section 1107 of sarbanesoxlei codifi at titl 18 usc 1513 make it a crime to
knowingli with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for provid
truth inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder
offens thi protect is onli trigger when inform is provid to a law enforc
offic it doe not appli to report made to supervisor or to member of congress as is
the case under 806
addition the act codifi three crimin offens to titl 18 of the code first it is a
crimin offens to alter destroi mutil conceal coverup or falsifi ani record or
document with the intent to imped obstruct or influenc a feder investig or
bankruptci proceed carri a maximum sentenc of 20 year imprison 18 usc
1519 secondli all audit account of secur issuer must maintain all audit or
review workpap for a period of 5 year where there is a know and will violat of
thi offens a sentenc of up to 10 year mai be impos 18 usc 1520 final the
act made codifi an addit secur fraud offenc that can carri a maximum sentenc
of 25 year imprison 18 usc 1348
in gener the coverag of 1107 is much broader than the civil liabil whistleblow
protect of 806 while the 806 protect appli onli to employe of publicli trade
compani 1107 crimin whistleblow protect cover all individu and
organ regardless of where thei work also 806 onli appli to violat of
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11511
secur law or sec rule and regul section 1107 on the other hand protect
individu who provid truth inform about the commiss or possibl commiss
of ani feder offens
violat of 1107 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to 10 year in prison
for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to 500000
