2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/State Regulation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


State Regulation 
The first state securities laws of any substance were enacted in Kansas around 1911. State 
securities laws are often referred to as “blue sky laws.” The term “blue sky” came into use in 
1917 after a judge issued an opinion describing the purpose of these laws as preventing 
“speculative schemes, which have no more basis than so many feet of blue sky.”  
 
The initial steps taken in Kansas to regulate the securities industry and protect consumers 
were quickly imitated by other states. In 1956, the National Conference of Commissioners 
on Uniform State Laws and the American Bar Association promulgated the Uniform 
Securities Act. More than 30 states have adop ted most or all of the Uniform Securities Act, 
which was revised in 1985 and amended in 1988.  
 
The revised Uniform Act has four parts: 
• Regulation of broker-dealers — Most states require broker-dealers to register with the 
state securities regulator. “Broker-dealer” means “a person engaged in the business of 
effecting transactions in securities for the account of others or for the person’s own 
account” and does not include an issuer selling his own securities.  
• Registration of securities—Most states require that an issuer proposing to offer securities 
for sale file some type of registration application.  
• Anti-fraud provisions — Fraud is usually defined in language similar to Rule 10b of the 
Securities and Exchange Act of 1934. Criminal, civil, and administrative penalties are 
usually attached to violations of state anti-fraud provisions. 
• Definitions, exemptions, administrative provisions — The definition of “security” is 
basically the same as that under the Securities Act of 1933. Provides powers for state 
regulators to examine books and records and take disciplinary action.  
 
To simplify to a general rule of thumb, unless certain exemptions apply, before a security is 
sold or offered for sale: 
• There must be a registration in place to cover the security. 
• The broker-dealer must be registered. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1515 
• There must be full and fair disclosure of all material information. 
 
As long as there is no conflict with federal laws, each state can supplement or duplicate 
federal requirements. However, in 1996, Congress passed the National Securities Markets 
Improvement Act preempting state regulation in several significant areas. 
 



:


state regul
the first state secur law of ani substanc were enact in kansa around 1911 state
secur law ar often refer to as blue sky law the term blue sky came into us in
1917 after a judg issu an opinion describ the purpos of these law as prevent
specul scheme which have no more basi than so mani feet of blue sky
the initi step taken in kansa to regul the secur industri and protect consum
were quickli imit by other state in 1956 the nation confer of commission
on uniform state law and the american bar associ promulg the uniform
secur act more than 30 state have adop ted most or all of the uniform secur act
which wa revis in 1985 and amend in 1988
the revis uniform act ha four part
regul of brokerdeal most state requir brokerdeal to regist with the
state secur regul brokerdeal mean a person engag in the busi of
effect transact in secur for the account of other or for the person own
account and doe not includ an issuer sell hi own secur
registr of securitiesmost state requir that an issuer propos to offer secur
for sale file some type of registr applic
antifraud provis fraud is usual defin in languag similar to rule 10b of the
secur and exchang act of 1934 crimin civil and administr penalti ar
usual attach to violat of state antifraud provis
definit exempt administr provis the definit of secur is
basic the same as that under the secur act of 1933 provid power for state
regul to examin book and record and take disciplinari action
to simplifi to a gener rule of thumb unless certain exempt appli befor a secur is
sold or offer for sale
there must be a registr in place to cover the secur
the brokerdeal must be regist
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11515
there must be full and fair disclosur of all materi inform
as long as there is no conflict with feder law each state can supplement or duplic
feder requir howev in 1996 congress pass the nation secur market
improv act preempt state regul in sever signific area
