2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Commodity Futures, Exchange-Traded Options, and OTC Options/Exchange-Traded Options


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Exchange-Traded Options 
Like commodities futures, exchange-traded options are contract markets with central 
clearing that eliminates individual counterparty credit risk and allows offsetting transactions. 
Option contracts are standardized, expire at a future date, are marked to market, call for 
physical delivery, and are derivatives. This is where the similarities to commodity futures 
markets end.  
 
The buyer of an option contract purchases the right, not the obligation, to buy or sell 
something at a specified price (exercise or strike price) by the expiration date of the option 
contract. The object of the option contract (what the option is written on) is called the 
underlying. The value of the underlying is the main (but not only) factor from which the 
option contract derives its value.  
 
There are two kinds of options: calls and puts. A call option is the right but not the 
obligation to purchase the underlying security at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s 
expiration date. A put option is the right but not the obligation to sell the underlying security 
at the strike (exercise) price by the option’s expiration date. In options transactions, the seller 
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer. Option 
buyers pay a premium to option writers for the options they buy. Option writers (sellers) 
collect this premium for the options they write and are obligated to deliver the underlying 
security if the option is exercised.  
 
Exchange-traded equity options are standardized, plain vanilla, American style options. 
American Style options can be exercised at any time by the buyer (European style options 
can only be exercised on the expiration day). For example, IBM call options traded at the 
CBOE are for 100 shares of IBM common stock.  The option writer is obligated to deliver 
100 shares of IBM common stock at the strike price if the option buyer chooses to exercise 
the option.  
 



:


exchangetrad option
like commod futur exchangetrad option ar contract market with central
clear that elimin individu counterparti credit risk and allow offset transact
option contract ar standard expir at a futur date ar mark to market call for
physic deliveri and ar deriv thi is where the similar to commod futur
market end
the buyer of an option contract purchas the right not the oblig to bui or sell
someth at a specifi price exercis or strike price by the expir date of the option
contract the object of the option contract what the option is written on is call the
underli the valu of the underli is the main but not onli factor from which the
option contract deriv it valu
there ar two kind of option call and put a call option is the right but not the
oblig to purchas the underli secur at the strike exercis price by the option
expir date a put option is the right but not the oblig to sell the underli secur
at the strike exercis price by the option expir date in option transact the seller
of a call option is the call writer while the seller of put option is the put writer option
buyer pai a premium to option writer for the option thei bui option writer seller
collect thi premium for the option thei write and ar oblig to deliv the underli
secur if the option is exercis
exchangetrad equiti option ar standard plain vanilla american style option
american style option can be exercis at ani time by the buyer european style option
can onli be exercis on the expir dai for exampl ibm call option trade at the
cboe ar for 100 share of ibm common stock the option writer is oblig to deliv
100 share of ibm common stock at the strike price if the option buyer choos to exercis
the option
