2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Securities Fraud Schemes/Unsuitable Recommendations/UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


UNITED STATES SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION 
Litigation Release No. 20438 / January 24, 2008 
People of the State of California v. Daniel William Heath, Denis Timothy O’Brien, John 
William Heath, and Larre Jaye Schlarmann, Superior Court of California, County 
of Riverside, Case No. RIF117775 
 
The Securities and Exchange Commission announced that on January 10 and 11, 2008 
a jury in Riverside County, California, convicted three men on felony charges involving a 
fraudulent scheme that was the subject of a prior enforcement action brought by the 
Commission, which raised more than $187 mill ion from over 1,800 victims, mostly senior 
citizens and the elderly. Convicted for their role in the scheme were Daniel William Heath, 
51, formerly of Chino Hills, California, Denis Timothy O’Brien, 53, formerly of Yorba 
Linda, California, and Heath’s father, John William Heath, 81, formerly of Covina, 
California. Daniel Heath was found guilty on 400 felony counts, O’Brien on 70 felony 
counts, and John Heath on 52 felony counts. In 2004, the Riverside County District 
Attorney’s Office arrested and charged them with committing securities fraud, elder abuse, 
grand theft, money laundering, tax fraud, and conspiracy, all under California law. Larre 
Jaye Schlarmann, 52, formerly of Carlsbad, California, was also arrested, pleaded guilty to 
securities fraud, elder abuse, money laundering, and tax fraud, and was sentenced to serve 
15 years in state prison. Daniel Heath faces a maximum of 117 years in state prison, 
O’Brien 37 years, and John Heath 28 years.  
 
In April 2004, the Commission filed a compla int against Daniel Heath and his entities, 
and O’Brien, alleging they fraudulently in duced elderly investors through “free lunch” 
seminars to invest in “secured” notes that paid a “guaranteed” return. The court appointed 
a permanent receiver over the Heath entities. Final judgments of permanent injunction and 
other relief were entered against Heath and O’Brien enjoining them from violating the anti-fraud, 
securities registration, and broker-dealer registrations provisions of the federal 
securities laws for their role in the scheme.  The judgments ordered Heath and O’Brien to 
disgorge to the receiver their ill-gotten gains plus prejudgment interest. The Commission then 
instituted administrative proceedings against Heath and O’Brien barring them from 
association with a broker or dealer. Heath and O’Brien consented to the entry of the final 
judgments and administrative orders with out admitting or denying the Commission’s 
allegations and findings. In September 2007, the Commission instituted administrative 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1534                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceedings against Martin S. Duffield, 52, of West Covina, California, and Raul A. 
Jordan, 52, of Pasadena, California, for viol ating the anti-fraud, securities registration, 
and broker-dealer registrations provisions for their role in the scheme. Duffield was barred 
association with any broker or dealer and Jordan was barred from association with any 
broker or dealer, with the right to reapply for association after five (5) years to the 
appropriate self-regulatory organization, or if there is none, to the Commission. Duffield 
and Jordan were ordered to disgorge ill-gotten gains to the receiver plus prejudgment interest. 
Duffield and Jordan consented to  the entry of the orders with out admitting or denying the 
Commission's findings. 
 
Administration of the court-order receivership over the Heath entities will continue. 
 



:


unit state secur and exchang commiss
litig releas no 20438 januari 24 2008
peopl of the state of california v daniel william heath deni timothi obrien john
william heath and larr jay schlarmann superior court of california counti
of riversid case no rif117775
the secur and exchang commiss announc that on januari 10 and 11 2008
a juri in riversid counti california convict three men on feloni charg involv a
fraudul scheme that wa the subject of a prior enforc action brought by the
commiss which rais more than 187 mill ion from over 1800 victim mostli senior
citizen and the elderli convict for their role in the scheme were daniel william heath
51 formerli of chino hill california deni timothi obrien 53 formerli of yorba
linda california and heath father john william heath 81 formerli of covina
california daniel heath wa found guilti on 400 feloni count obrien on 70 feloni
count and john heath on 52 feloni count in 2004 the riversid counti district
attornei offic arrest and charg them with commit secur fraud elder abus
grand theft monei launder tax fraud and conspiraci all under california law larr
jay schlarmann 52 formerli of carlsbad california wa also arrest plead guilti to
secur fraud elder abus monei launder and tax fraud and wa sentenc to serv
15 year in state prison daniel heath face a maximum of 117 year in state prison
obrien 37 year and john heath 28 year
in april 2004 the commiss file a compla int against daniel heath and hi entiti
and obrien alleg thei fraudul in duce elderli investor through free lunch
seminar to invest in secur note that paid a guarante return the court appoint
a perman receiv over the heath entiti final judgment of perman injunct and
other relief were enter against heath and obrien enjoin them from violat the antifraud
secur registr and brokerdeal registr provis of the feder
secur law for their role in the scheme the judgment order heath and obrien to
disgorg to the receiv their illgotten gain plu prejudg interest the commiss then
institut administr proceed against heath and obrien bar them from
associ with a broker or dealer heath and obrien consent to the entri of the final
judgment and administr order with out admit or deni the commiss
alleg and find in septemb 2007 the commiss institut administr
secur fraud financi transact
11534 2011 fraud examin manual
proceed against martin s duffield 52 of west covina california and raul a
jordan 52 of pasadena california for viol at the antifraud secur registr
and brokerdeal registr provis for their role in the scheme duffield wa bar
associ with ani broker or dealer and jordan wa bar from associ with ani
broker or dealer with the right to reappli for associ after five 5 year to the
appropri selfregulatori organ or if there is none to the commiss duffield
and jordan were order to disgorg illgotten gain to the receiv plu prejudg interest
duffield and jordan consent to the entri of the order with out admit or deni the
commiss find
administr of the courtord receivership over the heath entiti will continu
