2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/SECURITIES FRAUD/Investigative Tips/Promotional Materials


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Securities Fraud


:


Promotional Materials 
Usually, but by no means on every occasion, the fraud examiner will discover that various 
written information has been provided to investors and potential investors. This disclosure is 
often in the form of documents entitled “prospectus,” “offering memorandum,” or “private 
placement offering memorandum.” These documents can sometimes provide the “smoking 
gun” and should therefore be examined in detail. Do not overlook the information utilized 
in various advertising media to persuade the public to invest. How did the investor hear of 
this opportunity? Cold call, direct mail, newspapers, magazines, television, or the Internet?    
 
A properly prepared prospectus (which usually indicates that the issuer claims the security is 
registered) or a private placement memorandum (the issuer claims the security is exempt) 
would normally be expected to contain detailed information concerning the issuer and the 
security being offered. 
Financial Transactions  Securities Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1547 
Such information should describe the type of security, the initial price, and the amount being 
offered for sale. The issuing company, its business, products, background, and the 
qualifications of its officers and directors should be described. Any legal problems involving 
the company or its officers should be disclosed. The financial condition of the issuer should 
be discussed with audited financial statements where applicable. Frequently, there will be 
projections or forecasts of expected future growth and development (see “safe harbor” 
provisions discussed earlier). Usually, there will be risk disclosures of various kinds in bold 
font stating that, for example, “these securiti es have not been registered” or “purchase of 
these securities involves a high degree of risk.” 
   
These documents should be examined thoroughly for misrepresentations, omissions, and 
downright lies. Look closely at the background of principals. If in doubt, conduct a detailed 
background investigation of the principal officers of the corporation. Look especially for any 
previous criminal or regulatory action relating to securities fraud or offenses involving 
dishonesty. Also check for lawsuits, bankruptcies, or other civil or administrative action 
against the entity or its principals whether allegedly resolved or not. Look not only for the 
disposition of the action, but also for potential evidence gathered during the course of the 
suit, for example, depositions. Do not forget to verify any claimed experience in the relevant 
industry or academic qualifications. Closely compare the information, if any, disclosed in 
advertisements and the offering document with the results of the background investigation. 
 
A few other pertinent questions are: 
• What promises are made regarding the viability of the product or service? Is a patent 
claimed? Does it exist? 
• Is there a functioning business you can check out or is it in the developmental stage? 
Ascertain when and where the corporation was legally incorporated, or in the case of a 
partnership, where it was legally filed. 
• Are investors promised guaranteed returns? 
• Can financial statements concerning assets, liabilities, and income be verified? 
• How will investor funds be used? Follow the money trail. Were the proceeds invested as 
represented or used for other purposes? Is the issue potentially oversubscribed? 
• Are sales commissions paid to unregistered persons? Usually this is illegal. Also check to 
see if commissions paid are unusually high or concealed from investors. 
• Are the insiders retaining a majority of the stock while the investors fund the company? 
Are there any other undisclosed benefits to insiders? 
• Is there adequate risk disclosure? Investors may not have been made fully aware of a 
Securities Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1548                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
high percentage of failure, the degree of competition, or inexperience on the part of  
the principals. 
 



:


promot materi
usual but by no mean on everi occas the fraud examin will discov that variou
written inform ha been provid to investor and potenti investor thi disclosur is
often in the form of document entitl prospectu offer memorandum or privat
placement offer memorandum these document can sometim provid the smoke
gun and should therefor be examin in detail do not overlook the inform util
in variou advertis media to persuad the public to invest how did the investor hear of
thi opportun cold call direct mail newspap magazin televis or the internet
a properli prepar prospectu which usual indic that the issuer claim the secur is
regist or a privat placement memorandum the issuer claim the secur is exempt
would normal be expect to contain detail inform concern the issuer and the
secur be offer
financi transact secur fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11547
such inform should describ the type of secur the initi price and the amount be
offer for sale the issu compani it busi product background and the
qualif of it offic and director should be describ ani legal problem involv
the compani or it offic should be disclos the financi condit of the issuer should
be discuss with audit financi statement where applic frequent there will be
project or forecast of expect futur growth and develop see safe harbor
provis discuss earlier usual there will be risk disclosur of variou kind in bold
font state that for exampl these secur es have not been regist or purchas of
these secur involv a high degre of risk
these document should be examin thoroughli for misrepresent omiss and
downright li look close at the background of princip if in doubt conduct a detail
background investig of the princip offic of the corpor look especi for ani
previou crimin or regulatori action relat to secur fraud or offens involv
dishonesti also check for lawsuit bankruptci or other civil or administr action
against the entiti or it princip whether allegedli resolv or not look not onli for the
disposit of the action but also for potenti evid gather dure the cours of the
suit for exampl deposit do not forget to verifi ani claim experi in the relev
industri or academ qualif close compar the inform if ani disclos in
advertis and the offer document with the result of the background investig
a few other pertin question ar
what promis ar made regard the viabil of the product or servic is a patent
claim doe it exist
is there a function busi you can check out or is it in the development stage
ascertain when and where the corpor wa legal incorpor or in the case of a
partnership where it wa legal file
ar investor promis guarante return
can financi statement concern asset liabil and incom be verifi
how will investor fund be us follow the monei trail were the proce invest as
repres or us for other purpos is the issu potenti oversubscrib
ar sale commiss paid to unregist person usual thi is illeg also check to
see if commiss paid ar unusu high or conceal from investor
ar the insid retain a major of the stock while the investor fund the compani
ar there ani other undisclos benefit to insid
is there adequ risk disclosur investor mai not have been made fulli awar of a
secur fraud financi transact
11548 2011 fraud examin manual
high percentag of failur the degre of competit or inexperi on the part of
the princip
