2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Interviews/National Labor Relations Act/FORMER LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


FORMER LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
In the case of Epilepsy Foundation of Northeast Ohio (331 NLRB No. 92; decided July 10, 2000), 
the NLRB extended the so-called Weingarten rights to non-union employees. The case involved 
two workers who were fired from the Epilepsy Foundation. Prior to their discharge, the two 
employees wrote a memo that was critical of their supervisor. Later, the executive director 
requested to meet with one of the employees and the supervisor. The employee requested to 
meet with the executive director alone, but the request was denied. The employee then asked 
if the co-author of the memo could be present at the meeting. This request was also denied. 
When the employee still expressed apprehension about the meeting, he was told to go home, 
and he was fired the next day for insubordination. 
 
The NLRB ruled that discharging the employee for refusing to attend the meeting violated 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.412  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the National Labor Relations Act. A majority of the board felt that the rights set forth in 
Weingarten should apply equally in circumstances in which employees are not represented by 
a union. They reasoned that the right to have a co-worker present at an investigatory 
interview “greatly enhances the employees’ opportunities to act in concert to address the 
concern that the employer does not initiate or continue a practice of imposing punishment 
unjustly.” 
 



:


former law nonunion employe
in the case of epilepsi foundat of northeast ohio 331 nlrb no 92 decid juli 10 2000
the nlrb extend the socal weingarten right to nonunion employe the case involv
two worker who were fire from the epilepsi foundat prior to their discharg the two
employe wrote a memo that wa critic of their supervisor later the execut director
request to meet with on of the employe and the supervisor the employe request to
meet with the execut director alon but the request wa deni the employe then ask
if the coauthor of the memo could be present at the meet thi request wa also deni
when the employe still express apprehens about the meet he wa told to go home
and he wa fire the next dai for insubordin
the nlrb rule that discharg the employe for refus to attend the meet violat
individu right dure examin law
2412 2011 fraud examin manual
the nation labor relat act a major of the board felt that the right set forth in
weingarten should appli equal in circumst in which employe ar not repres by
a union thei reason that the right to have a cowork present at an investigatori
interview greatli enhanc the employe opportun to act in concert to address the
concern that the employ doe not initi or continu a practic of impos punish
unjustli
