2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986/THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701)


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701) 
As part of the ECPA, Congress enacted the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to protect 
stored electronic communications, such as e-mail and voicemail, by prohibiting the 
unauthorized access of such communications that are in storage. More specifically, the SCA 
prohibits unlawful access to a facility that provides an electronic communication service, 
and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is electronically stored in such a system. An electronic 
communication falls under the SCA once a system receives and stores it.  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.426  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than ten years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, 
courts may impose a fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all 
subsequent convictions, courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to ten years. 
 



:


the store commun act 18 usc 2701
as part of the ecpa congress enact the store commun act sca to protect
store electron commun such as email and voicemail by prohibit the
unauthor access of such commun that ar in storag more specif the sca
prohibit unlaw access to a facil that provid an electron commun servic
and then obtain alter or prevent author access to a wire or electron
commun while it is electron store in such a system an electron
commun fall under the sca onc a system receiv and store it
individu right dure examin law
2426 2011 fraud examin manual
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison
for up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor
imprison for not more than ten year in ani other case where it is a first offens
court mai impos a fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all
subsequ convict court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to ten year
