2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/Civil Liability for Damages (42 U.S.C. § 1983)


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Civil Liability for Damages (42 U.S.C. § 1983) 
Section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code, provides a remedy for violation of federally protected 
rights where state action is involved. To prevail in a claim under section 1983, the plaintiff 
must prove two critical issues: (1) that he  has been denied a right guaranteed by the 
Constitution and the laws of the United States, and (2) that the defendant(s) deprived him of 
that right while acting under the color of state law.  
 
The defendant, however, can raise certain defenses to a section 1983 claim, including 
qualified immunity and consent. For public employers, there might be a qualified immunity 
from liability if they act in good faith on the basis of unsettled law. Qualified immunity 
shields government officials from both suit and liability if their conduct did not violate any 
clearly established right which a reasonable person would have known.  
 
In addition, valid consent is a well-recognized exception to the Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against warrantless searches. Consent to search can be voluntary, involuntary, or 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.433 
“informed.” Consent is not voluntary if it requires a choice between constitutional rights. 
Consent might not be voluntary if it requires a choice between exercising constitutional 
rights and continued employment. Courts are split on this issue. (Published “search” policy 
as a barrier to expectation of privacy is used to diminish or eliminate the expectation 
altogether.) 
 



:


civil liabil for damag 42 usc 1983
section 1983 of titl 42 us code provid a remedi for violat of feder protect
right where state action is involv to prevail in a claim under section 1983 the plaintiff
must prove two critic issu 1 that he ha been deni a right guarante by the
constitut and the law of the unit state and 2 that the defend depriv him of
that right while act under the color of state law
the defend howev can rais certain defens to a section 1983 claim includ
qualifi immun and consent for public employ there might be a qualifi immun
from liabil if thei act in good faith on the basi of unsettl law qualifi immun
shield govern offici from both suit and liabil if their conduct did not violat ani
clearli establish right which a reason person would have known
in addit valid consent is a wellrecogn except to the fourth amend
prohibit against warrantless search consent to search can be voluntari involuntari or
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2433
inform consent is not voluntari if it requir a choic between constitut right
consent might not be voluntari if it requir a choic between exercis constitut
right and continu employ court ar split on thi issu publish search polici
as a barrier to expect of privaci is us to diminish or elimin the expect
altogeth
