2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Obtaining Information About Employees/Perjury and Subornation of Perjury


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Perjury and Subornation of Perjury 
Perjury is the willful giving of false material testimony under oath, and includes falsely 
claiming that one cannot remember a material fact. There are three general federal perjury 
laws. First, section 1621 of Title 18, U.S. Code, is the general federal perjury statute; it makes 
it a crime to present material false statements under oath in federal proceedings. Section 
1621 applies “in any case in which a law of the United States authorizes an oath to be 
administered.” All states have similar statutes.  
 
Second, section 1623 of Title 18, U.S. Code, makes it a crime to present false testimony or 
produce other false information under oath before, or ancillary to, a federal court or grand 
jury. 
 
Third, section 1622 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes subornation of perjury; it makes it a 
federal crime to induce or cause another to commit perjury. A person violates section 1622 if 
he induces another to commit perjury in violation of either section 1621 or section 1623. 
The most obvious example of subornation of perjury is telling a prospective witness to lie or 
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investigation. Similarly, subornation also has 
been found to exist where a person counseled a witness to give testimony, the truth of which 
he recklessly disregarded, even though he did not know for certain that the information was  
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.449 
untrue. Subornation is only an offense when the perjury has in fact occurred — proof of 
subornation requires proof of the perjury. 
 
 



:


perjuri and suborn of perjuri
perjuri is the will give of fals materi testimoni under oath and includ fals
claim that on cannot rememb a materi fact there ar three gener feder perjuri
law first section 1621 of titl 18 us code is the gener feder perjuri statut it make
it a crime to present materi fals statement under oath in feder proceed section
1621 appli in ani case in which a law of the unit state author an oath to be
administ all state have similar statut
second section 1623 of titl 18 us code make it a crime to present fals testimoni or
produc other fals inform under oath befor or ancillari to a feder court or grand
juri
third section 1622 of titl 18 us code crimin suborn of perjuri it make it a
feder crime to induc or caus anoth to commit perjuri a person violat section 1622 if
he induc anoth to commit perjuri in violat of either section 1621 or section 1623
the most obviou exampl of suborn of perjuri is tell a prospect wit to lie or
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investig similarli suborn also ha
been found to exist where a person counsel a wit to give testimoni the truth of which
he recklessli disregard even though he did not know for certain that the inform wa
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2449
untru suborn is onli an offens when the perjuri ha in fact occur proof of
suborn requir proof of the perjuri
