2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Normative Perspective


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Normative Perspective 
The focus of this perspective is what one considers just and moral. When people believe 
compliance is their moral obligation, commitment to the law is voluntary, regardless of fear 
of punishment.  
 
People of this belief may indulge in illegal drugs but refrain from stealing; one being morally 
acceptable in their view and the other not. Others  may obey all laws out of the belief that the 
authorities are just. In any case, compliance is unforced and voluntary. 
 
Naturally, the authorities prefer voluntary compliance. From their point of view, the 
normative is preferable to the instrumental perspective since the former does not require 
                                                 
7 Tyler, Tom R. Why People Obey the Law. 1990. Yale University Press: New Haven. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.109  
enforcement. If the public already believes in the government’s moral right to govern, the 
authorities’ job is made much easier.  
 
Morality, however, can work against the government as it did with the U.S. public’s moral 
indignation over the Vietnam conflict, for instance. Those who viewed the government’s 
authority as legitimate supported the war, regardless of their own views as to its necessity. 
Others considered the ongoing struggle useless and wrong and opposed it. 
 
Another significant difference between the instrumental and the normative perspectives is 
whether one focuses on procedures rather than results. Those adhering to the normative 
point of view will, for example, be more concerned with being treated justly in court rather 
than with winning or losing their case. They will contentedly await judgment if dealt with 
fairly. People of this opinion are interested in neutrality, lack of bias, honesty, politeness, and 
respect for one’s rights. The “due process,” then, is most effective in promoting compliance 
to those of this view. The instrumentalist, on the other hand, focuses on the outcome of his 
case and is less concerned with procedures. In his mind, a procedure is fair if it is favorable. 
 



:


norm perspect
the focu of thi perspect is what on consid just and moral when peopl believ
complianc is their moral oblig commit to the law is voluntari regardless of fear
of punish
peopl of thi belief mai indulg in illeg drug but refrain from steal on be moral
accept in their view and the other not other mai obei all law out of the belief that the
author ar just in ani case complianc is unforc and voluntari
natur the author prefer voluntari complianc from their point of view the
norm is prefer to the instrument perspect sinc the former doe not requir
7 tyler tom r why peopl obei the law 1990 yale univers press new haven
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4109
enforc if the public alreadi believ in the govern moral right to govern the
author job is made much easier
moral howev can work against the govern as it did with the us public moral
indign over the vietnam conflict for instanc those who view the govern
author as legitim support the war regardless of their own view as to it necess
other consid the ongo struggl useless and wrong and oppos it
anoth signific differ between the instrument and the norm perspect is
whether on focus on procedur rather than result those adher to the norm
point of view will for exampl be more concern with be treat justli in court rather
than with win or lose their case thei will contentedli await judgment if dealt with
fairli peopl of thi opinion ar interest in neutral lack of bia honesti polit and
respect for on right the due process then is most effect in promot complianc
to those of thi view the instrumentalist on the other hand focus on the outcom of hi
case and is less concern with procedur in hi mind a procedur is fair if it is favor
