2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Measuring Legitimacy and Compliance


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Measuring Legitimacy and Compliance 
A study by Tyler (called the Chicago Study) focused on six laws with which people deal on a 
daily basis: disturbing the peace, littering, dr iving while intoxicated, speeding, shoplifting, and 
parking illegally. Participants were asked how often they had broken these laws in the past 
year. Most admitted to parking illegally (51 pe rcent) and speeding (62 percent), but very few 
admitted to shoplifting (3 percent). Twenty-seven percent confessed to disturbing the peace, 
25 percent to littering, and 19 percent admitted to having driven while under the influence. 
 
The second wave of interviews, in which participants were asked about a shorter time frame, 
produced similar results. To measure fear of punishment, respondents were asked how likely 
they thought it was that they would be arrested or issued a citation if they violated these six 
laws. Eighty-three percent thought it was likely they would be caught driving drunk; 78 
Understanding Human Behavior  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.112   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
percent thought the same for parking violations and shoplifting; 72 percent for speeding; 35 
percent for disturbing the peace; and 31 percent for littering. 
 
Participants were then gauged for peer approval. For shoplifting, 89 percent said that they 
thought that the five adults they know best would disapprove. Eighty-six percent said the 
same for drunk driving, as did 51 percent for littering, 52 percent for speeding, 44 percent 
for illegal parking, and 53 percent for disturbing the peace. 
  
The next question was designed to measure respondents’ morality. They were asked whether 
each offense was “wrong.” Almost every one of the participants felt that any violations of 
the six laws were wrong. Speeding came out as the least immoral and shoplifting the most, 
with 99 percent of participants considering it morally objectionable. 
 
One sees that citizens seem to view the breaking of laws as a violation of their personal 
morality. Interestingly, most believe the chances of getting caught are high. And since peer 
disapproval levels are relatively light, one can gather that the social group is the source of the 
least amount of pressure to obey laws. 
 
More than four out of five participants felt a person should obey the law “even if it goes 
against what they think is right.” Almost as many  respondents felt that disobeying the law is 
seldom justified and that obedience and respect for authority are the most important virtues 
children should learn. 
 



:


measur legitimaci and complianc
a studi by tyler call the chicago studi focus on six law with which peopl deal on a
daili basi disturb the peac litter dr iv while intox speed shoplift and
park illeg particip were ask how often thei had broken these law in the past
year most admit to park illeg 51 pe rcent and speed 62 percent but veri few
admit to shoplift 3 percent twentyseven percent confess to disturb the peac
25 percent to litter and 19 percent admit to have driven while under the influenc
the second wave of interview in which particip were ask about a shorter time frame
produc similar result to measur fear of punish respond were ask how like
thei thought it wa that thei would be arrest or issu a citat if thei violat these six
law eightythre percent thought it wa like thei would be caught drive drunk 78
understand human behavior fraud prevent and deterr
4112 2011 fraud examin manual
percent thought the same for park violat and shoplift 72 percent for speed 35
percent for disturb the peac and 31 percent for litter
particip were then gaug for peer approv for shoplift 89 percent said that thei
thought that the five adult thei know best would disapprov eightysix percent said the
same for drunk drive as did 51 percent for litter 52 percent for speed 44 percent
for illeg park and 53 percent for disturb the peac
the next question wa design to measur respond moral thei were ask whether
each offens wa wrong almost everi on of the particip felt that ani violat of
the six law were wrong speed came out as the least immor and shoplift the most
with 99 percent of particip consid it moral objection
on see that citizen seem to view the break of law as a violat of their person
moral interestingli most believ the chanc of get caught ar high and sinc peer
disapprov level ar rel light on can gather that the social group is the sourc of the
least amount of pressur to obei law
more than four out of five particip felt a person should obei the law even if it goe
against what thei think is right almost as mani respond felt that disobei the law is
seldom justifi and that obedi and respect for author ar the most import virtu
children should learn
