2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/UNDERSTANDING HUMAN BEHAVIOR/Why People Obey the Law/Legitimacy and Experience


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


Legitimacy and Experience 
People will accept unfavorable rulings if they believe they were dealt with fairly. Thus, fair 
procedures can cushion the blow of an outcome that is to one’s disadvantage, without 
damaging the authorities’ legitimacy. Of course, fair procedures can only go so far. If fair 
procedures consistently produce unfavorable results, the fairness of the procedures 
themselves will come into question. 
 
People place importance on procedure for several reasons, the first of which is simplicity. 
Often, the result itself is difficult to classify as fair or unfair. People therefore focus on the 
steps that lead up to the outcome. Another reason such emphasis is placed on procedures is 
that, with as much religious and ethnic diversity that the United States has, people do not 
always concur on what is fair. Although most people may not necessarily agree upon the 
outcome, they are usually of one mind as to the justice of the procedures. 
 
The procedural aspects of the law and how the public perceives them must be of great 
importance to authorities. Of course, policymakers must have a good idea of what the public 
considers fair. If the public perceives a court’s legal actions as just, they will support the 
outcome although it might not be to their advantage. Plea bargaining, for example, is often 
justified based on outcome. But if the inconsistency in plea agreements is seen as unfair, 
support for the legal system will weaken. Likewise, no-fault insurance may make sense in 
economic terms, but may dilute the basic principle underlying our legal system: those 
individuals are responsible for their own actions. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Understanding Human Behavior 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.115  
The same is true in the corporate environment. Employees will often accept unpopular 
company policies if the employees feel that the policy is applied “fairly.” For instance, 
employees may be upset that the company provides only three paid sick days, but if the rule 
is applied to all employees in an equal manner, most employees will live with the policy. 
However, if some employees are allowed additional sick days and others are not, employees 
begin to resent the policy and the company. In other words, these employees feel they are 
being treated unfairly. 
 



:


legitimaci and experi
peopl will accept unfavor rule if thei believ thei were dealt with fairli thu fair
procedur can cushion the blow of an outcom that is to on disadvantag without
damag the author legitimaci of cours fair procedur can onli go so far if fair
procedur consist produc unfavor result the fair of the procedur
themselv will come into question
peopl place import on procedur for sever reason the first of which is simplic
often the result itself is difficult to classifi as fair or unfair peopl therefor focu on the
step that lead up to the outcom anoth reason such emphasi is place on procedur is
that with as much religi and ethnic divers that the unit state ha peopl do not
alwai concur on what is fair although most peopl mai not necessarili agre upon the
outcom thei ar usual of on mind as to the justic of the procedur
the procedur aspect of the law and how the public perceiv them must be of great
import to author of cours policymak must have a good idea of what the public
consid fair if the public perceiv a court legal action as just thei will support the
outcom although it might not be to their advantag plea bargain for exampl is often
justifi base on outcom but if the inconsist in plea agreement is seen as unfair
support for the legal system will weaken likewis nofault insur mai make sens in
econom term but mai dilut the basic principl underli our legal system those
individu ar respons for their own action
fraud prevent and deterr understand human behavior
2011 fraud examin manual 4115
the same is true in the corpor environ employe will often accept unpopular
compani polici if the employe feel that the polici is appli fairli for instanc
employe mai be upset that the compani provid onli three paid sick dai but if the rule
is appli to all employe in an equal manner most employe will live with the polici
howev if some employe ar allow addit sick dai and other ar not employe
begin to resent the polici and the compani in other word these employe feel thei ar
be treat unfairli
