2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Criminology


:


THEORIES OF CRIME CAUSATION 
 
Understanding human behavior and why people obey the law helps explain some of the 
reasons people commit fraud. However, there have been a number of theorists who have 
attempted to explain specifically why people commit crimes. In more sophisticated sciences, 
such as chemistry and physics, theories build on one another as new facts emerge from 
studies prompted by the reigning theories. In criminology (as in virtually all the social 
sciences), theories compete with one another for acceptance, with none of them adequately 
satisfying either practitioners or scholars in the field. 
 
The reason for this jumble of interpretations of criminal activity in large part lies in the fact 
that human beings, unlike inanimate objects, think for themselves. You can push a rock in a 
certain direction and it will (all other things being equal) move in that direction. But you 
cannot predict as simple a matter as the direction in which a human being might decide to 
proceed when confronted with a choice. Perhaps you can guess that he will go to the right 
because you know that this is the direction in which the store he wants to go to lies. But any 
human being, for reasons that satisfy him, can decide on any given day that he prefers to go 
to the left, perhaps just to saunter around or to get extra exercise, or for no particular reason 
that seems evident to him or to others.  
 
Imagine how much more difficult it is to try to predict very complicated human behaviors, 
such as criminal acts. 
 
The following sections summarize some of the better-known criminological theories, both 
past and present. 
 
 



:


theori of crime causat
understand human behavior and why peopl obei the law help explain some of the
reason peopl commit fraud howev there have been a number of theorist who have
attempt to explain specif why peopl commit crime in more sophist scienc
such as chemistri and physic theori build on on anoth as new fact emerg from
studi prompt by the reign theori in criminolog as in virtual all the social
scienc theori compet with on anoth for accept with none of them adequ
satisfi either practition or scholar in the field
the reason for thi jumbl of interpret of crimin activ in larg part li in the fact
that human be unlik inanim object think for themselv you can push a rock in a
certain direct and it will all other thing be equal move in that direct but you
cannot predict as simpl a matter as the direct in which a human be might decid to
proce when confront with a choic perhap you can guess that he will go to the right
becaus you know that thi is the direct in which the store he want to go to li but ani
human be for reason that satisfi him can decid on ani given dai that he prefer to go
to the left perhap just to saunter around or to get extra exercis or for no particular reason
that seem evid to him or to other
imagin how much more difficult it is to try to predict veri complic human behavior
such as crimin act
the follow section summar some of the betterknown criminolog theori both
past and present
