2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/INSURANCE FRAUD/Workers' Compensation Fraud/Premium Fraud Investigation Tips


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Insurance Fraud


:


Premium Fraud Investigation Tips 
• Review the application for coverage for completeness and accuracy. 
• If the business is claiming to be new, then it should be verified that it is indeed new and 
no mod factors have been established. 
• Review the underwriting of the application for suspicious activity. If the company is a 
large company and has a small payroll, verify the number of employees, as well as their 
classification. 
• Review claims to determine if they are consistent with the type of employment reported 
and the number of employees claimed. 
• Conduct an on-site audit of their payroll and related records for the policy period as well 
as to determine where their principal place of employment is located. 
• Observe if there are too many clerical employees or other low risk occupations that 
make up the calculation leading you to believe that the records are misstated. 
• Analyze the financial statements, when available, to determine what payroll expenses 
actually are compared to what is reported. 
• Review accident and injury reports for suspicious activities. 
• Conduct surveillance as needed to observe and document various activities. 
• Document findings and report the results of the activity as required.  
 



:


premium fraud investig tip
review the applic for coverag for complet and accuraci
if the busi is claim to be new then it should be verifi that it is inde new and
no mod factor have been establish
review the underwrit of the applic for suspici activ if the compani is a
larg compani and ha a small payrol verifi the number of employe as well as their
classif
review claim to determin if thei ar consist with the type of employ report
and the number of employe claim
conduct an onsit audit of their payrol and relat record for the polici period as well
as to determin where their princip place of employ is locat
observ if there ar too mani cleric employe or other low risk occup that
make up the calcul lead you to believ that the record ar misstat
analyz the financi statement when avail to determin what payrol expens
actual ar compar to what is report
review accid and injuri report for suspici activ
conduct surveil as need to observ and document variou activ
document find and report the result of the activ as requir
