2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Interviewing Government Officials/Assigning the Interview


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Assigning the Interview 
People assigned to interview high officials will find that there are both similarities and 
differences with “normal” interviews. 
 
The first rule is to ensure that the interviewer is not subordinate to the subject of the 
interview. This is no problem for outside entities such as an independent counsel or even an 
inspector general, but where auditors or investigators need to interview someone far up in 
their own chain of command, problems may arise. 
 
If there is any possibility that the high official could influence the career of the interviewer, 
either presently or in the future, someone else should be chosen. Agencies should be able to 
call on outside entities to conduct such interviews where appropriate. In any event, any hint 
by the official of help (or harm) to the interviewer should be documented and reported. 
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1926                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The term “high official” appears to encompass a homogenous group, but, in reality, anyone 
from a naive or brash political appointee to a grizzled and canny veteran civil servant with 
many such interviews under his belt may be encountered. The best method of interviewing 
will therefore depend on a number of factors: 
• Is the interviewee suspected of wrongdoing? 
• Is he likely to be cooperative? (Are there files or previous interviewers who can be 
consulted?) 
• Is he likely to be embarrassed by the results of the inquiry even though not personally 
culpable? 
 
These and other factors will determine whether the interviewer should be humble, 
deferential, apologetic, matter of fact, or aggressive. Obviously, no one mode fits all subjects 
or all situations. However, the interviewer should not be cowed by the subject’s position, 
although feigning humility may be appropriate. 
 



:


assign the interview
peopl assign to interview high offici will find that there ar both similar and
differ with normal interview
the first rule is to ensur that the interview is not subordin to the subject of the
interview thi is no problem for outsid entiti such as an independ counsel or even an
inspector gener but where auditor or investig need to interview someon far up in
their own chain of command problem mai aris
if there is ani possibl that the high offici could influenc the career of the interview
either present or in the futur someon els should be chosen agenc should be abl to
call on outsid entiti to conduct such interview where appropri in ani event ani hint
by the offici of help or harm to the interview should be document and report
public sector fraud financi transact
11926 2011 fraud examin manual
the term high offici appear to encompass a homogen group but in realiti anyon
from a naiv or brash polit appointe to a grizzl and canni veteran civil servant with
mani such interview under hi belt mai be encount the best method of interview
will therefor depend on a number of factor
is the interviewe suspect of wrongdo
is he like to be cooper ar there file or previou interview who can be
consult
is he like to be embarrass by the result of the inquiri even though not person
culpabl
these and other factor will determin whether the interview should be humbl
deferenti apologet matter of fact or aggress obvious no on mode fit all subject
or all situat howev the interview should not be cow by the subject posit
although feign humil mai be appropri
