2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME 
 
Most criminologists have adopted the distinction first made by Marshall B. Clinard (a 
recipient of the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ Cressey Award) and Richard 
Quinney between occupational crime  and organizational crime. Organizational crime is that which 
is committed by businesses, particularly corporations, and government. Occupational crime 
involves offenses against the law by individuals in the course of their occupation. An  
anti-trust offense would be an organizational crime; accepting or offering bribes is an 
occupational offense. 
 
Organizational crime occurs in the context of  complex relationships and expectations among 
boards of directors, executives, and managers on the one hand, and among parent 
corporations, corporate divisions, and subsidiaries on the other. White-collar crime is 
distinguished from lower socioeconomic crimes in terms of the structure of the violation 
and the fact that administrative and civil penalties are more likely to be used as punishment 
than are criminal penalties. 
 
While corporations cannot be jailed, they may be confined. Most corporate lawbreakers are 
handled by government regulatory agencies like the Federal Trade Commission, the 
Environmental Protection Agency, and the Food and Drug Administration. Enforcement 
measures might include warning letters, consent agreements or decrees not to repeat the 
violation; orders of regulatory agencies to  compel compliance, seizure, or recall of  
goods; administrative or civil monetary penalties; and court injunctions to refrain from 
further violations. 
 
Corporate crime is certainly not limited to the United States. Clinard and Yeager say it 
appears to be extensive in Europe, Japan, Australia, and other areas. According to Delmas-
 Marty, French multinationals violate the law in many ways. They utilize both legal and illegal 
means in tax evasion. They may transfer profits from one subsidiary to another located in a 
country that has a more lenient tax system or presents a tax haven, like Switzerland. 
According to Cosson, French manufacturing corporations also falsify their bookkeeping to 
avoid payment of industrial and commercial taxes. 
 
In Japan, the Diet (legislature) has passed a law for the punishment of crimes “relating to 
environmental pollution that adversely affects the health of persons.” Under this law, 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.502   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
intentional or negligent emission by industries of a substance that causes danger to human 
life or health is to be punished with imprisonment or fines. 
 
The Swiss banking system has often been accused of offering a hiding place for stolen or 
looted money, providing a screen for stock manipulations and shady promoters, and helping 
tax evaders to conceal both income and assets. Deposits in Swiss banks are often laundered 
to obscure their illegal origins, and then the money is made legal through new commercial 
transactions and is therefore concealed from tax authorities. 
 
 
Corporate Organization and Criminal Behavior 
Corporate offenses take place in a context of complex relationships and expectations in an 
organizational setting. It is often difficult to distinguish which corporate participants ought 
to be held personally responsible for the wrongdoing. Many offenses are the result of myriad 
decisions that are made by different individuals and passed through a chain of command. 
Not uncommonly, when corporate acts are contrary to the law, upper-level executives take 
pains to avoid learning what is going on so as to avoid responsibility if a scheme is 
uncovered. In some corporations, there is one well-paid executive who is only half in jest 
referred to as the “vice president in charge of going to jail.” 
 
The law largely treats corporations as people. They make more inviting prosecutory targets 
than individuals, most notably because they have deeper pockets and can be heavily fined to 
repay losses that have been inflicted on individuals or on the society in general.  
 
Government regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
oversee corporate performance in areas assigned to them by Congressional mandate. 
Typically, the lawmakers enact a statute that is deliberately vague, allowing the enforcement 
agency to develop its own enforcement guidelines within the boundaries of the 
Congressional authorization. The agencies will sometimes seek to expand the reach of the 
law by selecting notably egregious cases for litigation and appeal, thereby anticipating a 
favorable ruling on what is fundamentally a somewhat novel interpretation of their mandate. 
 
The Image of the Corporation 
Large corporations have contributed significantly to industrial and commercial development 
throughout the world. Their size and resources enable them to organize and coordinate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.503  
production and distribution. The capital resources of a large corporation provide it with the 
ability to develop, adopt, and alter technology on a mammoth scale. A considerable portion 
of the population has been accorded a high standard of living because of corporate activity. 
 
At the same time, large corporations have the power to influence the manner in which  
laws are written and to commit acts that can inflict serious harm upon the population. They 
can hire lobbyists and lawyers who manipulate definitions of wrongdoing in the 
corporations’ interests.  
 
The very largeness and remoteness of the corporation from most of us is part of the reason 
that Americans traditionally have a love-hate attitude toward such organizations. We admire 
and desire corporations’ products, but we are uneasy about their power — a power that tends 
to be used single-mindedly in the pursuit of profits. Thomas Hobbes, a seventeenth century 
English political philosopher, stands out in the crowd that has been scornful of 
corporations. Hobbes’ unsavory comparison was between corporations and ascarides — 
worms that eat at the entrails of what Hobbes called “natural man.” 1 Centuries later, Robert 
Heilbroner, an economist, would castigate “the corporation with its wealth-seeking, its 
dehumanizing calculus of plus and minus, its careful inculcation of impulses and goals that 
should at most be tolerated.” 2  
 
Corporations and their executives are often the object of deprecatory humor. As far back as 
l635, a satirist had a businessman proclaiming: “I love churches. I mean to rob my 
countrymen and build one.” 3 In more recent times, a U.S. Senator told the story of a 
corporation officer who, when asked at a committee hearing if he were not ashamed of 
double-dealing people who trusted him, was puzzled: “Who else can you cheat?” he wanted 
to know. The putdowns of the business world are part of a common folklore, reflected in 
the belief that the expression legitimate business  is an oxymoron. 
 
According to William Kristol, public hostility toward big business dates back to the Populist 
movement of the late nineteenth century and suspicions of trusts that led to the 1890 
Sherman Anti-Trust Act. People are suspicious as to whether goods produced by large 
corporations are of the highest quality or are available at the lowest possible price. In 1978, a 
                                                 
1Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (London: Andrew Crooke, 1651). 
2Robert Heilbroner, In the Name of Profit  (New York: Doubleday, 1973), p. 223. 
3Christopher Hill, Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary England  (London: Secker & Warburg, 1964), p. 267. 
4John T. Noonan, Bribes (New York: Macmillan, 1984). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
survey by Seymour Lipset and Gordan Schneider concluded that major industries and 
corporations had dropped in public esteem greatly during the 1970s.  
 
Clinard and Yeager 
In a comprehensive study of corporate law-breaking, Marshall Clinard (a recipient of the 
Association’s Donald Cressey Award) and Peter Yeager examined over a two-year period the 
records of 562 companies (477 of which were on the Fortune 500  list) and found that l,553 
white-collar crime cases had been filed against them. Some 60 percent of the firms had at 
least one case against them; for those companies, the average number of violations was 4.4. 
The oil, pharmaceutical, and motor vehicle industries were the most likely to be charged for 
wrongdoing, a matter that may be a function of enforcement priorities or a true reflection of 
their activities.  
 
In a study by Irwin Ross, he analyzed 1,043 companies that at one time or another had 
appeared on the Fortune  list of large industrial companies. Included in his study were five 
kinds of offenses: bribe-taking or bribe-giving by  high-level executives, criminal fraud, illegal 
campaign contributions, tax evasion, and anti-trust violations. One hundred seventeen, or 11 
percent of the corporations, were violators. 
 
The costs of corporate crimes not only include financial losses, but also injuries, deaths, and 
health hazards. Such crimes destroy public confidence in businesses and hurt the image of 
corporations. Clinard and Yeager say price-fixing offenses victimize the consumer and 
federal, state, and municipal governments while income tax crimes deprive the government 
and those dependent on it for needed revenue. 
 
Clinard and Yeager believe that corporate violations are increasingly difficult to discover, 
investigate, or prosecute successfully because of their growing complexity and intricacy. This 
is particularly true, they believe, of anti-trust cases, foreign payoffs, computer fraud, and 
illegal political contributions. In the last category, some corporations pay bonuses to their 
executives, with the understanding that part of that reward will be turned over to the coffers 
of a candidate that the corporation favors. 
 
Criminal activities involving corporations are often rooted in organizational subcultures 
and values and are developed over time. A particularly comprehensive examination of how 
                                                 
5Marshall B. Clinard and Peter C. Yeager, Corporate Crime (New York: Free Press, 1980). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.505  
matters of life and death become embedded in routine decision-making and ultimately can 
lead to tragedy is provided in a book titled The Challenger Space Shuttle Disaster  by Diane 
Vaughan, another Cressey Award winner. 6 
 
Legal responses have been slow and ineffectual when dealing with economic organizational 
change. The law has emphasized the role of the individual actor in criminality, but has not 
examined the role of the organization in crime. Criminal activities are often rooted in 
organizational subculture and attitudes developed over time and cannot be traced to 
individuals or groups within the organization. While individuals still carry out the criminal 
enterprise, their attitudes and characteristics are of little importance, as an organization will 
replace those employees unwilling to participate in a criminal activity. 
 
 
Opportunities for Unlawful Organizational Behavior 
 
Organizational Structure 
Complex companies provide a structure that can foster misbehavior. They provide many 
settings where misconduct is possible. They isolate those settings in departments and in 
locations around a city, the country, or the world. The isolation, in turn, means that 
information about what one part of a company is doing may be unknown in another part. 
All this reduces the risk that misbehavior will be detected and punished. The larger a 
company grows, the more specialized its subunits tend to become. An internally diversified 
company may have few employees who fully understand the detailed workings. 
 
Specialized departments in a large firm compete for resources not only with other firms,  
but with departments in their own firm. The need to outperform both other businesses and 
internal units can generate sufficient pressure to lead to misconduct. Vaughan notes that 
departments often have survival concerns that conflict with the larger interests of an 
organization. When given a chance to make decisions, she writes, lower-level managers will 
tend to act not in the interest of the firm, but in the interests of their departments. 
Specialization also hides illegal activities, especially where a firm’s tasks are kept separate and 
unrelated. Employees cannot garner knowledge about all the particulars of how a firm 
works. This protects a company from the effects of personnel turnover and leaks of 
                                                 
6Diane Vaughan, The Challenger Launch Decision:  Risky Technology, Culture, and Deviance at NASA. 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
information because no one can offer much more than a piece of the jigsaw puzzle  
that makes up the company picture. The same secrecy, however, raises the chances  
for misconduct. 
 
Companies spell out rules in a common language to decide how tasks will be performed and 
to create common bonds that will facilitate decision making. But a company’s ability to 
coordinate all its activities varies considerably. Vaughan writes that organizational growth 
naturally leads to a progressive loss of control over departments. Executives cannot hope to 
keep track of all the units in a huge company and must rely on subordinates to carry out 
policy. Vaughan states that when the distance between top executives and subordinate units 
grows to a sufficient level, “authority leakage”  results. Such leakage means the company has 
become too unwieldy for an executive to enforce rules at all levels. “The organization, in 
short,” Vaughan writes, “can diversify beyond the capability of those at the top to master it.” 
 
Such leakage allows subsidiaries, company researchers, accountants, or other departments to 
engage in misconduct without any assurance that internal controls will check the behavior. 
In some cases, as with computer crime, detecting misconduct might be beyond the ability of 
most employees. Conversely, authority leakage and specialization can also lead an 
organization to comply with societal rules even when the organizational pressures lean 
toward misconduct. 
 
Does the existence of authority imply a loss of company control? While a company that 
cannot steer its employees’ behavior might be viewed as irrational or incompetent, the ability 
to control information flow from top to bottom may not be possible. Research and theory 
suggest, to the contrary, that information is processed selectively through a company in ways 
that tend to protect the interests of departments and to promote efficiency.  
 
Sometimes censorship of information promotes a company’s interests. In other cases, “need 
to know” policies or ignorance of rules that  are irrelevant to a department leads to 
inefficiencies. All these tendencies restrict information flow and create opportunities for one 
unit in a company to act outside the knowledge of other units. Censorship policies may 
originate in any part of a company and hide matters throughout the organization.  
The tiered structure of most organizations obscures personal responsibility and tends to 
spread it throughout the company. Thus, determining where a decision to engage in 
misconduct originated can be difficult. Author John E. Conklin put it this way: “The 
delegation of responsibility and unwritten orders keep those at the top of the corporate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.507  
structure remote from the consequences of their decisions and orders, much as the heads of 
organized crime families remain ‘untouchable’ by law.” 
 
 
Criminogenic Organizational Structures 
Sociologist Edward Gross has asserted that all organizations are inherently criminogenic 
(that is, prone to committing crime), though not necessarily criminal. Gross makes this 
assertion because of the reliance on “the bottom line.” Without necessarily meaning to, 
organizations can invite fraud as a means of obtaining goals. Criminologist Oliver 
Williamson noted that because of a department’s concern with reaching its goals,  
managers might well tend to maximize their department’s own interests to the detriment of 
the organization. 
 
Organizations can also be criminogenic because  they encourage loyalty. According to Diane 
Vaughan, the reasons are that: 
• The organization tends to recruit and attract similar individuals. 
• Rewards are given out to those who display characteristics of the “company man.” 
• Long-term loyalty is encouraged through company retirement and benefits. 
• Loyalty is encouraged through social interaction, such as company parties and  
social functions. 
• Frequent transfers and long working hours encourage isolation from other groups. 
• Specialized job skills can discourage personnel from seeking employment elsewhere. 
 
This, in turn, causes company personnel to sometimes perceive that the organization might 
be worth committing crime to maintain and further its goals. The use of formal and informal 
rewards and punishments, plus social activities and pressures to participate, link an 
employee’s needs and goals to the success of the company. Society places value on the 
reputation of the company for which one works, reinforcing the link between an individual  
  
                                                 
7Edward Gross, “Organizational Structure and Organizational Crime.” In Gilbert Geis and Ezra Stotland 
(Eds.), White-Collar Crime: Theory and Research. Beverly Hills:  Sage, 1980, pp. 53–76. 
8Diane Vaughan, “Transaction Systems and Unlawful Organizational Behavior.” Social Problems,  29: 373–380. 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.508   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
and corporate goals. When a company achieves its goals, its employees prosper. In short, the 
interests of an organization and its employees coincide, and that situation may set the stage 
for unlawful conduct by individuals on the organization’s behalf. 
 
Vaughan writes that organizational processes create “an internal moral and intellectual 
world” that causes individuals to identify with organizational goals. Company survival comes 
to mean individual survival, and when resources become scarce, the incentive to misbehave 
increases. Of course, not all agents will act unlawfully on a company’s behalf, and how  
any employee behaves will be linked to factors that might not be related to the world of  
the organization. 
 
When the structural pressure to commit fraud exists, a firm often cannot unite its agents in 
such activities. At least three factors prevent such unity. First, the pressure to commit fraud 
might not affect departments in a company equally. A sales department that must meet 
certain goals to generate profits will feel different competitive pressure than a product 
development department in the same company that is running smoothly. Some parts of 
companies might never experience pressure to cheat, and members of those departments 
will have no motivation to engage in misconduct on a firm’s behalf. 
 
Second, even in high-pressure departments, some employees will not have knowledge of the 
difficulty of obtaining needed resources. An employee will have no motivation to commit 
fraud unless he has full information about an organization’s goals and how the department 
can achieve them. In other words, an employee usually needs a high degree of responsibility 
for a company’s success, as well as the ability to bring about those goals, before a chance to 
engage in misbehavior can occur. 
 
Third, outside societal behavior can produce values that conflict with those learned in an 
organizational environment. For example, fraternal or professional associations impart their 
own values to employees that may not coincide with a specific corporate code of honor. 
When faced with conflicting norms, Vaughan writes, employees will make their choices 
based on the rewards and punishments they perceive to accompany the alternatives. Where 
misbehavior is seen as too costly, it will not occur. Where an organization provides sufficient 
rewards to overcome the fear of punishment, misbehavior may occur despite competing 
norms. The amount of information an employee has will affect the decision on which way to 
go, as will an individual’s financial and social dependence on the firm. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.509  
The mere fact that corporate and individual goals are often joined in organizations does 
not necessarily create a climate for illegal actions. As with any major decision, complexities 
often enter the picture. Temptations vary not only among departments, but within them. 
The availability of information and individual risk-reward assessments may generate lawful 
behavior that resists organizational pressures to violate the law, as well as unlawful 
behavior in the face of organizational pressures to comply. Put plainly, the likelihood that 
organizational processes will generate misbehavior is highly variable and cannot currently 
be measured with any degree of precision. 
 
In explaining how employees are taught to make decisions that are correct from a 
corporation’s standpoint, Drucker said a natural tendency exists in every large-scale 
organization to discourage initiative and encourage conformity. Madden and Margolis say 
corporations lead new managers through an initiation period designed to weaken their ties 
with external groups, including their own families, and encourage a feeling of dependence on 
and attachment to the corporation.  
 
Geis found that individuals are trained quite often in illegal behavior as part of their 
occupational roles. Schrager and Short say criminal behavior stems more from the roles an 
employee is expected to fulfill than from individual pathology. Many executives know their 
behavior is illegal, but tend to justify their actions as simply common practice in the business 
world. Clinard and Yeager believed that in rationalizing their behavior, corporations follow a 
general tendency to obey laws selectively (i.e., obeying according to situational needs and 
determined by factors like social class and occupation). 
 
Sutherland demonstrated that corporate executives are insulated from those who might 
disagree with their beliefs because they associate almost exclusively with people who are pro-business, 
politically conservative, and generally opposed to government regulation. 
 
Silk and Vogel found that certain beliefs about government intervention in business are used 
throughout the business world to justify illegal activity by corporations. For example, some 
defend the corporation’s right to violate laws by claiming that “all legal measures proposed 
constitute government interference with the free enterprise system.”  
 
A problem common in many large corporations with intricate hierarchical structures tends to 
be a split between what the upper levels believe is going on below and the actual procedures 
being carried out. Clinard and Yeager say that the chief executive officer of a corporation is 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
often isolated, and thus messages transmitted down the line tend to become distorted. 
Clinard and Yeager found that all levels of the corporation might often agree to perpetuate 
the lack of full information, for the key to any successful conspiracy to violate the law 
probably lies in the fact that the higher-ups do not inquire about what is going on and the 
lower levels do not tell them. 
 
Often in corporations, no single individual at the highest levels may make a decision alone to 
market a faulty product or take shortcuts on product testing, Clinard and Yeager say. 
Instead, decisions are made in small steps at each level, possibly without any awareness of 
the illegal and potentially dangerous result. 
 
McCaghy says profit pressure is “the single most compelling factor behind deviance by 
industry, whether it be price fixing, the destruction of competition, or the misrepresentation 
of a product,” such as making a shoddy product that will wear out and need to be replaced. 
Clinard and Yeager say certain industries, such as the drug and chemical businesses, have 
such severe competition and strong profit drives due to demands for continual development 
of new products that they may feel pressured to falsify test data, market new products before 
their full effects are known, or engage in unethical sales techniques that can have disastrous 
effects on human beings and the environment. 
 
 
Corporate Executives and Criminal Liability 
Many of the ethical and legal problems of a corporation result from the corporate structure 
that separates ownership from management. Typical large corporations are administered by a 
group of salaried managers, with the board of directors exercising little direct power other 
than hiring or firing the managers, and thus corporate managers have great autonomy over 
decisions regarding production, investment, pricing, and marketing. 
 
Luthans and Hodgetts said that after performing a study with the American Management 
Society, 3,000 executives questioned “felt under pressure to compromise personal standards 
to meet company goals,” but that they felt “that business ethics should still be a concern.” 
 
Executives tend to believe that their jobs are at risk if they cannot show a profit to higher 
management or the board of directors, and often they are. Clinard and Yeager hold that if 
goals for managers are set too high, the employee then confronts a hard choice of risking 
being thought incompetent or taking unethical or even illegal shortcuts. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.511  
According to Clinard and Yeager, corporations often try to protect their executives from 
liability by agreeing to pay fines, court costs, and attorney’s fees with corporate funds; 
bonuses, raises, or liability insurance might offer protection to officers or directors. 
Generally, executive compensation and tenure remain untouched. There is much difficulty in 
criminal prosecution of executives because corporate violations are usually far more complex 
than conventional crimes. Also, the complexity of the legal proof required allows 
businessmen to test the limits of the law. 
 
Businessmen might have sought legal advice on loopholes in the law before committing the 
offense, Clinard and Yeager say, which may be cited as evidence that the executives thought 
they were in legal compliance. Businessmen can hire highly skilled lawyers who present 
arguments as to the client’s lack of previous convictions or unlikelihood of becoming a 
repeat offender, as well as being able to cite numerous precedents where businessmen were 
charged but not imprisoned for similar violations. 
 
Corporate offenders are usually not imprisoned with ordinary criminals, but are usually 
incarcerated in institutions designed for low-risk inmates with short sentences, presumably 
for the corporate offender’s own physical safety. Justifications used in arguing against a 
prison sentence for corporate offenders include: 
• Age and poor health 
• Personal and family reasons 
• Extent of punishment already suffered by virtue of being indicted 
• Offense was not immoral 
• Defendant has no prior record, is not a threat to society, and has been a prominent 
citizen active in community affairs 
• Incarceration would accomplish nothing (no benefit to society) 
• Defendant is repentant 
• Victimization of corporate executives solely because of their position 
 
Some corporate offenders are given community service as punishment, such as giving 
speeches about their offenses to businesses and civic groups, working in programs  
designed to aid the poor, or helping former ordinary criminal offenders secure job pledges 
from businesses. 
 
Prior to 2001, corporate offenders generally received little, if any, public attention. Coverage 
of corporate scandals was often limited to business and trade publications. However, all of 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.512   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that changed with the Enron scandal. Suddenly, corporate offenders were front-page news, 
and prosecutors have increased their efforts in pursing corporate executives for wrongdoing 
in the corporate organization. 
 
 
Management Behavior 
Brenner and Molander found that superiors are the primary influence in unethical decision 
making. Therefore, the use of sanctions to accomplish compliance with the law is only one 
of the various forces operating within a corporation encouraging or opposing violations of 
law. Stone found that the success of law enforcement “ultimately depends upon its 
consistency with and reinforcement of the organization’s rules for advancement and reward, 
its customs, conventions, and morals.” He maintains that if the law is too much at odds with 
the corporation’s “culture,” employees will tend to cover up their tracks rather than change  
their behavior. 
 
Corporations also argue that “regulation is faulty because most government regulations are 
incomprehensible and too complex.” Conklin found that anti-trust laws are seen as 
inconsistent, hypocritical, poorly defined, and rarely enforced. Therefore, most regulations 
must be written in detail to cover as many contingencies as possible. 
 
Silk and Vogel found several other actions used by business to rationalize conduct:  
• Government regulations are unjustified because the additional costs of regulations and 
bureaucratic procedures cut heavily into profits. 
• Regulation is unnecessary because the matters being regulated are unimportant. 
• Although some corporate violations involve millions of dollars, the damage is so 
diffused among a large number of consumers that individually there is little loss. 
• Violations are caused by economic necessity; they aim to protect the value of stock, to 
ensure an adequate return for stockholders, and to protect the job security of employees 
by ensuring the financial stability of the corporation. 
 
John Braithwaite is a researcher in white-collar crime at Australian National University in 
Canberra. He is also the recipient of the 1990 Cressey Award by the Association of Certified 
Fraud Examiners for his research in international white-collar crime issues. Braithwaite views 
                                                 
9Christopher Stone, “Where the Law Ends: The Social Control of Corporate Behavior .” New York:  
Harper & Row, 1975. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.513  
white-collar crime as a product of the corporate subculture. In Braithwaite’s view, 
corporations will turn to crime as a result of “blocked opportunities.”  
 
Because white-collar crime can exist only in secrecy, deviant subcultures develop (conspiracy 
among executives, for example), lines of communication are not allowed to develop, and 
people operate within spheres of responsibility.  
 
 
Controlling Organizational Crime 
Clinard and Yeager believe corporations that do violate acceptable conduct and those that 
do not are distinguished by “corporate cultures” or ethical climates, which are the degree to 
which a corporation has made the choice to be unethical, to disregard the interests of the 
consumer and the public, and to disobey the laws that regulate its specific industry. 
 
Efforts to control corporate crime follow three approaches: voluntary change in corporate 
attitudes and structure; strong intervention of the political state to force changes in corporate 
structure, accompanied by legal measures to deter or punish; or consumer action. Voluntary 
changes would involve the development of stronger business ethics and certain corporate 
organizational reforms; government controls might involve federal corporate chartering, 
deconcentration and divesture, larger and more effective enforcement staffs, stiffer penalties, 
wider use of publicity as a sanction, and possibly the nationalization of corporations; and 
consumer group pressures may be exerted through lobbying, selective buying, boycotts, and 
the establishment of large consumer cooperatives. 
 
Clinard and Yeager suggest that a wide, comprehensive industrial code of ethics, which many 
businessmen favor, would be of great help when a businessman wished to refuse an 
unethical request, would help define more clearly the limits of acceptable or ethical conduct, 
would improve the ethical climate of the industry, and would serve to reduce cutthroat 
practices where competition is intense. Greater stockholder involvement might enable 
greater corporate compliance with the law, but in actuality, it is the management staff that 
runs the company and makes the decisions; the stockholders are primarily concerned with 
stock growth and dividends. 
 
In some cases, critical information dealing with possible law violations simply fails to reach 
the board of directors. New board members are usually nominated by the board and 
routinely approved by stockholders, making boards self-perpetuating. Board members are 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.514   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
often drawn from management. Many corporations now employ outside directors and/or 
representatives of the public interest, much like the practice abroad of naming union 
representatives to boards. These public members represent the public and consumer 
concerns, ascertain whether the corporation is complying with the law, assist and maintain 
corporate public responsibility, help monitor the internal management system to discover 
faulty workmanship and report it to the board, serve as liaisons with government agencies 
with respect to legislation or standards, and serve as a hotline to receive information  
about deviance. 
 
Clinard and Yeager found that mass media publicity about law violations probably represents 
the most feared consequence of sanctions imposed on a corporation. Publicity can also 
inform the public about the operation of regulatory controls and can enable people to 
understand the purposes of the controls. Informal publicity is ordinarily carried as news 
items from the media, while formal publicity is a requirement that a corporation must, as 
part of an enforcement action, publish an advertisement or some other statement 
acknowledging a violation and that corrective measures are being taken. 
 
If illegal behavior consistently resulted in decreased patronage or even consumer boycotts, 
consumer pressure would be an effective tool in the control of illegal corporate behavior. 
However, say Clinard and Yeager, it appears to  not be very effective. Consumers are often 
unaware when a corporation’s products are unsafe or when it has been violating anti-trust 
laws or polluting the environment. Without organized behavior, a consumer’s withdrawal of 
individual patronage is generally ineffective.   
 
Many corporations settle charges, without admitting or denying guilt, by consenting to either 
an administrative or a court-ordered decree banning future violations. In a consent 
agreement, the corporation reaches an understanding with the government agency not to 
violate the regulation again. In a decree, the agreement is ratified by the court. 
 
Sporkin says consent decrees have enabled the appointment of special officers to investigate 
and pursue claims against erring managements and others on behalf of the corporation and 
its shareholders, the placement of people independent of management and not previously 
associated with the company or the board of directors, and the appointment of special 
review or audit committees. A problem with consent orders, however, is that frequently no 
one follows up to find out whether the terms imposed are being met. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.515  
Violations of a consent order can be followed  by an injunction, as can distribution of 
adulterated, contaminated, or mislabeled products. Corporate violations of Securities and 
Exchange Act provisions can result in injunctions, as well as discriminatory labor practices, 
illegal economic actions, environmental pollution, and illegal political contributions. 
 
Criminal fines and civil and administrative penalties against corporations are forms of 
monetary penalties. For completion, criminal cases average about one year from indictment 
to conviction, civil actions about two years, and administrative cases about four months. 
Criminal action against corporations is difficult to initiate because generally government 
agencies are dependent upon the records of the corporation and its ability or willingness to 
furnish needed information.  
 
Not all experts agree that monetary penalties are appropriate. For example, a $25 million fine 
to a pauper would have no effect. One novel approach to punishing corporations was 
proposed by Coffee (1978). He advocates stock dilution or “equity fining.” Under this 
approach, the convicted corporation would issue additional shares of stock to the state equal 
to the cash value of a fine. The state could collect the equity shares and sell them, trade 
them, or keep them for their earnings power. With respect to monetary penalties, some 
argue that these sanctions are limited to a person’s own worth and therefore have limited 
utility. In 1992, Congress implemented the corporate sentencing guidelines, providing up to 
$290 million in fines for illegal corporate behavior.  
 
Some of the criteria considered when deciding to bring criminal action against a corporation 
are the degree of loss to the public, the duration of the violation, the level of complicity by 
high corporate managers, the frequency of the violation, evidence of intent to violate, 
evidence of extortion, the degree of notoriety endangered by the media, precedent in law, a 
history of serious violations by the corporation, deterrence potential, and the degree of 
cooperation demonstrated by the corporation. 
 
Rules governing industry often have been initiated by parts of the industry itself. Kolko says 
that a major achievement for corporations may have been the establishment of the Federal 
Trade Commission, which ruled out “unfair methods of competition” and served to stabilize 
the competitive game by making the biggest abuses of competition illegal.  
 
Stone says that as they age, almost all agencies show evidence of protecting the industries 
they are supposed to regulate rather than the public. Industries also gain influence over 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.516   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
agencies by creating a business-oriented atmosphere between regulators and regulatees that 
may cause the regulators to feel unwarranted confidence in the possibility of voluntary 
compliance by corporations. 
 
The Enforcement Effort: Preventing and Reducing Fraud 
While the issues involved in the enforcement effort provide a context in which to assess the 
efforts to control white-collar crime, actual techniques of prevention need to be discussed. 
There are many theories about enforcement, sanctions, and punishments that are a part of 
controlling white-collar crime. 
 
Compliance 
Enforcement strategies include two main theories: compliance and deterrence.  
 
Compliance  hopes to achieve conformity to the law without having to detect, process, or 
penalize violators. Compliance systems provide economic incentives for voluntary 
compliance to the laws and use administrative efforts to control violations before they occur. 
For example, the SEC has a host of administrative mechanisms to encourage voluntary 
compliance with its rules. The IRS also uses such measures in addition to criminal penalties. 
Most environmental crimes also are controlled by these means. In a compliance system, an 
offense is called a “technical violation.”  
 
Compliance strategies have been criticized by some criminologists. These experts believe 
that compliance has little effect, as sanctions are imposed after the infraction occurs. Since 
economic penalties are common punishments for violators, these penalties amount to little 
more than the proverbial “slap on the wrist” in  the case of large, wealthy corporations.  
 
Deterrence 
As a strategy to control crime, deterrence  is designed to detect law violations, determine who is 
responsible, and penalize offenders in order to deter future violations. Deterrence systems 
try to control the immediate behavior of individuals, not the long-term behaviors targeted by 
compliance systems.  
 
Deterrence theory assumes that humans are rational in their behavior patterns. Humans seek 
profit and pleasure while they try to avoid pain. Deterrence assumes that an individual’s 
propensity toward lawbreaking is in inverse proportion to the perceived probability of 
negative consequences.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.517  
Increased Enforcement 
Formal levels of current enforcement in white-collar crime are, by all measures, extremely 
low. One view holds that increased enforcement can only come with a complete and total 
revision of the criminal justice system. Currently, people have little fear of detection because 
they know that the police and courts cannot keep up with the pace of criminal offenses. It is 
not necessary or even desirable to advocate longer prison sentences for offenders because 
we do not have the courts and jails to accommodate them. Perhaps a better plan would be to 
sacrifice the severity of punishment for certainty. Until potential offenders have the 
perception that they will be caught and punished, we cannot expect a reversal of the  
crime trend. 
 
Fraud Prevention Programs 
Although the government can provide incentives for organizations to prevent fraud, 
ultimately, it is up to management to institute prevention programs. The “Fraud Prevention 
Programs” chapter describes methods whereby management can institute policies and 
procedures to help detect and prevent fraud. 
 
 
Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
Congress, in the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, mandated uniform sentencing 
guidelines. The Act also established the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), 
which began studying sentences for individuals  soon after the passage of the Act. It was 
widely held in Congress that there was a great disparity of penalties for similar crimes 
committed by individuals. After three years of study, the USSC announced Sentencing 
Guidelines for Individuals. In November of 1987, these Guidelines became effective in the 
94 Federal Courts of the United States. 
 
In 1988, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for corporate 
wrongdoing. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the USSC submitted 
its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. On November 1, 1991, the 
Guidelines went into effect. And in April 2010, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified 
sentencing guidelines for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. 
The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any Congressional 
modifications or rejection. 
 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Until January 2005, federal judges were required to use the Guidelines to determine whether 
a defendant had an “effective compliance program” in place to prevent the violations for 
which it was being charged. But in two key United States Supreme Court rulings, United 
States v. Booker and United States v. Fanfan, the Supreme Court ruled that the  
Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial requires that federal sentencing guidelines be advisory, 
rather than mandatory. Federal judges must still consider  the Guidelines when sentencing, but 
are not required  to sentence within the range set by the Guidelines. According to the 
guidelines, judges are still required to examine the adequacy of a company’s compliance and 
ethics program. Furthermore, judges may now mitigate punishment beyond the mandated 
level of mitigation given under the guidelines. 
 
The term organization  includes the following entities: 
• Corporations 
• Partnerships 
• Associations 
• Joint-stock companies 
• Unions 
• Trusts 
• Pension funds 
• Unincorporated organizations 
• Governments and political subdivisions thereof 
• Nonprofit organizations 
 
The introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial reduction 
of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. 
 
If an organization is found liable for an offense, the Guidelines provide for four types of 
remedies from which a judge may consider: fines,  restitution, remedial orders, and probation. 
 
Fines 
Fines are based on two factors: the seriousness of the offense and the level of culpability by 
the organization. The seriousness of the offense determines the base fine to be imposed. 
This figure can be quite high. The organization’s culpability is a measure of the actions taken 
by the organization which either mitigated or aggravated the situation. Depending on the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.519  
culpability of the organization, the base fine can be increased by as much as 400 percent or 
reduced by as much as 95 percent.  
 
Calculating the Fine 
Under the Guidelines, an organization’s base fine is the highest of three numbers:  
• The monetary loss suffered by the victim 
• The pecuniary gain received by the defendant 
• An amount ranging from $5,000 to $72,500,00 0 as set forth in the Offense Level Scale 
Individual Guidelines, which is a table of preset penalties based on the seriousness of 
possible offenses 
 
FINE MULTIPLES 
After the base fine is established, the next step in sentencing is to calculate the culpability 
multiplier of the organization. The calculation of this multiplier is a complicated process. 
Every organization begins with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten. The 
organization’s score is then increased or decreased based on the presence of aggravating or 
mitigating factors. Aggravating factors increase the score (and thus increase the fine for the 
organization), while mitigating factors decrease the score. The Guidelines note four 
aggravating factors that can cause an organization’s score to increase:  
1. Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity. Points will be added if high-level employees of 
the organization participated in, condoned, or were willfully ignorant of the offense. 
Points may also be added if there was pervasive tolerance of the offense by high-level 
employees. Depending on the size of the organization, this can add from 1 to 5 points to 
an organization’s culpability score.  
2. Prior history. If that organization has previously been found criminally guilty of similar 
acts, or if the organization has been found guilty of a civil offense for similar acts on at 
least two occasions, points may be added to the culpability score. Depending on how 
long it has been since the previous offense, up to two points can be added to the 
organization’s culpability score.  
3. Violation of a prior court order. Points are added to the organization’s culpability score if, in 
committing the offense at hand, the organization violated an injunction or other judicial 
order. Points are also added if the offense in question is similar to a prior offense for 
which the organization is already on probation, and if the commission of the current 
offense violated the probation order. This factor can add up to two points to the 
culpability score.  
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4. Obstruction of justice. Finally, points are added to the organization’s culpability score if that 
organization interfered in any way with the investigation, prosecution, or sentencing of 
the offense in question. This does not always require an affirmative act by the 
organization. For instance, if the organization knew of an attempt by some party to 
obstruct an investigation, prosecution, or sentencing, and did nothing to prevent it, then 
the organization may be found to have obstructed justice. Simply stated, if the 
organization “turns a blind eye” to any form of obstruction, it faces the possibility of 
having its fine substantially increased under the Guidelines. This factor can add up to 
three points.  
 
FINE REDUCERS 
The Guidelines provide for an organization’s fine to be increased if it acts “badly,” but also 
provides for the reduction of fines if the company is “good.” The Guidelines set forth two 
mitigating factors which will reduce an organization’s criminal fines:  
1. Self-reporting: An organization’s culpability score will be reduced if, within a reasonable 
amount of time after learning of the offense, the organization reports the offense to 
authorities and then cooperates in the investigation and accepts responsibility for its 
wrongdoing. There are three elements to the self-reporting mitigation credit: (1) reporting 
within a reasonable time, (2) cooperating in the investigation, and (3) accepting 
responsibility for the wrongdoing. The organization earns the most points (five) if it 
complies with all three elements. However, it can receive a smaller credit (two) even if it 
does not report the offense in a timely manner, as long as it cooperates in the investigation 
and admits its own wrongdoing. Even if the organization fails to cooperate, it can 
nevertheless receive some credit (one) for accepting responsibility. This usually means 
pleading guilty to the offense prior to trial.  
2. An effective program to prevent and detect violations of the law: The implementation of an 
effective compliance program is the only way an organization can mitigate potential fines 
before violations actually occur. It can knock up to three points (out of a possible ten) 
off of an organization’s culpability score. The elements of an effective compliance 
program under the Guidelines are discussed below.  
 
Every organization begins with a culpability score of 5 under the Guidelines. Each aggravating 
factor raises the culpability score, and each mitigating factor diminishes it. After all the factors 
have been considered, a final score is determined. Each score corresponds to a range of 
multipliers that determine how much the fine should be increased or decreased. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.521  
TABLE OF MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM MULTIPLIERS FROM THE GUIDELINES 
The organization’s fine is multiplied by the minimum and maximum multipliers for its 
culpability score to determine the possible range of fines. 
 
Culpability  
Score  
10 or more 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 or less 
Multiplier 
Minimum  
2.00 
1.80 
1.60 
1.40 
1.20 
1.00 
.80 
.60 
.40 
.20 
.05
 Maximum 
Multiplier  
4.00 
3.60 
3.20 
2.80 
2.40 
2.00 
1.60 
1.20 
.80 
.40 
.20
  
Assuming an organization had been fined $1 00,000, its culpability score could have a 
tremendous impact. If the organization’s culpability score was zero as a result of self-reporting 
and having an effective compliance program in place, that organization’s fine range 
would be between $5,000 and $20,000. (Determined by multiplying $100,000 by .05 and .20, 
respectively.) On the other hand, if the presence of aggravating factors had left the 
organization with a culpability score of ten, its fine range would be $200,000 to $400,000. 
Thus, in the case of a $100,000 base fine, there is a potential swing of $395,000 in the fine 
the organization will have to pay.  
 
Departures 
Courts are permitted to impose fines outside the range prescribed by the Guidelines if there 
are special aggravating or mitigating circumstances in the case that would make a fine within 
the range inappropriate. Sentences that fall outside the guideline range are known as 
departures. The Guidelines describe certain factors that would justify departures from the 
ordinary fine range, although the lists are not exhaustive.  
 
UPWARD DEPARTURES 
When a court imposes a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provided by the 
Guidelines, this is known as an upward departure. The Guidelines list the following as 
factors that could justify an upward departure: 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• The offense involved a foreseeable risk of death or bodily injury. 
• The offense constituted a threat to national security. 
• The offense presented a threat to the environment. 
• The offense presented a risk to the integrity or continued existence of a market. 
• The offense involved official corruption. 
• The organization’s culpability score was reduced  because it had an effective compliance 
program, but the program was only implemented because of a court order or 
administrative order. In cases such as this, the court can impose an upward departure to 
offset all or part of the reduction. 
• The organization’s culpability score is greater than ten. 
 
DOWNWARD DEPARTURES 
The Guidelines list the following factors that could justify a downward departure:  
• Substantial assistance to the authorities in the investigation or prosecution of another 
organization or individual.  
• The organization is a public entity. 
• Members or beneficiaries (other than share holders) of the organization are direct victims 
of the offense. A downward departure in these cases may be warranted because a fine 
might increase the burden on the victims. 
• The organization has agreed to pay remedial costs that greatly exceed the organization’s 
gain from the offense. 
• The organization has an exceptionally low culpability score because: there was no 
involvement by anyone with substantial authority in the organization; there was an 
effective compliance program in place; and the base fine was determined by some means 
other than the organization’s gain from the offense. 
 
Restitution 
The Guidelines require that, whenever possible, the organization must pay full restitution to 
the victims of the crime. Restitution is not viewed as a form of punishment in the 
Guidelines, but rather as a means of remedying the harm caused by the offense.  
 
Remedial Orders 
The Guidelines also provide for the imposition of remedial orders, which require an 
offending organization to fix a harm it has already caused (to the extent that the harm is not 
fixed by the payment of restitution) and prevent any future harms from occurring.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.523  
Probation 
Finally, courts are required to impose probation on offending organizations under the 
following circumstances: 
• To secure payment of restitution, enforcement of a remedial order, or to ensure 
completion of community service 
• To safeguard the organization’s ability to pay a monetary penalty that was not fully paid 
at the time of sentencing 
• When an organization with at least 50 employees did not have an effective program to 
detect and prevent violations of law 
• When the organization was adjudicated within the past five years to have committed 
misconduct similar to any part of the misconduct of the offense in question 
• When a high-level employee was involved in the offense in question and was criminally 
convicted of similar conduct within the past five years 
• When such an order is necessary to ensure changes are made to reduce the likelihood of 
future criminal conduct 
• When the sentence does not include a fine 
• When such an order is necessary in order to accomplish one or more purposes of 
sentencing set forth in 18, U.S.C., § 3553(a)(2)  
 
When the offending organization has committed a felony, probation must run for at least 
one year. In no case may probation run for more than five years. The Guidelines also 
recommend conditions for probation in various circumstances. These conditions include:  
• Publicizing the nature of the offense, the organization’s conviction, the punishment 
imposed, and the steps taken to prevent the recurrence of a similar offense 
• Providing periodic reports to the court of the organization’s financial condition  
and expenses 
• Requiring the organization to submit to examinations of the organization’s business 
records and to interviews of knowledgeable employees 
• Requiring the organization to notify the court upon learning of a material adverse change 
to its financial condition or the commencement of any major legal proceedings, 
including bankruptcy, or any investigation by authorities 
• Requiring periodic payments under the court’s specifications, with priority in the order 
of restitution, fine, and any other monetary sanction 
• Developing a program to avoid violations of law and a schedule to implement it 
• Notifying the organization’s employees and shareholders of its violation and its program 
to avoid and detect violations of law 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.524   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Reporting to the court on the organization’s implementation of a program to avoid and 
detect violations of law and disclosing any investigation by authorities 
 
If an offending organization violates its probation, this may result in: 
• Resentencing 
• The terms of probation being extended 
• The imposition of more restrictive conditions  
 
 
Prosecuting Organizational Fraud 
In response to the high-profile corporate frauds of Enron, WorldCom, Global Crossing, and 
others, the Department of Justice (DOJ) instituted policies for imposing criminal penalties 
against business organizations. In January 2003, then Deputy Attorney General Larry 
Thompson issued a DOJ memorandum entitled “Principles of Federal Prosecution of 
Business Organization” (the Thompson Memorandum).  
 
The Thompson Memorandum explained the Depart ment’s position regarding the factors it 
considered in choosing to prosecute corporations and under what conditions an 
organization may reduce liability for cooperating with the government. One of the factors 
prosecutors considered in reaching their charging decisions was a company’s willingness to 
cooperate in the investigation. The Thompson Memorandum provided that in assessing a 
company’s cooperation, prosecutors were to consider whether the company waived its 
attorney-client privileges and attorney work product protections. The Thompson 
Memorandum also made clear that businesses perceived as not having fully cooperated 
would more likely face criminal indictment, prosecution, and sanctions. 
 
Following its issuance, many criticized the Thompson Memorandum because it seemed to 
imply that companies that refused to turn over privileged documents to the government 
could be considered uncooperative. In an attempt to appease critics, then Deputy Attorney 
General Paul McNulty issued a revised memo (the McNulty Memorandum) for federal 
investigation and prosecution of business organizations. The McNulty Memorandum revised 
the DOJ’s prior guidance outlined in the Thompson Memorandum that addressed the 
practice of federal prosecutors seeking waiver as an element of a company’s cooperation. 
The McNulty Memorandum provided specific criteria prosecutors were required to consider 
and procedures they were required to follow before seeking waiver of privileges or work 
product protection.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.525  
On August 28, 2008, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines that revised the 
McNulty Memorandum on how federal prosecutors investigate, charge, and prosecute 
corporate crimes. Unlike the McNulty and Thompson Memorandums, these guidelines are a 
part of the U.S. attorney’s manual, which provides internal DOJ guidance but does not 
create any enforceable law. 
 
In an effort to stop congressional action, the guidelines bar prosecutors from judging 
corporate cooperation for leniency on whether an entity is willing to waive the attorney-client 
privilege or work product protection. The guidelines also state that prosecutors can no 
longer seek disclosure of information that is either privileged or protected work product. In 
addition, the guidelines provide that when evaluating a corporation’s cooperation, 
prosecutors may no longer consider whether a company is advancing legal fees for its 
employees, whether a corporation has sanctioned or retained culpable employees, or whether 
a corporation has entered into joint defense agreements.  
 
Even though most observers agree that the guidelines are a significant improvement over the 
McNulty Memorandum, many contend that comprehensive legislation is still needed to 
make the DOJ’s reforms permanent and prevent a relapse in department policy, and to bar 
similar waiver policies adopted by other federal agencies, such as the Securities Exchange 
Commission and the Internal Revenue Service.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.601  



:


organiz crime
most criminologist have adopt the distinct first made by marshal b clinard a
recipi of the associ of certifi fraud examin cressei award and richard
quinnei between occup crime and organiz crime organiz crime is that which
is commit by busi particularli corpor and govern occup crime
involv offens against the law by individu in the cours of their occup an
antitrust offens would be an organiz crime accept or offer bribe is an
occup offens
organiz crime occur in the context of complex relationship and expect among
board of director execut and manag on the on hand and among parent
corpor corpor divis and subsidiari on the other whitecollar crime is
distinguish from lower socioeconom crime in term of the structur of the violat
and the fact that administr and civil penalti ar more like to be us as punish
than ar crimin penalti
while corpor cannot be jail thei mai be confin most corpor lawbreak ar
handl by govern regulatori agenc like the feder trade commiss the
environment protect agenc and the food and drug administr enforc
measur might includ warn letter consent agreement or decre not to repeat the
violat order of regulatori agenc to compel complianc seizur or recal of
good administr or civil monetari penalti and court injunct to refrain from
further violat
corpor crime is certainli not limit to the unit state clinard and yeager sai it
appear to be extens in europ japan australia and other area accord to delma
marti french multin violat the law in mani wai thei util both legal and illeg
mean in tax evas thei mai transfer profit from on subsidiari to anoth locat in a
countri that ha a more lenient tax system or present a tax haven like switzerland
accord to cosson french manufactur corpor also falsifi their bookkeep to
avoid payment of industri and commerci tax
in japan the diet legislatur ha pass a law for the punish of crime relat to
environment pollut that advers affect the health of person under thi law
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4502 2011 fraud examin manual
intent or neglig emiss by industri of a substanc that caus danger to human
life or health is to be punish with imprison or fine
the swiss bank system ha often been accus of offer a hide place for stolen or
loot monei provid a screen for stock manipul and shadi promot and help
tax evad to conceal both incom and asset deposit in swiss bank ar often launder
to obscur their illeg origin and then the monei is made legal through new commerci
transact and is therefor conceal from tax author
corpor organ and crimin behavior
corpor offens take place in a context of complex relationship and expect in an
organiz set it is often difficult to distinguish which corpor particip ought
to be held person respons for the wrongdo mani offens ar the result of myriad
decis that ar made by differ individu and pass through a chain of command
not uncommonli when corpor act ar contrari to the law upperlevel execut take
pain to avoid learn what is go on so as to avoid respons if a scheme is
uncov in some corpor there is on wellpaid execut who is onli half in jest
refer to as the vice presid in charg of go to jail
the law larg treat corpor as peopl thei make more invit prosecutori target
than individu most notabl becaus thei have deeper pocket and can be heavili fine to
repai loss that have been inflict on individu or on the societi in gener
govern regulatori agenc such as the feder trade commiss ftc the
environment protect agenc epa and the food and drug administr fda
overse corpor perform in area assign to them by congression mandat
typic the lawmak enact a statut that is deliber vagu allow the enforc
agenc to develop it own enforc guidelin within the boundari of the
congression author the agenc will sometim seek to expand the reach of the
law by select notabl egregi case for litig and appeal therebi anticip a
favor rule on what is fundament a somewhat novel interpret of their mandat
the imag of the corpor
larg corpor have contribut significantli to industri and commerci develop
throughout the world their size and resourc enabl them to organ and coordin
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4503
product and distribut the capit resourc of a larg corpor provid it with the
abil to develop adopt and alter technolog on a mammoth scale a consider portion
of the popul ha been accord a high standard of live becaus of corpor activ
at the same time larg corpor have the power to influenc the manner in which
law ar written and to commit act that can inflict seriou harm upon the popul thei
can hire lobbyist and lawyer who manipul definit of wrongdo in the
corpor interest
the veri larg and remot of the corpor from most of us is part of the reason
that american tradition have a loveh attitud toward such organ we admir
and desir corpor product but we ar uneasi about their power a power that tend
to be us singlemindedli in the pursuit of profit thoma hobb a seventeenth centuri
english polit philosoph stand out in the crowd that ha been scorn of
corpor hobb unsavori comparison wa between corpor and ascarid
worm that eat at the entrail of what hobb call natur man 1 centuri later robert
heilbron an economist would castig the corpor with it wealthseek it
dehuman calculu of plu and minu it care inculc of impuls and goal that
should at most be toler 2
corpor and their execut ar often the object of deprecatori humor as far back as
l635 a satirist had a businessman proclaim i love church i mean to rob my
countrymen and build on 3 in more recent time a us senat told the stori of a
corpor offic who when ask at a committe hear if he were not asham of
doubled peopl who trust him wa puzzl who els can you cheat he want
to know the putdown of the busi world ar part of a common folklor reflect in
the belief that the express legitim busi is an oxymoron
accord to william kristol public hostil toward big busi date back to the populist
movement of the late nineteenth centuri and suspicion of trust that led to the 1890
sherman antitrust act peopl ar suspici as to whether good produc by larg
corpor ar of the highest qualiti or ar avail at the lowest possibl price in 1978 a
1thoma hobb leviathan london andrew crook 1651
2robert heilbron in the name of profit new york doubledai 1973 p 223
3christoph hill societi and puritan in prerevolutionari england london secker warburg 1964 p 267
4john t noonan bribe new york macmillan 1984
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4504 2011 fraud examin manual
survei by seymour lipset and gordan schneider conclud that major industri and
corpor had drop in public esteem greatli dure the 1970
clinard and yeager
in a comprehens studi of corpor lawbreak marshal clinard a recipi of the
associ donald cressei award and peter yeager examin over a twoyear period the
record of 562 compani 477 of which were on the fortun 500 list and found that l553
whitecollar crime case had been file against them some 60 percent of the firm had at
least on case against them for those compani the averag number of violat wa 44
the oil pharmaceut and motor vehicl industri were the most like to be charg for
wrongdo a matter that mai be a function of enforc prioriti or a true reflect of
their activ
in a studi by irwin ross he analyz 1043 compani that at on time or anoth had
appear on the fortun list of larg industri compani includ in hi studi were five
kind of offens bribetak or bribegiv by highlevel execut crimin fraud illeg
campaign contribut tax evas and antitrust violat on hundr seventeen or 11
percent of the corpor were violat
the cost of corpor crime not onli includ financi loss but also injuri death and
health hazard such crime destroi public confid in busi and hurt the imag of
corpor clinard and yeager sai pricefix offens victim the consum and
feder state and municip govern while incom tax crime depriv the govern
and those depend on it for need revenu
clinard and yeager believ that corpor violat ar increasingli difficult to discov
investig or prosecut successfulli becaus of their grow complex and intricaci thi
is particularli true thei believ of antitrust case foreign payoff comput fraud and
illeg polit contribut in the last categori some corpor pai bonus to their
execut with the understand that part of that reward will be turn over to the coffer
of a candid that the corpor favor
crimin activ involv corpor ar often root in organiz subcultur
and valu and ar develop over time a particularli comprehens examin of how
5marshal b clinard and peter c yeager corpor crime new york free press 1980
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4505
matter of life and death becom embed in routin decisionmak and ultim can
lead to tragedi is provid in a book titl the challeng space shuttl disast by dian
vaughan anoth cressei award winner 6
legal respons have been slow and ineffectu when deal with econom organiz
chang the law ha emphas the role of the individu actor in crimin but ha not
examin the role of the organ in crime crimin activ ar often root in
organiz subcultur and attitud develop over time and cannot be trace to
individu or group within the organ while individu still carri out the crimin
enterpris their attitud and characterist ar of littl import as an organ will
replac those employe unwil to particip in a crimin activ
opportun for unlaw organiz behavior
organiz structur
complex compani provid a structur that can foster misbehavior thei provid mani
set where misconduct is possibl thei isol those set in depart and in
locat around a citi the countri or the world the isol in turn mean that
inform about what on part of a compani is do mai be unknown in anoth part
all thi reduc the risk that misbehavior will be detect and punish the larger a
compani grow the more special it subunit tend to becom an intern diversifi
compani mai have few employe who fulli understand the detail work
special depart in a larg firm compet for resourc not onli with other firm
but with depart in their own firm the need to outperform both other busi and
intern unit can gener suffici pressur to lead to misconduct vaughan note that
depart often have surviv concern that conflict with the larger interest of an
organ when given a chanc to make decis she write lowerlevel manag will
tend to act not in the interest of the firm but in the interest of their depart
special also hide illeg activ especi where a firm task ar kept separ and
unrel employe cannot garner knowledg about all the particular of how a firm
work thi protect a compani from the effect of personnel turnov and leak of
6dian vaughan the challeng launch decis riski technolog cultur and devianc at nasa
chicago univers of chicago press 1996
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4506 2011 fraud examin manual
inform becaus no on can offer much more than a piec of the jigsaw puzzl
that make up the compani pictur the same secreci howev rais the chanc
for misconduct
compani spell out rule in a common languag to decid how task will be perform and
to creat common bond that will facilit decis make but a compani abil to
coordin all it activ vari consider vaughan write that organiz growth
natur lead to a progress loss of control over depart execut cannot hope to
keep track of all the unit in a huge compani and must reli on subordin to carri out
polici vaughan state that when the distanc between top execut and subordin unit
grow to a suffici level author leakag result such leakag mean the compani ha
becom too unwieldi for an execut to enforc rule at all level the organ in
short vaughan write can diversifi beyond the capabl of those at the top to master it
such leakag allow subsidiari compani research account or other depart to
engag in misconduct without ani assur that intern control will check the behavior
in some case as with comput crime detect misconduct might be beyond the abil of
most employe convers author leakag and special can also lead an
organ to compli with societ rule even when the organiz pressur lean
toward misconduct
doe the exist of author impli a loss of compani control while a compani that
cannot steer it employe behavior might be view as irrat or incompet the abil
to control inform flow from top to bottom mai not be possibl research and theori
suggest to the contrari that inform is process select through a compani in wai
that tend to protect the interest of depart and to promot effici
sometim censorship of inform promot a compani interest in other case need
to know polici or ignor of rule that ar irrelev to a depart lead to
ineffici all these tendenc restrict inform flow and creat opportun for on
unit in a compani to act outsid the knowledg of other unit censorship polici mai
origin in ani part of a compani and hide matter throughout the organ
the tier structur of most organ obscur person respons and tend to
spread it throughout the compani thu determin where a decis to engag in
misconduct origin can be difficult author john e conklin put it thi wai the
deleg of respons and unwritten order keep those at the top of the corpor
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4507
structur remot from the consequ of their decis and order much as the head of
organ crime famili remain untouch by law
criminogen organiz structur
sociologist edward gross ha assert that all organ ar inher criminogen
that is prone to commit crime though not necessarili crimin gross make thi
assert becaus of the relianc on the bottom line without necessarili mean to
organ can invit fraud as a mean of obtain goal criminologist oliv
williamson note that becaus of a depart concern with reach it goal
manag might well tend to maxim their depart own interest to the detriment of
the organ
organ can also be criminogen becaus thei encourag loyalti accord to dian
vaughan the reason ar that
the organ tend to recruit and attract similar individu
reward ar given out to those who displai characterist of the compani man
longterm loyalti is encourag through compani retir and benefit
loyalti is encourag through social interact such as compani parti and
social function
frequent transfer and long work hour encourag isol from other group
special job skill can discourag personnel from seek employ elsewher
thi in turn caus compani personnel to sometim perceiv that the organ might
be worth commit crime to maintain and further it goal the us of formal and inform
reward and punish plu social activ and pressur to particip link an
employe need and goal to the success of the compani societi place valu on the
reput of the compani for which on work reinforc the link between an individu
7edward gross organiz structur and organiz crime in gilbert gei and ezra stotland
ed whitecollar crime theori and research beverli hill sage 1980 pp 5376
8dian vaughan transact system and unlaw organiz behavior social problem 29 373380
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4508 2011 fraud examin manual
and corpor goal when a compani achiev it goal it employe prosper in short the
interest of an organ and it employe coincid and that situat mai set the stage
for unlaw conduct by individu on the organ behalf
vaughan write that organiz process creat an intern moral and intellectu
world that caus individu to identifi with organiz goal compani surviv come
to mean individu surviv and when resourc becom scarc the incent to misbehav
increas of cours not all agent will act unlawfulli on a compani behalf and how
ani employe behav will be link to factor that might not be relat to the world of
the organ
when the structur pressur to commit fraud exist a firm often cannot unit it agent in
such activ at least three factor prevent such uniti first the pressur to commit fraud
might not affect depart in a compani equal a sale depart that must meet
certain goal to gener profit will feel differ competit pressur than a product
develop depart in the same compani that is run smoothli some part of
compani might never experi pressur to cheat and member of those depart
will have no motiv to engag in misconduct on a firm behalf
second even in highpressur depart some employe will not have knowledg of the
difficulti of obtain need resourc an employe will have no motiv to commit
fraud unless he ha full inform about an organ goal and how the depart
can achiev them in other word an employe usual need a high degre of respons
for a compani success as well as the abil to bring about those goal befor a chanc to
engag in misbehavior can occur
third outsid societ behavior can produc valu that conflict with those learn in an
organiz environ for exampl fratern or profession associ impart their
own valu to employe that mai not coincid with a specif corpor code of honor
when face with conflict norm vaughan write employe will make their choic
base on the reward and punish thei perceiv to accompani the altern where
misbehavior is seen as too costli it will not occur where an organ provid suffici
reward to overcom the fear of punish misbehavior mai occur despit compet
norm the amount of inform an employe ha will affect the decis on which wai to
go as will an individu financi and social depend on the firm
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4509
the mere fact that corpor and individu goal ar often join in organ doe
not necessarili creat a climat for illeg action as with ani major decis complex
often enter the pictur temptat vari not onli among depart but within them
the avail of inform and individu riskreward assess mai gener law
behavior that resist organiz pressur to violat the law as well as unlaw
behavior in the face of organiz pressur to compli put plainli the likelihood that
organiz process will gener misbehavior is highli variabl and cannot current
be measur with ani degre of precis
in explain how employe ar taught to make decis that ar correct from a
corpor standpoint drucker said a natur tendenc exist in everi largescal
organ to discourag initi and encourag conform madden and margoli sai
corpor lead new manag through an initi period design to weaken their ti
with extern group includ their own famili and encourag a feel of depend on
and attach to the corpor
gei found that individu ar train quit often in illeg behavior as part of their
occup role schrager and short sai crimin behavior stem more from the role an
employe is expect to fulfil than from individu patholog mani execut know their
behavior is illeg but tend to justifi their action as simpli common practic in the busi
world clinard and yeager believ that in ration their behavior corpor follow a
gener tendenc to obei law select ie obei accord to situat need and
determin by factor like social class and occup
sutherland demonstr that corpor execut ar insul from those who might
disagre with their belief becaus thei associ almost exclus with peopl who ar probusi
polit conserv and gener oppos to govern regul
silk and vogel found that certain belief about govern intervent in busi ar us
throughout the busi world to justifi illeg activ by corpor for exampl some
defend the corpor right to violat law by claim that all legal measur propos
constitut govern interfer with the free enterpris system
a problem common in mani larg corpor with intric hierarch structur tend to
be a split between what the upper level believ is go on below and the actual procedur
be carri out clinard and yeager sai that the chief execut offic of a corpor is
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4510 2011 fraud examin manual
often isol and thu messag transmit down the line tend to becom distort
clinard and yeager found that all level of the corpor might often agre to perpetu
the lack of full inform for the kei to ani success conspiraci to violat the law
probabl li in the fact that the higherup do not inquir about what is go on and the
lower level do not tell them
often in corpor no singl individu at the highest level mai make a decis alon to
market a faulti product or take shortcut on product test clinard and yeager sai
instead decis ar made in small step at each level possibl without ani awar of
the illeg and potenti danger result
mccaghi sai profit pressur is the singl most compel factor behind devianc by
industri whether it be price fix the destruct of competit or the misrepresent
of a product such as make a shoddi product that will wear out and need to be replac
clinard and yeager sai certain industri such as the drug and chemic busi have
such sever competit and strong profit drive due to demand for continu develop
of new product that thei mai feel pressur to falsifi test data market new product befor
their full effect ar known or engag in uneth sale techniqu that can have disastr
effect on human be and the environ
corpor execut and crimin liabil
mani of the ethic and legal problem of a corpor result from the corpor structur
that separ ownership from manag typic larg corpor ar administ by a
group of salari manag with the board of director exercis littl direct power other
than hire or fire the manag and thu corpor manag have great autonomi over
decis regard product invest price and market
luthan and hodgett said that after perform a studi with the american manag
societi 3000 execut question felt under pressur to compromis person standard
to meet compani goal but that thei felt that busi ethic should still be a concern
execut tend to believ that their job ar at risk if thei cannot show a profit to higher
manag or the board of director and often thei ar clinard and yeager hold that if
goal for manag ar set too high the employe then confront a hard choic of risk
be thought incompet or take uneth or even illeg shortcut
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4511
accord to clinard and yeager corpor often try to protect their execut from
liabil by agre to pai fine court cost and attornei fee with corpor fund
bonus rais or liabil insur might offer protect to offic or director
gener execut compens and tenur remain untouch there is much difficulti in
crimin prosecut of execut becaus corpor violat ar usual far more complex
than convent crime also the complex of the legal proof requir allow
businessmen to test the limit of the law
businessmen might have sought legal advic on loophol in the law befor commit the
offens clinard and yeager sai which mai be cite as evid that the execut thought
thei were in legal complianc businessmen can hire highli skill lawyer who present
argument as to the client lack of previou convict or unlikelihood of becom a
repeat offend as well as be abl to cite numer preced where businessmen were
charg but not imprison for similar violat
corpor offend ar usual not imprison with ordinari crimin but ar usual
incarcer in institut design for lowrisk inmat with short sentenc presum
for the corpor offend own physic safeti justif us in argu against a
prison sentenc for corpor offend includ
ag and poor health
person and famili reason
extent of punish alreadi suffer by virtu of be indict
offens wa not immor
defend ha no prior record is not a threat to societi and ha been a promin
citizen activ in commun affair
incarcer would accomplish noth no benefit to societi
defend is repent
victim of corpor execut sole becaus of their posit
some corpor offend ar given commun servic as punish such as give
speech about their offens to busi and civic group work in program
design to aid the poor or help former ordinari crimin offend secur job pledg
from busi
prior to 2001 corpor offend gener receiv littl if ani public attent coverag
of corpor scandal wa often limit to busi and trade public howev all of
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4512 2011 fraud examin manual
that chang with the enron scandal suddenli corpor offend were frontpag new
and prosecutor have increas their effort in purs corpor execut for wrongdo
in the corpor organ
manag behavior
brenner and moland found that superior ar the primari influenc in uneth decis
make therefor the us of sanction to accomplish complianc with the law is onli on
of the variou forc oper within a corpor encourag or oppos violat of
law stone found that the success of law enforc ultim depend upon it
consist with and reinforc of the organ rule for advanc and reward
it custom convent and moral he maintain that if the law is too much at odd with
the corpor cultur employe will tend to cover up their track rather than chang
their behavior
corpor also argu that regul is faulti becaus most govern regul ar
incomprehens and too complex conklin found that antitrust law ar seen as
inconsist hypocrit poorli defin and rare enforc therefor most regul
must be written in detail to cover as mani conting as possibl
silk and vogel found sever other action us by busi to ration conduct
govern regul ar unjustifi becaus the addit cost of regul and
bureaucrat procedur cut heavili into profit
regul is unnecessari becaus the matter be regul ar unimport
although some corpor violat involv million of dollar the damag is so
diffus among a larg number of consum that individu there is littl loss
violat ar caus by econom necess thei aim to protect the valu of stock to
ensur an adequ return for stockhold and to protect the job secur of employe
by ensur the financi stabil of the corpor
john braithwait is a research in whitecollar crime at australian nation univers in
canberra he is also the recipi of the 1990 cressei award by the associ of certifi
fraud examin for hi research in intern whitecollar crime issu braithwait view
9christoph stone where the law end the social control of corpor behavior new york
harper row 1975
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4513
whitecollar crime as a product of the corpor subcultur in braithwait view
corpor will turn to crime as a result of block opportun
becaus whitecollar crime can exist onli in secreci deviant subcultur develop conspiraci
among execut for exampl line of commun ar not allow to develop and
peopl oper within sphere of respons
control organiz crime
clinard and yeager believ corpor that do violat accept conduct and those that
do not ar distinguish by corpor cultur or ethic climat which ar the degre to
which a corpor ha made the choic to be uneth to disregard the interest of the
consum and the public and to disobei the law that regul it specif industri
effort to control corpor crime follow three approach voluntari chang in corpor
attitud and structur strong intervent of the polit state to forc chang in corpor
structur accompani by legal measur to deter or punish or consum action voluntari
chang would involv the develop of stronger busi ethic and certain corpor
organiz reform govern control might involv feder corpor charter
deconcentr and divestur larger and more effect enforc staff stiffer penalti
wider us of public as a sanction and possibl the nation of corpor and
consum group pressur mai be exert through lobbi select bui boycott and
the establish of larg consum cooper
clinard and yeager suggest that a wide comprehens industri code of ethic which mani
businessmen favor would be of great help when a businessman wish to refus an
uneth request would help defin more clearli the limit of accept or ethic conduct
would improv the ethic climat of the industri and would serv to reduc cutthroat
practic where competit is intens greater stockhold involv might enabl
greater corpor complianc with the law but in actual it is the manag staff that
run the compani and make the decis the stockhold ar primarili concern with
stock growth and dividend
in some case critic inform deal with possibl law violat simpli fail to reach
the board of director new board member ar usual nomin by the board and
routin approv by stockhold make board selfperpetu board member ar
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4514 2011 fraud examin manual
often drawn from manag mani corpor now emploi outsid director andor
repres of the public interest much like the practic abroad of name union
repres to board these public member repres the public and consum
concern ascertain whether the corpor is compli with the law assist and maintain
corpor public respons help monitor the intern manag system to discov
faulti workmanship and report it to the board serv as liaison with govern agenc
with respect to legisl or standard and serv as a hotlin to receiv inform
about devianc
clinard and yeager found that mass media public about law violat probabl repres
the most fear consequ of sanction impos on a corpor public can also
inform the public about the oper of regulatori control and can enabl peopl to
understand the purpos of the control inform public is ordinarili carri as new
item from the media while formal public is a requir that a corpor must as
part of an enforc action publish an advertis or some other statement
acknowledg a violat and that correct measur ar be taken
if illeg behavior consist result in decreas patronag or even consum boycott
consum pressur would be an effect tool in the control of illeg corpor behavior
howev sai clinard and yeager it appear to not be veri effect consum ar often
unawar when a corpor product ar unsaf or when it ha been violat antitrust
law or pollut the environ without organ behavior a consum withdraw of
individu patronag is gener ineffect
mani corpor settl charg without admit or deni guilt by consent to either
an administr or a courtord decre ban futur violat in a consent
agreement the corpor reach an understand with the govern agenc not to
violat the regul again in a decre the agreement is ratifi by the court
sporkin sai consent decre have enabl the appoint of special offic to investig
and pursu claim against er manag and other on behalf of the corpor and
it sharehold the placement of peopl independ of manag and not previous
associ with the compani or the board of director and the appoint of special
review or audit committe a problem with consent order howev is that frequent no
on follow up to find out whether the term impos ar be met
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4515
violat of a consent order can be follow by an injunct as can distribut of
adulter contamin or mislabel product corpor violat of secur and
exchang act provis can result in injunct as well as discriminatori labor practic
illeg econom action environment pollut and illeg polit contribut
crimin fine and civil and administr penalti against corpor ar form of
monetari penalti for complet crimin case averag about on year from indict
to convict civil action about two year and administr case about four month
crimin action against corpor is difficult to initi becaus gener govern
agenc ar depend upon the record of the corpor and it abil or willing to
furnish need inform
not all expert agre that monetari penalti ar appropri for exampl a 25 million fine
to a pauper would have no effect on novel approach to punish corpor wa
propos by coffe 1978 he advoc stock dilut or equiti fine under thi
approach the convict corpor would issu addit share of stock to the state equal
to the cash valu of a fine the state could collect the equiti share and sell them trade
them or keep them for their earn power with respect to monetari penalti some
argu that these sanction ar limit to a person own worth and therefor have limit
util in 1992 congress implement the corpor sentenc guidelin provid up to
290 million in fine for illeg corpor behavior
some of the criteria consid when decid to bring crimin action against a corpor
ar the degre of loss to the public the durat of the violat the level of complic by
high corpor manag the frequenc of the violat evid of intent to violat
evid of extort the degre of notorieti endang by the media preced in law a
histori of seriou violat by the corpor deterr potenti and the degre of
cooper demonstr by the corpor
rule govern industri often have been initi by part of the industri itself kolko sai
that a major achiev for corpor mai have been the establish of the feder
trade commiss which rule out unfair method of competit and serv to stabil
the competit game by make the biggest abus of competit illeg
stone sai that as thei ag almost all agenc show evid of protect the industri
thei ar suppos to regul rather than the public industri also gain influenc over
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4516 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc by creat a businessori atmospher between regul and regulate that
mai caus the regul to feel unwarr confid in the possibl of voluntari
complianc by corpor
the enforc effort prevent and reduc fraud
while the issu involv in the enforc effort provid a context in which to assess the
effort to control whitecollar crime actual techniqu of prevent need to be discuss
there ar mani theori about enforc sanction and punish that ar a part of
control whitecollar crime
complianc
enforc strategi includ two main theori complianc and deterr
complianc hope to achiev conform to the law without have to detect process or
penal violat complianc system provid econom incent for voluntari
complianc to the law and us administr effort to control violat befor thei occur
for exampl the sec ha a host of administr mechan to encourag voluntari
complianc with it rule the ir also us such measur in addit to crimin penalti
most environment crime also ar control by these mean in a complianc system an
offens is call a technic violat
complianc strategi have been critic by some criminologist these expert believ
that complianc ha littl effect as sanction ar impos after the infract occur sinc
econom penalti ar common punish for violat these penalti amount to littl
more than the proverbi slap on the wrist in the case of larg wealthi corpor
deterr
as a strategi to control crime deterr is design to detect law violat determin who is
respons and penal offend in order to deter futur violat deterr system
try to control the immedi behavior of individu not the longterm behavior target by
complianc system
deterr theori assum that human ar ration in their behavior pattern human seek
profit and pleasur while thei try to avoid pain deterr assum that an individu
propens toward lawbreak is in invers proport to the perceiv probabl of
neg consequ
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4517
increas enforc
formal level of current enforc in whitecollar crime ar by all measur extrem
low on view hold that increas enforc can onli come with a complet and total
revis of the crimin justic system current peopl have littl fear of detect becaus
thei know that the polic and court cannot keep up with the pace of crimin offens it is
not necessari or even desir to advoc longer prison sentenc for offend becaus
we do not have the court and jail to accommod them perhap a better plan would be to
sacrific the sever of punish for certainti until potenti offend have the
percept that thei will be caught and punish we cannot expect a revers of the
crime trend
fraud prevent program
although the govern can provid incent for organ to prevent fraud
ultim it is up to manag to institut prevent program the fraud prevent
program chapter describ method wherebi manag can institut polici and
procedur to help detect and prevent fraud
corpor sentenc guidelin
congress in the comprehens crime control act of 1984 mandat uniform sentenc
guidelin the act also establish the unit state sentenc commiss ussc
which began studi sentenc for individu soon after the passag of the act it wa
wide held in congress that there wa a great dispar of penalti for similar crime
commit by individu after three year of studi the ussc announc sentenc
guidelin for individu in novemb of 1987 these guidelin becam effect in the
94 feder court of the unit state
in 1988 the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for corpor
wrongdo after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the ussc submit
it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress on novemb 1 1991 the
guidelin went into effect and in april 2010 the us sentenc commiss modifi
sentenc guidelin for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program
the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani congression
modif or reject
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4518 2011 fraud examin manual
until januari 2005 feder judg were requir to us the guidelin to determin whether
a defend had an effect complianc program in place to prevent the violat for
which it wa be charg but in two kei unit state suprem court rule unit
state v booker and unit state v fanfan the suprem court rule that the
sixth amend right to a juri trial requir that feder sentenc guidelin be advisori
rather than mandatori feder judg must still consid the guidelin when sentenc but
ar not requir to sentenc within the rang set by the guidelin accord to the
guidelin judg ar still requir to examin the adequaci of a compani complianc and
ethic program furthermor judg mai now mitig punish beyond the mandat
level of mitig given under the guidelin
the term organ includ the follow entiti
corpor
partnership
associ
jointstock compani
union
trust
pension fund
unincorpor organ
govern and polit subdivis thereof
nonprofit organ
the introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti reduct
of fine for organ that have effect complianc program
if an organ is found liabl for an offens the guidelin provid for four type of
remedi from which a judg mai consid fine restitut remedi order and probat
fine
fine ar base on two factor the serious of the offens and the level of culpabl by
the organ the serious of the offens determin the base fine to be impos
thi figur can be quit high the organ culpabl is a measur of the action taken
by the organ which either mitig or aggrav the situat depend on the
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4519
culpabl of the organ the base fine can be increas by as much as 400 percent or
reduc by as much as 95 percent
calcul the fine
under the guidelin an organ base fine is the highest of three number
the monetari loss suffer by the victim
the pecuniari gain receiv by the defend
an amount rang from 5000 to 7250000 0 as set forth in the offens level scale
individu guidelin which is a tabl of preset penalti base on the serious of
possibl offens
fine multipl
after the base fine is establish the next step in sentenc is to calcul the culpabl
multipli of the organ the calcul of thi multipli is a complic process
everi organ begin with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten the
organ score is then increas or decreas base on the presenc of aggrav or
mitig factor aggrav factor increas the score and thu increas the fine for the
organ while mitig factor decreas the score the guidelin note four
aggrav factor that can caus an organ score to increas
1 involv in or toler of crimin activ point will be ad if highlevel employe of
the organ particip in condon or were willfulli ignor of the offens
point mai also be ad if there wa pervas toler of the offens by highlevel
employe depend on the size of the organ thi can add from 1 to 5 point to
an organ culpabl score
2 prior histori if that organ ha previous been found crimin guilti of similar
act or if the organ ha been found guilti of a civil offens for similar act on at
least two occas point mai be ad to the culpabl score depend on how
long it ha been sinc the previou offens up to two point can be ad to the
organ culpabl score
3 violat of a prior court order point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if in
commit the offens at hand the organ violat an injunct or other judici
order point ar also ad if the offens in question is similar to a prior offens for
which the organ is alreadi on probat and if the commiss of the current
offens violat the probat order thi factor can add up to two point to the
culpabl score
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4520 2011 fraud examin manual
4 obstruct of justic final point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if that
organ interf in ani wai with the investig prosecut or sentenc of
the offens in question thi doe not alwai requir an affirm act by the
organ for instanc if the organ knew of an attempt by some parti to
obstruct an investig prosecut or sentenc and did noth to prevent it then
the organ mai be found to have obstruct justic simpli state if the
organ turn a blind ey to ani form of obstruct it face the possibl of
have it fine substanti increas under the guidelin thi factor can add up to
three point
fine reduc
the guidelin provid for an organ fine to be increas if it act badli but also
provid for the reduct of fine if the compani is good the guidelin set forth two
mitig factor which will reduc an organ crimin fine
1 selfreport an organ culpabl score will be reduc if within a reason
amount of time after learn of the offens the organ report the offens to
author and then cooper in the investig and accept respons for it
wrongdo there ar three element to the selfreport mitig credit 1 report
within a reason time 2 cooper in the investig and 3 accept
respons for the wrongdo the organ earn the most point five if it
compli with all three element howev it can receiv a smaller credit two even if it
doe not report the offens in a time manner as long as it cooper in the investig
and admit it own wrongdo even if the organ fail to cooper it can
nevertheless receiv some credit on for accept respons thi usual mean
plead guilti to the offens prior to trial
2 an effect program to prevent and detect violat of the law the implement of an
effect complianc program is the onli wai an organ can mitig potenti fine
befor violat actual occur it can knock up to three point out of a possibl ten
off of an organ culpabl score the element of an effect complianc
program under the guidelin ar discuss below
everi organ begin with a culpabl score of 5 under the guidelin each aggrav
factor rais the culpabl score and each mitig factor diminish it after all the factor
have been consid a final score is determin each score correspond to a rang of
multipli that determin how much the fine should be increas or decreas
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4521
tabl of minimum and maximum multipli from the guidelin
the organ fine is multipli by the minimum and maximum multipli for it
culpabl score to determin the possibl rang of fine
culpabl
score
10 or more
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0 or less
multipli
minimum
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
05
maximum
multipli
400
360
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
20
assum an organ had been fine 1 00000 it culpabl score could have a
tremend impact if the organ culpabl score wa zero as a result of selfreport
and have an effect complianc program in place that organ fine rang
would be between 5000 and 20000 determin by multipli 100000 by 05 and 20
respect on the other hand if the presenc of aggrav factor had left the
organ with a culpabl score of ten it fine rang would be 200000 to 400000
thu in the case of a 100000 base fine there is a potenti swing of 395000 in the fine
the organ will have to pai
departur
court ar permit to impos fine outsid the rang prescrib by the guidelin if there
ar special aggrav or mitig circumst in the case that would make a fine within
the rang inappropri sentenc that fall outsid the guidelin rang ar known as
departur the guidelin describ certain factor that would justifi departur from the
ordinari fine rang although the list ar not exhaust
upward departur
when a court impos a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provid by the
guidelin thi is known as an upward departur the guidelin list the follow as
factor that could justifi an upward departur
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4522 2011 fraud examin manual
the offens involv a forese risk of death or bodili injuri
the offens constitut a threat to nation secur
the offens present a threat to the environ
the offens present a risk to the integr or continu exist of a market
the offens involv offici corrupt
the organ culpabl score wa reduc becaus it had an effect complianc
program but the program wa onli implement becaus of a court order or
administr order in case such as thi the court can impos an upward departur to
offset all or part of the reduct
the organ culpabl score is greater than ten
downward departur
the guidelin list the follow factor that could justifi a downward departur
substanti assist to the author in the investig or prosecut of anoth
organ or individu
the organ is a public entiti
member or beneficiari other than share holder of the organ ar direct victim
of the offens a downward departur in these case mai be warrant becaus a fine
might increas the burden on the victim
the organ ha agre to pai remedi cost that greatli exce the organ
gain from the offens
the organ ha an exception low culpabl score becaus there wa no
involv by anyon with substanti author in the organ there wa an
effect complianc program in place and the base fine wa determin by some mean
other than the organ gain from the offens
restitut
the guidelin requir that whenev possibl the organ must pai full restitut to
the victim of the crime restitut is not view as a form of punish in the
guidelin but rather as a mean of remedi the harm caus by the offens
remedi order
the guidelin also provid for the imposit of remedi order which requir an
offend organ to fix a harm it ha alreadi caus to the extent that the harm is not
fix by the payment of restitut and prevent ani futur harm from occur
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4523
probat
final court ar requir to impos probat on offend organ under the
follow circumst
to secur payment of restitut enforc of a remedi order or to ensur
complet of commun servic
to safeguard the organ abil to pai a monetari penalti that wa not fulli paid
at the time of sentenc
when an organ with at least 50 employe did not have an effect program to
detect and prevent violat of law
when the organ wa adjud within the past five year to have commit
misconduct similar to ani part of the misconduct of the offens in question
when a highlevel employe wa involv in the offens in question and wa crimin
convict of similar conduct within the past five year
when such an order is necessari to ensur chang ar made to reduc the likelihood of
futur crimin conduct
when the sentenc doe not includ a fine
when such an order is necessari in order to accomplish on or more purpos of
sentenc set forth in 18 usc 3553a2
when the offend organ ha commit a feloni probat must run for at least
on year in no case mai probat run for more than five year the guidelin also
recommend condit for probat in variou circumst these condit includ
public the natur of the offens the organ convict the punish
impos and the step taken to prevent the recurr of a similar offens
provid period report to the court of the organ financi condit
and expens
requir the organ to submit to examin of the organ busi
record and to interview of knowledg employe
requir the organ to notifi the court upon learn of a materi advers chang
to it financi condit or the commenc of ani major legal proceed
includ bankruptci or ani investig by author
requir period payment under the court specif with prioriti in the order
of restitut fine and ani other monetari sanction
develop a program to avoid violat of law and a schedul to implement it
notifi the organ employe and sharehold of it violat and it program
to avoid and detect violat of law
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4524 2011 fraud examin manual
report to the court on the organ implement of a program to avoid and
detect violat of law and disclos ani investig by author
if an offend organ violat it probat thi mai result in
resentenc
the term of probat be extend
the imposit of more restrict condit
prosecut organiz fraud
in respons to the highprofil corpor fraud of enron worldcom global cross and
other the depart of justic doj institut polici for impos crimin penalti
against busi organ in januari 2003 then deputi attornei gener larri
thompson issu a doj memorandum entitl principl of feder prosecut of
busi organ the thompson memorandum
the thompson memorandum explain the depart ment posit regard the factor it
consid in choos to prosecut corpor and under what condit an
organ mai reduc liabil for cooper with the govern on of the factor
prosecutor consid in reach their charg decis wa a compani willing to
cooper in the investig the thompson memorandum provid that in assess a
compani cooper prosecutor were to consid whether the compani waiv it
attorneycli privileg and attornei work product protect the thompson
memorandum also made clear that busi perceiv as not have fulli cooper
would more like face crimin indict prosecut and sanction
follow it issuanc mani critic the thompson memorandum becaus it seem to
impli that compani that refus to turn over privileg document to the govern
could be consid uncoop in an attempt to appeas critic then deputi attornei
gener paul mcnulti issu a revis memo the mcnulti memorandum for feder
investig and prosecut of busi organ the mcnulti memorandum revis
the doj prior guidanc outlin in the thompson memorandum that address the
practic of feder prosecutor seek waiver as an element of a compani cooper
the mcnulti memorandum provid specif criteria prosecutor were requir to consid
and procedur thei were requir to follow befor seek waiver of privileg or work
product protect
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4525
on august 28 2008 the depart of justic doj issu guidelin that revis the
mcnulti memorandum on how feder prosecutor investig charg and prosecut
corpor crime unlik the mcnulti and thompson memorandum these guidelin ar a
part of the us attornei manual which provid intern doj guidanc but doe not
creat ani enforc law
in an effort to stop congression action the guidelin bar prosecutor from judg
corpor cooper for lenienc on whether an entiti is will to waiv the attorneycli
privileg or work product protect the guidelin also state that prosecutor can no
longer seek disclosur of inform that is either privileg or protect work product in
addit the guidelin provid that when evalu a corpor cooper
prosecutor mai no longer consid whether a compani is advanc legal fee for it
employe whether a corpor ha sanction or retain culpabl employe or whether
a corpor ha enter into joint defens agreement
even though most observ agre that the guidelin ar a signific improv over the
mcnulti memorandum mani contend that comprehens legisl is still need to
make the doj reform perman and prevent a relaps in depart polici and to bar
similar waiver polici adopt by other feder agenc such as the secur exchang
commiss and the intern revenu servic
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4601
