2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Organization and Criminal Behavior


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Corporate Organization and Criminal Behavior 
Corporate offenses take place in a context of complex relationships and expectations in an 
organizational setting. It is often difficult to distinguish which corporate participants ought 
to be held personally responsible for the wrongdoing. Many offenses are the result of myriad 
decisions that are made by different individuals and passed through a chain of command. 
Not uncommonly, when corporate acts are contrary to the law, upper-level executives take 
pains to avoid learning what is going on so as to avoid responsibility if a scheme is 
uncovered. In some corporations, there is one well-paid executive who is only half in jest 
referred to as the “vice president in charge of going to jail.” 
 
The law largely treats corporations as people. They make more inviting prosecutory targets 
than individuals, most notably because they have deeper pockets and can be heavily fined to 
repay losses that have been inflicted on individuals or on the society in general.  
 
Government regulatory agencies such as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
oversee corporate performance in areas assigned to them by Congressional mandate. 
Typically, the lawmakers enact a statute that is deliberately vague, allowing the enforcement 
agency to develop its own enforcement guidelines within the boundaries of the 
Congressional authorization. The agencies will sometimes seek to expand the reach of the 
law by selecting notably egregious cases for litigation and appeal, thereby anticipating a 
favorable ruling on what is fundamentally a somewhat novel interpretation of their mandate. 
 
The Image of the Corporation 
Large corporations have contributed significantly to industrial and commercial development 
throughout the world. Their size and resources enable them to organize and coordinate 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.503  
production and distribution. The capital resources of a large corporation provide it with the 
ability to develop, adopt, and alter technology on a mammoth scale. A considerable portion 
of the population has been accorded a high standard of living because of corporate activity. 
 
At the same time, large corporations have the power to influence the manner in which  
laws are written and to commit acts that can inflict serious harm upon the population. They 
can hire lobbyists and lawyers who manipulate definitions of wrongdoing in the 
corporations’ interests.  
 
The very largeness and remoteness of the corporation from most of us is part of the reason 
that Americans traditionally have a love-hate attitude toward such organizations. We admire 
and desire corporations’ products, but we are uneasy about their power — a power that tends 
to be used single-mindedly in the pursuit of profits. Thomas Hobbes, a seventeenth century 
English political philosopher, stands out in the crowd that has been scornful of 
corporations. Hobbes’ unsavory comparison was between corporations and ascarides — 
worms that eat at the entrails of what Hobbes called “natural man.” 1 Centuries later, Robert 
Heilbroner, an economist, would castigate “the corporation with its wealth-seeking, its 
dehumanizing calculus of plus and minus, its careful inculcation of impulses and goals that 
should at most be tolerated.” 2  
 
Corporations and their executives are often the object of deprecatory humor. As far back as 
l635, a satirist had a businessman proclaiming: “I love churches. I mean to rob my 
countrymen and build one.” 3 In more recent times, a U.S. Senator told the story of a 
corporation officer who, when asked at a committee hearing if he were not ashamed of 
double-dealing people who trusted him, was puzzled: “Who else can you cheat?” he wanted 
to know. The putdowns of the business world are part of a common folklore, reflected in 
the belief that the expression legitimate business  is an oxymoron. 
 
According to William Kristol, public hostility toward big business dates back to the Populist 
movement of the late nineteenth century and suspicions of trusts that led to the 1890 
Sherman Anti-Trust Act. People are suspicious as to whether goods produced by large 
corporations are of the highest quality or are available at the lowest possible price. In 1978, a 
                                                 
1Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (London: Andrew Crooke, 1651). 
2Robert Heilbroner, In the Name of Profit  (New York: Doubleday, 1973), p. 223. 
3Christopher Hill, Society and Puritanism in Pre-Revolutionary England  (London: Secker & Warburg, 1964), p. 267. 
4John T. Noonan, Bribes (New York: Macmillan, 1984). 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
survey by Seymour Lipset and Gordan Schneider concluded that major industries and 
corporations had dropped in public esteem greatly during the 1970s.  
 
Clinard and Yeager 
In a comprehensive study of corporate law-breaking, Marshall Clinard (a recipient of the 
Association’s Donald Cressey Award) and Peter Yeager examined over a two-year period the 
records of 562 companies (477 of which were on the Fortune 500  list) and found that l,553 
white-collar crime cases had been filed against them. Some 60 percent of the firms had at 
least one case against them; for those companies, the average number of violations was 4.4. 
The oil, pharmaceutical, and motor vehicle industries were the most likely to be charged for 
wrongdoing, a matter that may be a function of enforcement priorities or a true reflection of 
their activities.  
 
In a study by Irwin Ross, he analyzed 1,043 companies that at one time or another had 
appeared on the Fortune  list of large industrial companies. Included in his study were five 
kinds of offenses: bribe-taking or bribe-giving by  high-level executives, criminal fraud, illegal 
campaign contributions, tax evasion, and anti-trust violations. One hundred seventeen, or 11 
percent of the corporations, were violators. 
 
The costs of corporate crimes not only include financial losses, but also injuries, deaths, and 
health hazards. Such crimes destroy public confidence in businesses and hurt the image of 
corporations. Clinard and Yeager say price-fixing offenses victimize the consumer and 
federal, state, and municipal governments while income tax crimes deprive the government 
and those dependent on it for needed revenue. 
 
Clinard and Yeager believe that corporate violations are increasingly difficult to discover, 
investigate, or prosecute successfully because of their growing complexity and intricacy. This 
is particularly true, they believe, of anti-trust cases, foreign payoffs, computer fraud, and 
illegal political contributions. In the last category, some corporations pay bonuses to their 
executives, with the understanding that part of that reward will be turned over to the coffers 
of a candidate that the corporation favors. 
 
Criminal activities involving corporations are often rooted in organizational subcultures 
and values and are developed over time. A particularly comprehensive examination of how 
                                                 
5Marshall B. Clinard and Peter C. Yeager, Corporate Crime (New York: Free Press, 1980). 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.505  
matters of life and death become embedded in routine decision-making and ultimately can 
lead to tragedy is provided in a book titled The Challenger Space Shuttle Disaster  by Diane 
Vaughan, another Cressey Award winner. 6 
 
Legal responses have been slow and ineffectual when dealing with economic organizational 
change. The law has emphasized the role of the individual actor in criminality, but has not 
examined the role of the organization in crime. Criminal activities are often rooted in 
organizational subculture and attitudes developed over time and cannot be traced to 
individuals or groups within the organization. While individuals still carry out the criminal 
enterprise, their attitudes and characteristics are of little importance, as an organization will 
replace those employees unwilling to participate in a criminal activity. 
 
 



:


corpor organ and crimin behavior
corpor offens take place in a context of complex relationship and expect in an
organiz set it is often difficult to distinguish which corpor particip ought
to be held person respons for the wrongdo mani offens ar the result of myriad
decis that ar made by differ individu and pass through a chain of command
not uncommonli when corpor act ar contrari to the law upperlevel execut take
pain to avoid learn what is go on so as to avoid respons if a scheme is
uncov in some corpor there is on wellpaid execut who is onli half in jest
refer to as the vice presid in charg of go to jail
the law larg treat corpor as peopl thei make more invit prosecutori target
than individu most notabl becaus thei have deeper pocket and can be heavili fine to
repai loss that have been inflict on individu or on the societi in gener
govern regulatori agenc such as the feder trade commiss ftc the
environment protect agenc epa and the food and drug administr fda
overse corpor perform in area assign to them by congression mandat
typic the lawmak enact a statut that is deliber vagu allow the enforc
agenc to develop it own enforc guidelin within the boundari of the
congression author the agenc will sometim seek to expand the reach of the
law by select notabl egregi case for litig and appeal therebi anticip a
favor rule on what is fundament a somewhat novel interpret of their mandat
the imag of the corpor
larg corpor have contribut significantli to industri and commerci develop
throughout the world their size and resourc enabl them to organ and coordin
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4503
product and distribut the capit resourc of a larg corpor provid it with the
abil to develop adopt and alter technolog on a mammoth scale a consider portion
of the popul ha been accord a high standard of live becaus of corpor activ
at the same time larg corpor have the power to influenc the manner in which
law ar written and to commit act that can inflict seriou harm upon the popul thei
can hire lobbyist and lawyer who manipul definit of wrongdo in the
corpor interest
the veri larg and remot of the corpor from most of us is part of the reason
that american tradition have a loveh attitud toward such organ we admir
and desir corpor product but we ar uneasi about their power a power that tend
to be us singlemindedli in the pursuit of profit thoma hobb a seventeenth centuri
english polit philosoph stand out in the crowd that ha been scorn of
corpor hobb unsavori comparison wa between corpor and ascarid
worm that eat at the entrail of what hobb call natur man 1 centuri later robert
heilbron an economist would castig the corpor with it wealthseek it
dehuman calculu of plu and minu it care inculc of impuls and goal that
should at most be toler 2
corpor and their execut ar often the object of deprecatori humor as far back as
l635 a satirist had a businessman proclaim i love church i mean to rob my
countrymen and build on 3 in more recent time a us senat told the stori of a
corpor offic who when ask at a committe hear if he were not asham of
doubled peopl who trust him wa puzzl who els can you cheat he want
to know the putdown of the busi world ar part of a common folklor reflect in
the belief that the express legitim busi is an oxymoron
accord to william kristol public hostil toward big busi date back to the populist
movement of the late nineteenth centuri and suspicion of trust that led to the 1890
sherman antitrust act peopl ar suspici as to whether good produc by larg
corpor ar of the highest qualiti or ar avail at the lowest possibl price in 1978 a
1thoma hobb leviathan london andrew crook 1651
2robert heilbron in the name of profit new york doubledai 1973 p 223
3christoph hill societi and puritan in prerevolutionari england london secker warburg 1964 p 267
4john t noonan bribe new york macmillan 1984
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4504 2011 fraud examin manual
survei by seymour lipset and gordan schneider conclud that major industri and
corpor had drop in public esteem greatli dure the 1970
clinard and yeager
in a comprehens studi of corpor lawbreak marshal clinard a recipi of the
associ donald cressei award and peter yeager examin over a twoyear period the
record of 562 compani 477 of which were on the fortun 500 list and found that l553
whitecollar crime case had been file against them some 60 percent of the firm had at
least on case against them for those compani the averag number of violat wa 44
the oil pharmaceut and motor vehicl industri were the most like to be charg for
wrongdo a matter that mai be a function of enforc prioriti or a true reflect of
their activ
in a studi by irwin ross he analyz 1043 compani that at on time or anoth had
appear on the fortun list of larg industri compani includ in hi studi were five
kind of offens bribetak or bribegiv by highlevel execut crimin fraud illeg
campaign contribut tax evas and antitrust violat on hundr seventeen or 11
percent of the corpor were violat
the cost of corpor crime not onli includ financi loss but also injuri death and
health hazard such crime destroi public confid in busi and hurt the imag of
corpor clinard and yeager sai pricefix offens victim the consum and
feder state and municip govern while incom tax crime depriv the govern
and those depend on it for need revenu
clinard and yeager believ that corpor violat ar increasingli difficult to discov
investig or prosecut successfulli becaus of their grow complex and intricaci thi
is particularli true thei believ of antitrust case foreign payoff comput fraud and
illeg polit contribut in the last categori some corpor pai bonus to their
execut with the understand that part of that reward will be turn over to the coffer
of a candid that the corpor favor
crimin activ involv corpor ar often root in organiz subcultur
and valu and ar develop over time a particularli comprehens examin of how
5marshal b clinard and peter c yeager corpor crime new york free press 1980
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4505
matter of life and death becom embed in routin decisionmak and ultim can
lead to tragedi is provid in a book titl the challeng space shuttl disast by dian
vaughan anoth cressei award winner 6
legal respons have been slow and ineffectu when deal with econom organiz
chang the law ha emphas the role of the individu actor in crimin but ha not
examin the role of the organ in crime crimin activ ar often root in
organiz subcultur and attitud develop over time and cannot be trace to
individu or group within the organ while individu still carri out the crimin
enterpris their attitud and characterist ar of littl import as an organ will
replac those employe unwil to particip in a crimin activ
