2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Criminogenic Organizational Structures


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Criminogenic Organizational Structures 
Sociologist Edward Gross has asserted that all organizations are inherently criminogenic 
(that is, prone to committing crime), though not necessarily criminal. Gross makes this 
assertion because of the reliance on “the bottom line.” Without necessarily meaning to, 
organizations can invite fraud as a means of obtaining goals. Criminologist Oliver 
Williamson noted that because of a department’s concern with reaching its goals,  
managers might well tend to maximize their department’s own interests to the detriment of 
the organization. 
 
Organizations can also be criminogenic because  they encourage loyalty. According to Diane 
Vaughan, the reasons are that: 
• The organization tends to recruit and attract similar individuals. 
• Rewards are given out to those who display characteristics of the “company man.” 
• Long-term loyalty is encouraged through company retirement and benefits. 
• Loyalty is encouraged through social interaction, such as company parties and  
social functions. 
• Frequent transfers and long working hours encourage isolation from other groups. 
• Specialized job skills can discourage personnel from seeking employment elsewhere. 
 
This, in turn, causes company personnel to sometimes perceive that the organization might 
be worth committing crime to maintain and further its goals. The use of formal and informal 
rewards and punishments, plus social activities and pressures to participate, link an 
employee’s needs and goals to the success of the company. Society places value on the 
reputation of the company for which one works, reinforcing the link between an individual  
  
                                                 
7Edward Gross, “Organizational Structure and Organizational Crime.” In Gilbert Geis and Ezra Stotland 
(Eds.), White-Collar Crime: Theory and Research. Beverly Hills:  Sage, 1980, pp. 53–76. 
8Diane Vaughan, “Transaction Systems and Unlawful Organizational Behavior.” Social Problems,  29: 373–380. 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.508   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
and corporate goals. When a company achieves its goals, its employees prosper. In short, the 
interests of an organization and its employees coincide, and that situation may set the stage 
for unlawful conduct by individuals on the organization’s behalf. 
 
Vaughan writes that organizational processes create “an internal moral and intellectual 
world” that causes individuals to identify with organizational goals. Company survival comes 
to mean individual survival, and when resources become scarce, the incentive to misbehave 
increases. Of course, not all agents will act unlawfully on a company’s behalf, and how  
any employee behaves will be linked to factors that might not be related to the world of  
the organization. 
 
When the structural pressure to commit fraud exists, a firm often cannot unite its agents in 
such activities. At least three factors prevent such unity. First, the pressure to commit fraud 
might not affect departments in a company equally. A sales department that must meet 
certain goals to generate profits will feel different competitive pressure than a product 
development department in the same company that is running smoothly. Some parts of 
companies might never experience pressure to cheat, and members of those departments 
will have no motivation to engage in misconduct on a firm’s behalf. 
 
Second, even in high-pressure departments, some employees will not have knowledge of the 
difficulty of obtaining needed resources. An employee will have no motivation to commit 
fraud unless he has full information about an organization’s goals and how the department 
can achieve them. In other words, an employee usually needs a high degree of responsibility 
for a company’s success, as well as the ability to bring about those goals, before a chance to 
engage in misbehavior can occur. 
 
Third, outside societal behavior can produce values that conflict with those learned in an 
organizational environment. For example, fraternal or professional associations impart their 
own values to employees that may not coincide with a specific corporate code of honor. 
When faced with conflicting norms, Vaughan writes, employees will make their choices 
based on the rewards and punishments they perceive to accompany the alternatives. Where 
misbehavior is seen as too costly, it will not occur. Where an organization provides sufficient 
rewards to overcome the fear of punishment, misbehavior may occur despite competing 
norms. The amount of information an employee has will affect the decision on which way to 
go, as will an individual’s financial and social dependence on the firm. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.509  
The mere fact that corporate and individual goals are often joined in organizations does 
not necessarily create a climate for illegal actions. As with any major decision, complexities 
often enter the picture. Temptations vary not only among departments, but within them. 
The availability of information and individual risk-reward assessments may generate lawful 
behavior that resists organizational pressures to violate the law, as well as unlawful 
behavior in the face of organizational pressures to comply. Put plainly, the likelihood that 
organizational processes will generate misbehavior is highly variable and cannot currently 
be measured with any degree of precision. 
 
In explaining how employees are taught to make decisions that are correct from a 
corporation’s standpoint, Drucker said a natural tendency exists in every large-scale 
organization to discourage initiative and encourage conformity. Madden and Margolis say 
corporations lead new managers through an initiation period designed to weaken their ties 
with external groups, including their own families, and encourage a feeling of dependence on 
and attachment to the corporation.  
 
Geis found that individuals are trained quite often in illegal behavior as part of their 
occupational roles. Schrager and Short say criminal behavior stems more from the roles an 
employee is expected to fulfill than from individual pathology. Many executives know their 
behavior is illegal, but tend to justify their actions as simply common practice in the business 
world. Clinard and Yeager believed that in rationalizing their behavior, corporations follow a 
general tendency to obey laws selectively (i.e., obeying according to situational needs and 
determined by factors like social class and occupation). 
 
Sutherland demonstrated that corporate executives are insulated from those who might 
disagree with their beliefs because they associate almost exclusively with people who are pro-business, 
politically conservative, and generally opposed to government regulation. 
 
Silk and Vogel found that certain beliefs about government intervention in business are used 
throughout the business world to justify illegal activity by corporations. For example, some 
defend the corporation’s right to violate laws by claiming that “all legal measures proposed 
constitute government interference with the free enterprise system.”  
 
A problem common in many large corporations with intricate hierarchical structures tends to 
be a split between what the upper levels believe is going on below and the actual procedures 
being carried out. Clinard and Yeager say that the chief executive officer of a corporation is 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
often isolated, and thus messages transmitted down the line tend to become distorted. 
Clinard and Yeager found that all levels of the corporation might often agree to perpetuate 
the lack of full information, for the key to any successful conspiracy to violate the law 
probably lies in the fact that the higher-ups do not inquire about what is going on and the 
lower levels do not tell them. 
 
Often in corporations, no single individual at the highest levels may make a decision alone to 
market a faulty product or take shortcuts on product testing, Clinard and Yeager say. 
Instead, decisions are made in small steps at each level, possibly without any awareness of 
the illegal and potentially dangerous result. 
 
McCaghy says profit pressure is “the single most compelling factor behind deviance by 
industry, whether it be price fixing, the destruction of competition, or the misrepresentation 
of a product,” such as making a shoddy product that will wear out and need to be replaced. 
Clinard and Yeager say certain industries, such as the drug and chemical businesses, have 
such severe competition and strong profit drives due to demands for continual development 
of new products that they may feel pressured to falsify test data, market new products before 
their full effects are known, or engage in unethical sales techniques that can have disastrous 
effects on human beings and the environment. 
 
 



:


criminogen organiz structur
sociologist edward gross ha assert that all organ ar inher criminogen
that is prone to commit crime though not necessarili crimin gross make thi
assert becaus of the relianc on the bottom line without necessarili mean to
organ can invit fraud as a mean of obtain goal criminologist oliv
williamson note that becaus of a depart concern with reach it goal
manag might well tend to maxim their depart own interest to the detriment of
the organ
organ can also be criminogen becaus thei encourag loyalti accord to dian
vaughan the reason ar that
the organ tend to recruit and attract similar individu
reward ar given out to those who displai characterist of the compani man
longterm loyalti is encourag through compani retir and benefit
loyalti is encourag through social interact such as compani parti and
social function
frequent transfer and long work hour encourag isol from other group
special job skill can discourag personnel from seek employ elsewher
thi in turn caus compani personnel to sometim perceiv that the organ might
be worth commit crime to maintain and further it goal the us of formal and inform
reward and punish plu social activ and pressur to particip link an
employe need and goal to the success of the compani societi place valu on the
reput of the compani for which on work reinforc the link between an individu
7edward gross organiz structur and organiz crime in gilbert gei and ezra stotland
ed whitecollar crime theori and research beverli hill sage 1980 pp 5376
8dian vaughan transact system and unlaw organiz behavior social problem 29 373380
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4508 2011 fraud examin manual
and corpor goal when a compani achiev it goal it employe prosper in short the
interest of an organ and it employe coincid and that situat mai set the stage
for unlaw conduct by individu on the organ behalf
vaughan write that organiz process creat an intern moral and intellectu
world that caus individu to identifi with organiz goal compani surviv come
to mean individu surviv and when resourc becom scarc the incent to misbehav
increas of cours not all agent will act unlawfulli on a compani behalf and how
ani employe behav will be link to factor that might not be relat to the world of
the organ
when the structur pressur to commit fraud exist a firm often cannot unit it agent in
such activ at least three factor prevent such uniti first the pressur to commit fraud
might not affect depart in a compani equal a sale depart that must meet
certain goal to gener profit will feel differ competit pressur than a product
develop depart in the same compani that is run smoothli some part of
compani might never experi pressur to cheat and member of those depart
will have no motiv to engag in misconduct on a firm behalf
second even in highpressur depart some employe will not have knowledg of the
difficulti of obtain need resourc an employe will have no motiv to commit
fraud unless he ha full inform about an organ goal and how the depart
can achiev them in other word an employe usual need a high degre of respons
for a compani success as well as the abil to bring about those goal befor a chanc to
engag in misbehavior can occur
third outsid societ behavior can produc valu that conflict with those learn in an
organiz environ for exampl fratern or profession associ impart their
own valu to employe that mai not coincid with a specif corpor code of honor
when face with conflict norm vaughan write employe will make their choic
base on the reward and punish thei perceiv to accompani the altern where
misbehavior is seen as too costli it will not occur where an organ provid suffici
reward to overcom the fear of punish misbehavior mai occur despit compet
norm the amount of inform an employe ha will affect the decis on which wai to
go as will an individu financi and social depend on the firm
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4509
the mere fact that corpor and individu goal ar often join in organ doe
not necessarili creat a climat for illeg action as with ani major decis complex
often enter the pictur temptat vari not onli among depart but within them
the avail of inform and individu riskreward assess mai gener law
behavior that resist organiz pressur to violat the law as well as unlaw
behavior in the face of organiz pressur to compli put plainli the likelihood that
organiz process will gener misbehavior is highli variabl and cannot current
be measur with ani degre of precis
in explain how employe ar taught to make decis that ar correct from a
corpor standpoint drucker said a natur tendenc exist in everi largescal
organ to discourag initi and encourag conform madden and margoli sai
corpor lead new manag through an initi period design to weaken their ti
with extern group includ their own famili and encourag a feel of depend on
and attach to the corpor
gei found that individu ar train quit often in illeg behavior as part of their
occup role schrager and short sai crimin behavior stem more from the role an
employe is expect to fulfil than from individu patholog mani execut know their
behavior is illeg but tend to justifi their action as simpli common practic in the busi
world clinard and yeager believ that in ration their behavior corpor follow a
gener tendenc to obei law select ie obei accord to situat need and
determin by factor like social class and occup
sutherland demonstr that corpor execut ar insul from those who might
disagre with their belief becaus thei associ almost exclus with peopl who ar probusi
polit conserv and gener oppos to govern regul
silk and vogel found that certain belief about govern intervent in busi ar us
throughout the busi world to justifi illeg activ by corpor for exampl some
defend the corpor right to violat law by claim that all legal measur propos
constitut govern interfer with the free enterpris system
a problem common in mani larg corpor with intric hierarch structur tend to
be a split between what the upper level believ is go on below and the actual procedur
be carri out clinard and yeager sai that the chief execut offic of a corpor is
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4510 2011 fraud examin manual
often isol and thu messag transmit down the line tend to becom distort
clinard and yeager found that all level of the corpor might often agre to perpetu
the lack of full inform for the kei to ani success conspiraci to violat the law
probabl li in the fact that the higherup do not inquir about what is go on and the
lower level do not tell them
often in corpor no singl individu at the highest level mai make a decis alon to
market a faulti product or take shortcut on product test clinard and yeager sai
instead decis ar made in small step at each level possibl without ani awar of
the illeg and potenti danger result
mccaghi sai profit pressur is the singl most compel factor behind devianc by
industri whether it be price fix the destruct of competit or the misrepresent
of a product such as make a shoddi product that will wear out and need to be replac
clinard and yeager sai certain industri such as the drug and chemic busi have
such sever competit and strong profit drive due to demand for continu develop
of new product that thei mai feel pressur to falsifi test data market new product befor
their full effect ar known or engag in uneth sale techniqu that can have disastr
effect on human be and the environ
