2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Sentencing Guidelines


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Corporate Sentencing Guidelines 
Congress, in the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, mandated uniform sentencing 
guidelines. The Act also established the United States Sentencing Commission (USSC), 
which began studying sentences for individuals  soon after the passage of the Act. It was 
widely held in Congress that there was a great disparity of penalties for similar crimes 
committed by individuals. After three years of study, the USSC announced Sentencing 
Guidelines for Individuals. In November of 1987, these Guidelines became effective in the 
94 Federal Courts of the United States. 
 
In 1988, the United States Sentencing Commission began a study of sanctions for corporate 
wrongdoing. After three years of study and hearings, on May 1, 1991, the USSC submitted 
its Proposed Guidelines for Sentencing Organizations  to Congress. On November 1, 1991, the 
Guidelines went into effect. And in April 2010, the U.S. Sentencing Commission modified 
sentencing guidelines for organizations, especially as they relate to compliance programs. 
The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, barring any Congressional 
modifications or rejection. 
 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Until January 2005, federal judges were required to use the Guidelines to determine whether 
a defendant had an “effective compliance program” in place to prevent the violations for 
which it was being charged. But in two key United States Supreme Court rulings, United 
States v. Booker and United States v. Fanfan, the Supreme Court ruled that the  
Sixth Amendment right to a jury trial requires that federal sentencing guidelines be advisory, 
rather than mandatory. Federal judges must still consider  the Guidelines when sentencing, but 
are not required  to sentence within the range set by the Guidelines. According to the 
guidelines, judges are still required to examine the adequacy of a company’s compliance and 
ethics program. Furthermore, judges may now mitigate punishment beyond the mandated 
level of mitigation given under the guidelines. 
 
The term organization  includes the following entities: 
• Corporations 
• Partnerships 
• Associations 
• Joint-stock companies 
• Unions 
• Trusts 
• Pension funds 
• Unincorporated organizations 
• Governments and political subdivisions thereof 
• Nonprofit organizations 
 
The introductory commentary to the Guidelines clearly states that they are designed to provide 
incentives for organizations to maintain internal mechanisms for preventing, detecting, and 
reporting criminal conduct. Among other things, the Guidelines suggest a substantial reduction 
of fines for organizations that have effective compliance programs. 
 
If an organization is found liable for an offense, the Guidelines provide for four types of 
remedies from which a judge may consider: fines,  restitution, remedial orders, and probation. 
 
Fines 
Fines are based on two factors: the seriousness of the offense and the level of culpability by 
the organization. The seriousness of the offense determines the base fine to be imposed. 
This figure can be quite high. The organization’s culpability is a measure of the actions taken 
by the organization which either mitigated or aggravated the situation. Depending on the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.519  
culpability of the organization, the base fine can be increased by as much as 400 percent or 
reduced by as much as 95 percent.  
 
Calculating the Fine 
Under the Guidelines, an organization’s base fine is the highest of three numbers:  
• The monetary loss suffered by the victim 
• The pecuniary gain received by the defendant 
• An amount ranging from $5,000 to $72,500,00 0 as set forth in the Offense Level Scale 
Individual Guidelines, which is a table of preset penalties based on the seriousness of 
possible offenses 
 
FINE MULTIPLES 
After the base fine is established, the next step in sentencing is to calculate the culpability 
multiplier of the organization. The calculation of this multiplier is a complicated process. 
Every organization begins with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten. The 
organization’s score is then increased or decreased based on the presence of aggravating or 
mitigating factors. Aggravating factors increase the score (and thus increase the fine for the 
organization), while mitigating factors decrease the score. The Guidelines note four 
aggravating factors that can cause an organization’s score to increase:  
1. Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity. Points will be added if high-level employees of 
the organization participated in, condoned, or were willfully ignorant of the offense. 
Points may also be added if there was pervasive tolerance of the offense by high-level 
employees. Depending on the size of the organization, this can add from 1 to 5 points to 
an organization’s culpability score.  
2. Prior history. If that organization has previously been found criminally guilty of similar 
acts, or if the organization has been found guilty of a civil offense for similar acts on at 
least two occasions, points may be added to the culpability score. Depending on how 
long it has been since the previous offense, up to two points can be added to the 
organization’s culpability score.  
3. Violation of a prior court order. Points are added to the organization’s culpability score if, in 
committing the offense at hand, the organization violated an injunction or other judicial 
order. Points are also added if the offense in question is similar to a prior offense for 
which the organization is already on probation, and if the commission of the current 
offense violated the probation order. This factor can add up to two points to the 
culpability score.  
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4. Obstruction of justice. Finally, points are added to the organization’s culpability score if that 
organization interfered in any way with the investigation, prosecution, or sentencing of 
the offense in question. This does not always require an affirmative act by the 
organization. For instance, if the organization knew of an attempt by some party to 
obstruct an investigation, prosecution, or sentencing, and did nothing to prevent it, then 
the organization may be found to have obstructed justice. Simply stated, if the 
organization “turns a blind eye” to any form of obstruction, it faces the possibility of 
having its fine substantially increased under the Guidelines. This factor can add up to 
three points.  
 
FINE REDUCERS 
The Guidelines provide for an organization’s fine to be increased if it acts “badly,” but also 
provides for the reduction of fines if the company is “good.” The Guidelines set forth two 
mitigating factors which will reduce an organization’s criminal fines:  
1. Self-reporting: An organization’s culpability score will be reduced if, within a reasonable 
amount of time after learning of the offense, the organization reports the offense to 
authorities and then cooperates in the investigation and accepts responsibility for its 
wrongdoing. There are three elements to the self-reporting mitigation credit: (1) reporting 
within a reasonable time, (2) cooperating in the investigation, and (3) accepting 
responsibility for the wrongdoing. The organization earns the most points (five) if it 
complies with all three elements. However, it can receive a smaller credit (two) even if it 
does not report the offense in a timely manner, as long as it cooperates in the investigation 
and admits its own wrongdoing. Even if the organization fails to cooperate, it can 
nevertheless receive some credit (one) for accepting responsibility. This usually means 
pleading guilty to the offense prior to trial.  
2. An effective program to prevent and detect violations of the law: The implementation of an 
effective compliance program is the only way an organization can mitigate potential fines 
before violations actually occur. It can knock up to three points (out of a possible ten) 
off of an organization’s culpability score. The elements of an effective compliance 
program under the Guidelines are discussed below.  
 
Every organization begins with a culpability score of 5 under the Guidelines. Each aggravating 
factor raises the culpability score, and each mitigating factor diminishes it. After all the factors 
have been considered, a final score is determined. Each score corresponds to a range of 
multipliers that determine how much the fine should be increased or decreased. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.521  
TABLE OF MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM MULTIPLIERS FROM THE GUIDELINES 
The organization’s fine is multiplied by the minimum and maximum multipliers for its 
culpability score to determine the possible range of fines. 
 
Culpability  
Score  
10 or more 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 or less 
Multiplier 
Minimum  
2.00 
1.80 
1.60 
1.40 
1.20 
1.00 
.80 
.60 
.40 
.20 
.05
 Maximum 
Multiplier  
4.00 
3.60 
3.20 
2.80 
2.40 
2.00 
1.60 
1.20 
.80 
.40 
.20
  
Assuming an organization had been fined $1 00,000, its culpability score could have a 
tremendous impact. If the organization’s culpability score was zero as a result of self-reporting 
and having an effective compliance program in place, that organization’s fine range 
would be between $5,000 and $20,000. (Determined by multiplying $100,000 by .05 and .20, 
respectively.) On the other hand, if the presence of aggravating factors had left the 
organization with a culpability score of ten, its fine range would be $200,000 to $400,000. 
Thus, in the case of a $100,000 base fine, there is a potential swing of $395,000 in the fine 
the organization will have to pay.  
 
Departures 
Courts are permitted to impose fines outside the range prescribed by the Guidelines if there 
are special aggravating or mitigating circumstances in the case that would make a fine within 
the range inappropriate. Sentences that fall outside the guideline range are known as 
departures. The Guidelines describe certain factors that would justify departures from the 
ordinary fine range, although the lists are not exhaustive.  
 
UPWARD DEPARTURES 
When a court imposes a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provided by the 
Guidelines, this is known as an upward departure. The Guidelines list the following as 
factors that could justify an upward departure: 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• The offense involved a foreseeable risk of death or bodily injury. 
• The offense constituted a threat to national security. 
• The offense presented a threat to the environment. 
• The offense presented a risk to the integrity or continued existence of a market. 
• The offense involved official corruption. 
• The organization’s culpability score was reduced  because it had an effective compliance 
program, but the program was only implemented because of a court order or 
administrative order. In cases such as this, the court can impose an upward departure to 
offset all or part of the reduction. 
• The organization’s culpability score is greater than ten. 
 
DOWNWARD DEPARTURES 
The Guidelines list the following factors that could justify a downward departure:  
• Substantial assistance to the authorities in the investigation or prosecution of another 
organization or individual.  
• The organization is a public entity. 
• Members or beneficiaries (other than share holders) of the organization are direct victims 
of the offense. A downward departure in these cases may be warranted because a fine 
might increase the burden on the victims. 
• The organization has agreed to pay remedial costs that greatly exceed the organization’s 
gain from the offense. 
• The organization has an exceptionally low culpability score because: there was no 
involvement by anyone with substantial authority in the organization; there was an 
effective compliance program in place; and the base fine was determined by some means 
other than the organization’s gain from the offense. 
 
Restitution 
The Guidelines require that, whenever possible, the organization must pay full restitution to 
the victims of the crime. Restitution is not viewed as a form of punishment in the 
Guidelines, but rather as a means of remedying the harm caused by the offense.  
 
Remedial Orders 
The Guidelines also provide for the imposition of remedial orders, which require an 
offending organization to fix a harm it has already caused (to the extent that the harm is not 
fixed by the payment of restitution) and prevent any future harms from occurring.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.523  
Probation 
Finally, courts are required to impose probation on offending organizations under the 
following circumstances: 
• To secure payment of restitution, enforcement of a remedial order, or to ensure 
completion of community service 
• To safeguard the organization’s ability to pay a monetary penalty that was not fully paid 
at the time of sentencing 
• When an organization with at least 50 employees did not have an effective program to 
detect and prevent violations of law 
• When the organization was adjudicated within the past five years to have committed 
misconduct similar to any part of the misconduct of the offense in question 
• When a high-level employee was involved in the offense in question and was criminally 
convicted of similar conduct within the past five years 
• When such an order is necessary to ensure changes are made to reduce the likelihood of 
future criminal conduct 
• When the sentence does not include a fine 
• When such an order is necessary in order to accomplish one or more purposes of 
sentencing set forth in 18, U.S.C., § 3553(a)(2)  
 
When the offending organization has committed a felony, probation must run for at least 
one year. In no case may probation run for more than five years. The Guidelines also 
recommend conditions for probation in various circumstances. These conditions include:  
• Publicizing the nature of the offense, the organization’s conviction, the punishment 
imposed, and the steps taken to prevent the recurrence of a similar offense 
• Providing periodic reports to the court of the organization’s financial condition  
and expenses 
• Requiring the organization to submit to examinations of the organization’s business 
records and to interviews of knowledgeable employees 
• Requiring the organization to notify the court upon learning of a material adverse change 
to its financial condition or the commencement of any major legal proceedings, 
including bankruptcy, or any investigation by authorities 
• Requiring periodic payments under the court’s specifications, with priority in the order 
of restitution, fine, and any other monetary sanction 
• Developing a program to avoid violations of law and a schedule to implement it 
• Notifying the organization’s employees and shareholders of its violation and its program 
to avoid and detect violations of law 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.524   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Reporting to the court on the organization’s implementation of a program to avoid and 
detect violations of law and disclosing any investigation by authorities 
 
If an offending organization violates its probation, this may result in: 
• Resentencing 
• The terms of probation being extended 
• The imposition of more restrictive conditions  
 
 



:


corpor sentenc guidelin
congress in the comprehens crime control act of 1984 mandat uniform sentenc
guidelin the act also establish the unit state sentenc commiss ussc
which began studi sentenc for individu soon after the passag of the act it wa
wide held in congress that there wa a great dispar of penalti for similar crime
commit by individu after three year of studi the ussc announc sentenc
guidelin for individu in novemb of 1987 these guidelin becam effect in the
94 feder court of the unit state
in 1988 the unit state sentenc commiss began a studi of sanction for corpor
wrongdo after three year of studi and hear on mai 1 1991 the ussc submit
it propos guidelin for sentenc organ to congress on novemb 1 1991 the
guidelin went into effect and in april 2010 the us sentenc commiss modifi
sentenc guidelin for organ especi as thei relat to complianc program
the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010 bar ani congression
modif or reject
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4518 2011 fraud examin manual
until januari 2005 feder judg were requir to us the guidelin to determin whether
a defend had an effect complianc program in place to prevent the violat for
which it wa be charg but in two kei unit state suprem court rule unit
state v booker and unit state v fanfan the suprem court rule that the
sixth amend right to a juri trial requir that feder sentenc guidelin be advisori
rather than mandatori feder judg must still consid the guidelin when sentenc but
ar not requir to sentenc within the rang set by the guidelin accord to the
guidelin judg ar still requir to examin the adequaci of a compani complianc and
ethic program furthermor judg mai now mitig punish beyond the mandat
level of mitig given under the guidelin
the term organ includ the follow entiti
corpor
partnership
associ
jointstock compani
union
trust
pension fund
unincorpor organ
govern and polit subdivis thereof
nonprofit organ
the introductori commentari to the guidelin clearli state that thei ar design to provid
incent for organ to maintain intern mechan for prevent detect and
report crimin conduct among other thing the guidelin suggest a substanti reduct
of fine for organ that have effect complianc program
if an organ is found liabl for an offens the guidelin provid for four type of
remedi from which a judg mai consid fine restitut remedi order and probat
fine
fine ar base on two factor the serious of the offens and the level of culpabl by
the organ the serious of the offens determin the base fine to be impos
thi figur can be quit high the organ culpabl is a measur of the action taken
by the organ which either mitig or aggrav the situat depend on the
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4519
culpabl of the organ the base fine can be increas by as much as 400 percent or
reduc by as much as 95 percent
calcul the fine
under the guidelin an organ base fine is the highest of three number
the monetari loss suffer by the victim
the pecuniari gain receiv by the defend
an amount rang from 5000 to 7250000 0 as set forth in the offens level scale
individu guidelin which is a tabl of preset penalti base on the serious of
possibl offens
fine multipl
after the base fine is establish the next step in sentenc is to calcul the culpabl
multipli of the organ the calcul of thi multipli is a complic process
everi organ begin with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten the
organ score is then increas or decreas base on the presenc of aggrav or
mitig factor aggrav factor increas the score and thu increas the fine for the
organ while mitig factor decreas the score the guidelin note four
aggrav factor that can caus an organ score to increas
1 involv in or toler of crimin activ point will be ad if highlevel employe of
the organ particip in condon or were willfulli ignor of the offens
point mai also be ad if there wa pervas toler of the offens by highlevel
employe depend on the size of the organ thi can add from 1 to 5 point to
an organ culpabl score
2 prior histori if that organ ha previous been found crimin guilti of similar
act or if the organ ha been found guilti of a civil offens for similar act on at
least two occas point mai be ad to the culpabl score depend on how
long it ha been sinc the previou offens up to two point can be ad to the
organ culpabl score
3 violat of a prior court order point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if in
commit the offens at hand the organ violat an injunct or other judici
order point ar also ad if the offens in question is similar to a prior offens for
which the organ is alreadi on probat and if the commiss of the current
offens violat the probat order thi factor can add up to two point to the
culpabl score
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4520 2011 fraud examin manual
4 obstruct of justic final point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if that
organ interf in ani wai with the investig prosecut or sentenc of
the offens in question thi doe not alwai requir an affirm act by the
organ for instanc if the organ knew of an attempt by some parti to
obstruct an investig prosecut or sentenc and did noth to prevent it then
the organ mai be found to have obstruct justic simpli state if the
organ turn a blind ey to ani form of obstruct it face the possibl of
have it fine substanti increas under the guidelin thi factor can add up to
three point
fine reduc
the guidelin provid for an organ fine to be increas if it act badli but also
provid for the reduct of fine if the compani is good the guidelin set forth two
mitig factor which will reduc an organ crimin fine
1 selfreport an organ culpabl score will be reduc if within a reason
amount of time after learn of the offens the organ report the offens to
author and then cooper in the investig and accept respons for it
wrongdo there ar three element to the selfreport mitig credit 1 report
within a reason time 2 cooper in the investig and 3 accept
respons for the wrongdo the organ earn the most point five if it
compli with all three element howev it can receiv a smaller credit two even if it
doe not report the offens in a time manner as long as it cooper in the investig
and admit it own wrongdo even if the organ fail to cooper it can
nevertheless receiv some credit on for accept respons thi usual mean
plead guilti to the offens prior to trial
2 an effect program to prevent and detect violat of the law the implement of an
effect complianc program is the onli wai an organ can mitig potenti fine
befor violat actual occur it can knock up to three point out of a possibl ten
off of an organ culpabl score the element of an effect complianc
program under the guidelin ar discuss below
everi organ begin with a culpabl score of 5 under the guidelin each aggrav
factor rais the culpabl score and each mitig factor diminish it after all the factor
have been consid a final score is determin each score correspond to a rang of
multipli that determin how much the fine should be increas or decreas
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4521
tabl of minimum and maximum multipli from the guidelin
the organ fine is multipli by the minimum and maximum multipli for it
culpabl score to determin the possibl rang of fine
culpabl
score
10 or more
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0 or less
multipli
minimum
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
05
maximum
multipli
400
360
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
20
assum an organ had been fine 1 00000 it culpabl score could have a
tremend impact if the organ culpabl score wa zero as a result of selfreport
and have an effect complianc program in place that organ fine rang
would be between 5000 and 20000 determin by multipli 100000 by 05 and 20
respect on the other hand if the presenc of aggrav factor had left the
organ with a culpabl score of ten it fine rang would be 200000 to 400000
thu in the case of a 100000 base fine there is a potenti swing of 395000 in the fine
the organ will have to pai
departur
court ar permit to impos fine outsid the rang prescrib by the guidelin if there
ar special aggrav or mitig circumst in the case that would make a fine within
the rang inappropri sentenc that fall outsid the guidelin rang ar known as
departur the guidelin describ certain factor that would justifi departur from the
ordinari fine rang although the list ar not exhaust
upward departur
when a court impos a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provid by the
guidelin thi is known as an upward departur the guidelin list the follow as
factor that could justifi an upward departur
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4522 2011 fraud examin manual
the offens involv a forese risk of death or bodili injuri
the offens constitut a threat to nation secur
the offens present a threat to the environ
the offens present a risk to the integr or continu exist of a market
the offens involv offici corrupt
the organ culpabl score wa reduc becaus it had an effect complianc
program but the program wa onli implement becaus of a court order or
administr order in case such as thi the court can impos an upward departur to
offset all or part of the reduct
the organ culpabl score is greater than ten
downward departur
the guidelin list the follow factor that could justifi a downward departur
substanti assist to the author in the investig or prosecut of anoth
organ or individu
the organ is a public entiti
member or beneficiari other than share holder of the organ ar direct victim
of the offens a downward departur in these case mai be warrant becaus a fine
might increas the burden on the victim
the organ ha agre to pai remedi cost that greatli exce the organ
gain from the offens
the organ ha an exception low culpabl score becaus there wa no
involv by anyon with substanti author in the organ there wa an
effect complianc program in place and the base fine wa determin by some mean
other than the organ gain from the offens
restitut
the guidelin requir that whenev possibl the organ must pai full restitut to
the victim of the crime restitut is not view as a form of punish in the
guidelin but rather as a mean of remedi the harm caus by the offens
remedi order
the guidelin also provid for the imposit of remedi order which requir an
offend organ to fix a harm it ha alreadi caus to the extent that the harm is not
fix by the payment of restitut and prevent ani futur harm from occur
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4523
probat
final court ar requir to impos probat on offend organ under the
follow circumst
to secur payment of restitut enforc of a remedi order or to ensur
complet of commun servic
to safeguard the organ abil to pai a monetari penalti that wa not fulli paid
at the time of sentenc
when an organ with at least 50 employe did not have an effect program to
detect and prevent violat of law
when the organ wa adjud within the past five year to have commit
misconduct similar to ani part of the misconduct of the offens in question
when a highlevel employe wa involv in the offens in question and wa crimin
convict of similar conduct within the past five year
when such an order is necessari to ensur chang ar made to reduc the likelihood of
futur crimin conduct
when the sentenc doe not includ a fine
when such an order is necessari in order to accomplish on or more purpos of
sentenc set forth in 18 usc 3553a2
when the offend organ ha commit a feloni probat must run for at least
on year in no case mai probat run for more than five year the guidelin also
recommend condit for probat in variou circumst these condit includ
public the natur of the offens the organ convict the punish
impos and the step taken to prevent the recurr of a similar offens
provid period report to the court of the organ financi condit
and expens
requir the organ to submit to examin of the organ busi
record and to interview of knowledg employe
requir the organ to notifi the court upon learn of a materi advers chang
to it financi condit or the commenc of ani major legal proceed
includ bankruptci or ani investig by author
requir period payment under the court specif with prioriti in the order
of restitut fine and ani other monetari sanction
develop a program to avoid violat of law and a schedul to implement it
notifi the organ employe and sharehold of it violat and it program
to avoid and detect violat of law
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4524 2011 fraud examin manual
report to the court on the organ implement of a program to avoid and
detect violat of law and disclos ani investig by author
if an offend organ violat it probat thi mai result in
resentenc
the term of probat be extend
the imposit of more restrict condit
