2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Sentencing Guidelines/Calculating the Fine


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Calculating the Fine 
Under the Guidelines, an organization’s base fine is the highest of three numbers:  
• The monetary loss suffered by the victim 
• The pecuniary gain received by the defendant 
• An amount ranging from $5,000 to $72,500,00 0 as set forth in the Offense Level Scale 
Individual Guidelines, which is a table of preset penalties based on the seriousness of 
possible offenses 
 
FINE MULTIPLES 
After the base fine is established, the next step in sentencing is to calculate the culpability 
multiplier of the organization. The calculation of this multiplier is a complicated process. 
Every organization begins with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten. The 
organization’s score is then increased or decreased based on the presence of aggravating or 
mitigating factors. Aggravating factors increase the score (and thus increase the fine for the 
organization), while mitigating factors decrease the score. The Guidelines note four 
aggravating factors that can cause an organization’s score to increase:  
1. Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity. Points will be added if high-level employees of 
the organization participated in, condoned, or were willfully ignorant of the offense. 
Points may also be added if there was pervasive tolerance of the offense by high-level 
employees. Depending on the size of the organization, this can add from 1 to 5 points to 
an organization’s culpability score.  
2. Prior history. If that organization has previously been found criminally guilty of similar 
acts, or if the organization has been found guilty of a civil offense for similar acts on at 
least two occasions, points may be added to the culpability score. Depending on how 
long it has been since the previous offense, up to two points can be added to the 
organization’s culpability score.  
3. Violation of a prior court order. Points are added to the organization’s culpability score if, in 
committing the offense at hand, the organization violated an injunction or other judicial 
order. Points are also added if the offense in question is similar to a prior offense for 
which the organization is already on probation, and if the commission of the current 
offense violated the probation order. This factor can add up to two points to the 
culpability score.  
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
4. Obstruction of justice. Finally, points are added to the organization’s culpability score if that 
organization interfered in any way with the investigation, prosecution, or sentencing of 
the offense in question. This does not always require an affirmative act by the 
organization. For instance, if the organization knew of an attempt by some party to 
obstruct an investigation, prosecution, or sentencing, and did nothing to prevent it, then 
the organization may be found to have obstructed justice. Simply stated, if the 
organization “turns a blind eye” to any form of obstruction, it faces the possibility of 
having its fine substantially increased under the Guidelines. This factor can add up to 
three points.  
 
FINE REDUCERS 
The Guidelines provide for an organization’s fine to be increased if it acts “badly,” but also 
provides for the reduction of fines if the company is “good.” The Guidelines set forth two 
mitigating factors which will reduce an organization’s criminal fines:  
1. Self-reporting: An organization’s culpability score will be reduced if, within a reasonable 
amount of time after learning of the offense, the organization reports the offense to 
authorities and then cooperates in the investigation and accepts responsibility for its 
wrongdoing. There are three elements to the self-reporting mitigation credit: (1) reporting 
within a reasonable time, (2) cooperating in the investigation, and (3) accepting 
responsibility for the wrongdoing. The organization earns the most points (five) if it 
complies with all three elements. However, it can receive a smaller credit (two) even if it 
does not report the offense in a timely manner, as long as it cooperates in the investigation 
and admits its own wrongdoing. Even if the organization fails to cooperate, it can 
nevertheless receive some credit (one) for accepting responsibility. This usually means 
pleading guilty to the offense prior to trial.  
2. An effective program to prevent and detect violations of the law: The implementation of an 
effective compliance program is the only way an organization can mitigate potential fines 
before violations actually occur. It can knock up to three points (out of a possible ten) 
off of an organization’s culpability score. The elements of an effective compliance 
program under the Guidelines are discussed below.  
 
Every organization begins with a culpability score of 5 under the Guidelines. Each aggravating 
factor raises the culpability score, and each mitigating factor diminishes it. After all the factors 
have been considered, a final score is determined. Each score corresponds to a range of 
multipliers that determine how much the fine should be increased or decreased. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Organizational Crime 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.521  
TABLE OF MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM MULTIPLIERS FROM THE GUIDELINES 
The organization’s fine is multiplied by the minimum and maximum multipliers for its 
culpability score to determine the possible range of fines. 
 
Culpability  
Score  
10 or more 
9 
8 
7 
6 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 or less 
Multiplier 
Minimum  
2.00 
1.80 
1.60 
1.40 
1.20 
1.00 
.80 
.60 
.40 
.20 
.05
 Maximum 
Multiplier  
4.00 
3.60 
3.20 
2.80 
2.40 
2.00 
1.60 
1.20 
.80 
.40 
.20
  
Assuming an organization had been fined $1 00,000, its culpability score could have a 
tremendous impact. If the organization’s culpability score was zero as a result of self-reporting 
and having an effective compliance program in place, that organization’s fine range 
would be between $5,000 and $20,000. (Determined by multiplying $100,000 by .05 and .20, 
respectively.) On the other hand, if the presence of aggravating factors had left the 
organization with a culpability score of ten, its fine range would be $200,000 to $400,000. 
Thus, in the case of a $100,000 base fine, there is a potential swing of $395,000 in the fine 
the organization will have to pay.  
 



:


calcul the fine
under the guidelin an organ base fine is the highest of three number
the monetari loss suffer by the victim
the pecuniari gain receiv by the defend
an amount rang from 5000 to 7250000 0 as set forth in the offens level scale
individu guidelin which is a tabl of preset penalti base on the serious of
possibl offens
fine multipl
after the base fine is establish the next step in sentenc is to calcul the culpabl
multipli of the organ the calcul of thi multipli is a complic process
everi organ begin with a preset score of five on a scale of zero to ten the
organ score is then increas or decreas base on the presenc of aggrav or
mitig factor aggrav factor increas the score and thu increas the fine for the
organ while mitig factor decreas the score the guidelin note four
aggrav factor that can caus an organ score to increas
1 involv in or toler of crimin activ point will be ad if highlevel employe of
the organ particip in condon or were willfulli ignor of the offens
point mai also be ad if there wa pervas toler of the offens by highlevel
employe depend on the size of the organ thi can add from 1 to 5 point to
an organ culpabl score
2 prior histori if that organ ha previous been found crimin guilti of similar
act or if the organ ha been found guilti of a civil offens for similar act on at
least two occas point mai be ad to the culpabl score depend on how
long it ha been sinc the previou offens up to two point can be ad to the
organ culpabl score
3 violat of a prior court order point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if in
commit the offens at hand the organ violat an injunct or other judici
order point ar also ad if the offens in question is similar to a prior offens for
which the organ is alreadi on probat and if the commiss of the current
offens violat the probat order thi factor can add up to two point to the
culpabl score
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4520 2011 fraud examin manual
4 obstruct of justic final point ar ad to the organ culpabl score if that
organ interf in ani wai with the investig prosecut or sentenc of
the offens in question thi doe not alwai requir an affirm act by the
organ for instanc if the organ knew of an attempt by some parti to
obstruct an investig prosecut or sentenc and did noth to prevent it then
the organ mai be found to have obstruct justic simpli state if the
organ turn a blind ey to ani form of obstruct it face the possibl of
have it fine substanti increas under the guidelin thi factor can add up to
three point
fine reduc
the guidelin provid for an organ fine to be increas if it act badli but also
provid for the reduct of fine if the compani is good the guidelin set forth two
mitig factor which will reduc an organ crimin fine
1 selfreport an organ culpabl score will be reduc if within a reason
amount of time after learn of the offens the organ report the offens to
author and then cooper in the investig and accept respons for it
wrongdo there ar three element to the selfreport mitig credit 1 report
within a reason time 2 cooper in the investig and 3 accept
respons for the wrongdo the organ earn the most point five if it
compli with all three element howev it can receiv a smaller credit two even if it
doe not report the offens in a time manner as long as it cooper in the investig
and admit it own wrongdo even if the organ fail to cooper it can
nevertheless receiv some credit on for accept respons thi usual mean
plead guilti to the offens prior to trial
2 an effect program to prevent and detect violat of the law the implement of an
effect complianc program is the onli wai an organ can mitig potenti fine
befor violat actual occur it can knock up to three point out of a possibl ten
off of an organ culpabl score the element of an effect complianc
program under the guidelin ar discuss below
everi organ begin with a culpabl score of 5 under the guidelin each aggrav
factor rais the culpabl score and each mitig factor diminish it after all the factor
have been consid a final score is determin each score correspond to a rang of
multipli that determin how much the fine should be increas or decreas
fraud prevent and deterr organiz crime
2011 fraud examin manual 4521
tabl of minimum and maximum multipli from the guidelin
the organ fine is multipli by the minimum and maximum multipli for it
culpabl score to determin the possibl rang of fine
culpabl
score
10 or more
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0 or less
multipli
minimum
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
05
maximum
multipli
400
360
320
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
20
assum an organ had been fine 1 00000 it culpabl score could have a
tremend impact if the organ culpabl score wa zero as a result of selfreport
and have an effect complianc program in place that organ fine rang
would be between 5000 and 20000 determin by multipli 100000 by 05 and 20
respect on the other hand if the presenc of aggrav factor had left the
organ with a culpabl score of ten it fine rang would be 200000 to 400000
thu in the case of a 100000 base fine there is a potenti swing of 395000 in the fine
the organ will have to pai
