2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/ORGANIZATIONAL CRIME/Corporate Sentencing Guidelines/Departures


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Organizational Crime


:


Departures 
Courts are permitted to impose fines outside the range prescribed by the Guidelines if there 
are special aggravating or mitigating circumstances in the case that would make a fine within 
the range inappropriate. Sentences that fall outside the guideline range are known as 
departures. The Guidelines describe certain factors that would justify departures from the 
ordinary fine range, although the lists are not exhaustive.  
 
UPWARD DEPARTURES 
When a court imposes a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provided by the 
Guidelines, this is known as an upward departure. The Guidelines list the following as 
factors that could justify an upward departure: 
Organizational Crime  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• The offense involved a foreseeable risk of death or bodily injury. 
• The offense constituted a threat to national security. 
• The offense presented a threat to the environment. 
• The offense presented a risk to the integrity or continued existence of a market. 
• The offense involved official corruption. 
• The organization’s culpability score was reduced  because it had an effective compliance 
program, but the program was only implemented because of a court order or 
administrative order. In cases such as this, the court can impose an upward departure to 
offset all or part of the reduction. 
• The organization’s culpability score is greater than ten. 
 
DOWNWARD DEPARTURES 
The Guidelines list the following factors that could justify a downward departure:  
• Substantial assistance to the authorities in the investigation or prosecution of another 
organization or individual.  
• The organization is a public entity. 
• Members or beneficiaries (other than share holders) of the organization are direct victims 
of the offense. A downward departure in these cases may be warranted because a fine 
might increase the burden on the victims. 
• The organization has agreed to pay remedial costs that greatly exceed the organization’s 
gain from the offense. 
• The organization has an exceptionally low culpability score because: there was no 
involvement by anyone with substantial authority in the organization; there was an 
effective compliance program in place; and the base fine was determined by some means 
other than the organization’s gain from the offense. 
 



:


departur
court ar permit to impos fine outsid the rang prescrib by the guidelin if there
ar special aggrav or mitig circumst in the case that would make a fine within
the rang inappropri sentenc that fall outsid the guidelin rang ar known as
departur the guidelin describ certain factor that would justifi departur from the
ordinari fine rang although the list ar not exhaust
upward departur
when a court impos a fine that is greater than the maximum fine provid by the
guidelin thi is known as an upward departur the guidelin list the follow as
factor that could justifi an upward departur
organiz crime fraud prevent and deterr
4522 2011 fraud examin manual
the offens involv a forese risk of death or bodili injuri
the offens constitut a threat to nation secur
the offens present a threat to the environ
the offens present a risk to the integr or continu exist of a market
the offens involv offici corrupt
the organ culpabl score wa reduc becaus it had an effect complianc
program but the program wa onli implement becaus of a court order or
administr order in case such as thi the court can impos an upward departur to
offset all or part of the reduct
the organ culpabl score is greater than ten
downward departur
the guidelin list the follow factor that could justifi a downward departur
substanti assist to the author in the investig or prosecut of anoth
organ or individu
the organ is a public entiti
member or beneficiari other than share holder of the organ ar direct victim
of the offens a downward departur in these case mai be warrant becaus a fine
might increas the burden on the victim
the organ ha agre to pai remedi cost that greatli exce the organ
gain from the offens
the organ ha an exception low culpabl score becaus there wa no
involv by anyon with substanti author in the organ there wa an
effect complianc program in place and the base fine wa determin by some mean
other than the organ gain from the offens
