2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM 
 
Basic Concepts of the Law 
The material below introduces the fraud examiner to the basic concepts of the law. Legal 
issues related to fraud are often complex, and their interpretation might require the assistance 
of an experienced attorney. The Certified Fraud Examiner always should consult with counsel 
if legal questions arise during a fraud examination.  
 
Constitutional Law 
The U.S. Constitution and its accompanying amendments are the foundation of our legal 
system. The Constitution defines and limits the powers of the various branches of the 
government and guarantees basic rights to all citizens — rights such as equal protection under 
the law, due process, and the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. 
 
The Constitution is the supreme law of the land. The legislature may not properly pass, the 
executive branch enforce, nor the judiciary uphold, any law or action that violates its 
provisions. 
 
Constitutional rights that are of particular importance to Certified Fraud Examiners include 
those found in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. The Fourth Amendment 
guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. This 
means that the government may not seize any records in a criminal case unless reasonable 
grounds exist — “probable cause” — to believe that the records would constitute evidence of a 
crime, and that a suspect may not be arrested unless there is probable cause to believe that he 
committed an offense. The Fifth Amendment guarantees subjects of a criminal investigation 
the right to refuse to answer questions or to provide certain personal information that might 
be incriminating. The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right 
to counsel, the right to confront (cross-examine) the witnesses against them, and the right to 
a speedy trial.  
 
Substantive and Procedural Law 
Additionally, in the United States, there are two main categories of law: substantive law and 
procedural law. Substantive law is comprised of the basic laws of rights and duties (contract 
law, tort law, criminal law, etc.) as opposed to procedural law, which involves rules governing 
pleadings, evidence, jurisdiction, and so on. If someone says an act is “against the law,” he 
means substantive law, which includes statutes and ordinances at every level; common law, or 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.102  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
case law, from all the various courts; and state and federal constitutions.  
 
Procedural law sets out the rules of the legal system, including the procedures to be followed in 
hearing a grievance. This means deadlines, filing requirements, steps to follow in bringing a 
claim, rules of evidence, and so on. Substantive law sets the terms of any dispute; procedural 
law dictates how a legal dispute is handled. 
 
In federal courts, procedures are governed by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.  
 
There are special procedural laws governing appeals courts and evidence. The Federal Rules of 
Appellate Procedure are collected in the U.S. Code (following Title 28); individual courts of 
appeal may supplement the general rules with their own publications. These are listed under 
the name of the court (e.g., Appeals to the Fifth Circuit Manual). 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence cover what counts as evidence, the conditions of its admissibility 
in court, and the methods which authorities must use in acquiring and processing evidence.  
 
Each state (and some counties) publishes its own procedural rules. Most states follow the 
general outline of the federal rules, but procedural rules can be vastly different. If you have a 
specific question about a procedural or evidentiary rule at the state or county level, consult a 
copy of the rules for the particular jurisdiction or your attorney. 
 
Statutory and Common Law 
There are two sources of substantive law: statutory law and common law. Statutory law  
includes statutes passed by the federal or state legislatures (and regulations passed by 
administrative bodies). The common law consists of the usages and customs of a society as 
interpreted by the judiciary; it often is referred to as “judge-made” law. Criminal law is 
statutory, while civil actions can be based on either statutory or common law. 
 
Although criminal fraud statutes outlaw certain behavior, they often contain provisions that 
do not have any obvious connection to basic principles of right and wrong. For example, a 
violation of the federal mail fraud statute can be charged only if the wrongdoers placed or 
received a letter in the U.S. mail, regardless of how serious the underlying fraud might be. 
Similarly, defendants are liable under the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations 
(RICO) statute only if they engage “in a pattern of racketeering activity” through “an 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.103 
enterprise” that is engaged in interstate commerce, while violations of the federal money 
laundering statute occur only if the defendants have engaged in “specified unlawful activity” 
and have thereafter conducted a “prohibited financial transaction.” Certified Fraud 
Examiners preparing criminal cases must be familiar with the specific technical elements of 
the applicable statutes, and they must carefully review the evidence to make certain that all 
essential elements of proof are met. 
 
In contrast to criminal fraud statutes, civil cases brought under the common law usually 
contain fewer technical elements and incorporate traditional principles of fairness and 
morality. For example, a plaintiff may file a common law claim for fraud by alleging simply 
that the defendant misrepresented important facts upon which the plaintiff relied, resulting in 
loss to the plaintiff.  
 
The common law is based not on statutes passed by the legislatures, but upon “precedent” 
established by previously decided cases stretching back hundreds of years in U.S. and English 
courts. That is, decisions that establish particular legal principles are called precedent, and in a 
common law system, the decision in an individual case binds judges in later cases of a similar 
nature, until or unless the rule of law established is overturned by a higher court or the 
legislature. The body of judicial opinions is sometimes referred to as case law. There are an 
increasing number of civil statutes in the fraud area, including the federal Civil RICO and 
Civil False Claims statutes. 
 
 
The Court System 
Civil and criminal cases will be filed in either state or federal court. The power to hear a case 
and render a judgment is strictly limited to a court’s jurisdiction, which is defined both by 
geographic boundaries and by the specific powers granted to it by the legislature. This reflects 
the basic constitutional principle of separation of powers among the three branches of 
government: the legislature, elected popularly, enacts the laws; the executive (e.g., state or 
federal prosecutors) enforces them (with a great deal of discretion); and the judiciary 
interprets and applies them.  
 
Jurisdiction and Venue 
Courts are defined by their jurisdiction and venue. To hear and decide a case, a court must 
have jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter involved and proper venue.  
 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.104  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and decide a given case; it refers to the subject 
matter or persons over which lawful authority may be exercised by a court. A probate court, 
for instance, only has jurisdiction to hear cases related to wills and other probate matters. 
Lower trial courts (such as a justice of the peace court) may only have jurisdiction to hear 
matters under a certain dollar amount, e.g., cases with less than $5,000 in controversy.  
 
Venue refers to the geographical area covered by the court; it is the physical location where 
the lawsuit is to be tried. A trial court in Dallas County, Texas, for example, can only hear 
cases that have some connection with either parties or events that occurred in that county. 
Venue is technically an element of the court’s jurisdiction. This issue may be important in 
deciding where to file charges or claims.  
 
Determining the proper court requires a three-part test. (1) Does the court hear cases of the 
type in question? Claiming $500,000 in damages, the plaintiff needs a court that hears civil 
complaints of that magnitude. (2) Does the court have the authority to exercise its power 
over a particular defendant or piece of property? You can sue a Nebraska company in a 
Nebraska state court because courts have personal jurisdiction over all businesses that do 
business in that state. (3) Does the claim arise within the court’s venue? If the claim for 
damages is against the Missouri office of a company headquartered in Nebraska, determining 
the proper venue is essential. If you file the claim in North Dakota, the court will have no 
jurisdiction to hear the case.  
 
State and Federal Court Systems  
The U.S. justice system uses separate but interlocking organizations of courts. State courts 
can decide nearly every type of case, limited only by the U.S. Constitution, their own state 
constitutions, and state law. Citizens will have most of their legal dealings with the state and 
local courts situated throughout the country. Most fraud cases will be tried at this level. 
Probate cases, marital disputes, and real estate suits are heard by state courts. 
 
Federal courts are principally located in larger cities and hold limited jurisdictions. They hear 
only those cases over which the Constitution or federal law gives them authority. Federal 
courts have jurisdiction in only two kinds of cases: (1) federal question cases, and (2) diversity 
jurisdiction cases.  
 
A court has federal question jurisdiction over cases based on (arising under) any federal law.  
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.105 
In diversity cases, a federal court can hear a state action that involves more than $75,000 and 
is between parties who are citizens of different states. Diversity of citizenship must be 
complete—all of the plaintiffs must be citize ns of a different state(s) from all of the 
defendants. For purposes of determining diversity jurisdiction, a party is a citizen of the state 
where he is domiciled (i.e., where he is present and intends to make his permanent home). A 
corporation is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorporated and the state in which it 
has its principal place of business. 
 
State Courts 
Most states use a three- or four-tier system. 
• Lower courts try misdemeanors and preliminaries for felony cases, as well as civil disputes 
below a certain dollar amount (e.g., $10,000 or less).  
• Higher-level trial courts (sometimes called Superior courts) try felony cases and civil disputes 
above a certain amount (e.g., $10,000 or more). 
• Appellate courts review trial court decisions. 
• Superior appellate courts, or Supreme courts, review lower appellate court decisions. 
 
Many states have different systems — at the trial court and appellate court levels — for trying 
civil and criminal cases. Local and state criminal courts might have limited jurisdiction; for 
example, some courts only handle traffic violations and minor offenses. Some jurisdictions 
include a small-claims civil court to hear cases involving no more than $2,000 to $3,000. 
 
Federal Courts 
The federal system uses a three-tier model. 
• U.S. District Courts conduct trials on criminal charges and civil complaints under federal 
law. 
• Courts of Appeal, including the Court of Military Appeals, reviews trial court decisions. 
• The U.S. Supreme Court  reviews lower court decisions. It is sometimes called the court of 
last resort. 
 
Each federal district has a chief prosecutor, a political appointee, known as the United States 
Attorney, and a staff of prosecutors, known as Assistant United States Attorneys. Almost all cases 
are prosecuted by assistants. Criminal cases at the state and local level are prosecuted by the 
District Attorney’s office or the Attorney General’s office. 
 
The federal system also includes specialized courts. These are:  
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.106  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Bankruptcy Court — handles matters involving the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.  
• Tax Court — deals with tax law violations.  
• Court of Federal Claims — jurisdiction over complaints filed against the federal government 
and its agencies.  
• Court of Veterans Appeals — hears veterans’ benefits cases. 
• Court of International Trade — covers business cases of international jurisdiction. 

*Although federal administration agencies are not part of the federal judiciary, they are included here because
appeals from their decisions go to the federal courts.
**Appeals from the highest state court also may be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court.
  
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.107 

FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
 
 U.S. SUPREME COURT **
 9 Justices 

 U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 
 Federal Circuit

 U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 
 12 Circuits
 (Three-judge panels, not the entire 
 circuit court, hear almost all cases.) 
 
 U.S. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES
 (In a few cases,
 appeals go to a U.S.
 District Court,
 instead of the circuit
 courts.)
 
 U.S. DISTRICT COURTS
 50 States
 Washington, D.C.
 Puerto Rico,
 Virgin Islands, The
 Canal Zone,
 Guam
 
 US TAX COURT 
 (Reviews IRS 
 decisions.) 

 
 U.S. COURT OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
 (Created in 1980, 
 formerly the U.S. 
 Customs Court.)

 U.S. CLAIMS COURTS
 and some special
 agencies (E.g., Board of
 Contract Appeals, Patent
 and Trademark Office,
 and Merit Systems
 Protection Board)

 U.S. BANKRUPTCY COURTS
 U.S. MAGISTRATES

(One court created in 1982, by 
a congressional statute;  
formed by merging the Court
of Claims and the Court of 
Custom and Patent Appeals;  
judges sit in panels of three on 
cases involving customs, 
copyright, trademarks, and 
patents.)
 
2.108  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A TYPICAL STATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
 
 HIGHEST–LEVEL APPELLATE COURT  
 (A state’s highest court; 
 usually called the State Supreme 
 Court; sometimes called the Court of 
 Appeals of the Supreme Judicial 
 Court) 
 Typically, 5 to 9 judges 
 
 
 
 
 INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE OR 
 REVIEWING COURTS  
 (Found in 41 of the 50 states) 
 Generally, 3 Judges per Panel 
 
 
 
 
 TRIAL COURTS 
 General Jurisdiction
  (Called, for example, Circuit Courts 
 or Superior Courts) 
 LAW                     EQUITY 
 
 
 
 LOWER TRIAL COURTS   (Usually presided over by judges, 
 although some states have justices of 
 the peace or magistrates) 
 Nonjury—Limited Jurisdiction   
 
 (In some states, 
 handled by several 
 types of courts; in 
 others, by the 
 same trial court) 
 Traffic 
 Courts
  
 Housing 
 (Rent) 
 
 Small 
 Claims 
 Courts 
 
 Probate 
 (Orphan’s) 
 Courts 
 
 County or 
 Municipal 
 Courts 
 
 Juvenile 
 Courts 
 
 Domestic 
 Relations 
 Courts 
 Criminal 
 Courts 
 (Maximum amounts vary, 
 depending on the state, from 
 $200 to about $5,000) 
 (Serious criminal cases tend 
 to be handled by the general 
 jurisdiction trial courts) 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.109 
In general, the judge and jury serve important roles during a trial. In the trial setting, the jury 
finds the facts, and the judge applies the law, rules on evidence, and generally moderates the 
proceeding to ensure a fair trial. If, however, a jury is waived by the defendant and 
government, the judge decides both the facts and the law.  
 
Evidence in a criminal or civil case is presented based on burdens of proof. In general terms, 
the burden of proof is the responsibility of a party to prove each element necessary to 
establish the existence of a cause of action. In a criminal case, the prosecution must prove its 
case beyond a reasonable doubt; in a civil case, the burden of proof usually is a 
preponderance of the evidence — a lower standard. 
 
After the trial court enters its decision, a party may file an appeal with a higher court. Appeals 
involve questions of law or questions involving both law and fact. Most questions of law are 
decided by precedent, that is, prior court decisions of equal or higher authority that have 
considered similar cases. Obviously, however, disputes exist over what precedent should 
prevail, with both sides attempting to persuade the court to interpret existing law in a manner 
favorable to its client. 
 
The right to appeal differs in criminal and civil cases. Because of the Fifth Amendment’s 
double jeopardy provisions, which prohibits defendants from being tried twice for the same 
crime, only a convicted defendant in a criminal case can appeal a verdict. The government 
cannot appeal an acquittal on the merits. If a statute authorizes the prosecution to appeal, 
such an appeal is constitutional only if the appellate court can decide the appeal without 
subjecting the defendant to a second trial. The prosecution may appeal adverse pre-trial 
rulings on the admissibility of evidence and certain other matters that can terminate a 
prosecution temporarily (but do not result in a decision on the merits in favor of the 
defendant). Either party in a civil case may appeal a judgment. 
 
An appellate court will not reverse a conviction unless it finds error that affected the 
“substantial rights” of a party; “harmless error,” which supposedly does not affect the jury’s 
decision, is tolerated. Defendants are entitled to a fair trial—not a perfect one. If the appellate 
court reverses a conviction, it will usually order a new trial, but it may also direct dismissal of 
the case. 
 
Appeals from decisions of the U.S. District Courts are heard in the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the “Circuit,” which covers a particular geographic area. The United States is divided into 11 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.110  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
judicial circuits, plus the District of Columbia. The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest 
appellate court in the federal system and may hear certain appeals from state courts, 
particularly on constitutional grounds. 
 
In the federal system, an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court is accomplished by applying for a 
Writ of Certiorari. Relatively few appeals — “writs” — are granted. The Supreme Court usually 
hears only those cases that present an important question of constitutional law, or may be 
used to resolve a “split” or disagreement on a point of law among the circuits, or that have 
considerable significance to the judicial system beyond the interest of the litigants. If the 
Supreme Court “denies Cert.,” the lower court decision stands and the appeal process ends 
unless the defendant can find some collateral ground, such as alleged constitutional errors in 
state court proceedings, to attack the judgment. As death penalty challenges illustrate, appeals 
on such points, often brought by people in custody under “Habeas Corpus” proceedings, can 
sometimes consume a decade or more. 
 
The various state and federal courts operate in separate spheres, confined by their own 
jurisdictional limitations. State courts are “inferior” to federal courts only in the sense that 
they are subject to Constitutional and “federal question” limitations. Without these factors, a 
federal court will not interfere in state court proceedings. A single act might violate both state 
and federal law, and actions may be brought in separate courts for both violations without 
violating the double jeopardy protection. However, one jurisdiction will usually abstain if the 
other has already prosecuted. 
 
 
Civil and Criminal Actions for Fraud 
This section seeks to provide an overview of the law as it relates to fraud.  
 
Criminal Versus Civil Actions for Fraud 
Fraud may be prosecuted criminally, civilly, or both, in sequence or simultaneously, but there 
are a number of differences between criminal and civil actions with which the Certified Fraud 
Examiner should be familiar. The following is a brief description of some of the differences 
between civil and criminal actions. More information about each action is contained in the 
chapters on Criminal Prosecutions and the Civil Justice System. 
 
One key difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns who files the suit. 
Criminal actions for fraud are brought by the government acting through the prosecutor’s 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.111 
office. The prosecutor has almost unbridled discretion in such matters as whether to bring a 
criminal case, what charges to file, who to charge, and whether to try the case or negotiate a 
plea bargain. Conversely, civil actions may be brought by private individuals or organizations, 
usually without the involvement or permission of the government or court. However, 
corporate civil liability may be enforced by both private individuals as well as government 
agencies (e.g., the SEC). Moreover, a civil action usually involves a dispute over something 
(such as the terms of a contract) or a claim that one part has violated a legal duty owed to it 
by the other party, which can be generally referred to as tort actions. 
 
Another key distinction concerns who investigates the cases. Criminal cases are investigated 
by law enforcement agencies, at times with the assistance of the prosecutor’s office and the 
grand jury. The grand jury  is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas —
 legal orders to produce documents, witnesses, or other things — for testimony and documents 
to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. Law enforcement agencies and the 
prosecution can therefore subpoena evidence before charges are filed to determine whether 
an offense has occurred. In civil actions brought by private parties, however, there generally is 
no opportunity to compel the production of testimony or other evidence until a complaint is 
filed. 
 
Moreover, criminal investigations and prosecutions for fraud are subject to constitutional 
limitations, such as those in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments, and other procedural 
rules to protect the rights of the defendant, including the requirement to give Miranda 
warnings. In general, these requirements have limited applicability to civil actions. Violations 
of constitutional rights in a criminal case can result in the “suppression,” or exclusion, of any 
evidence or statement obtained by such means, or in some instances, in dismissal of the 
indictment. 
 
Also, the burden of proof differs. The burden of proof in a criminal case is always beyond a 
reasonable doubt. In civil cases, however, the burden of proof is lower, usually a preponderance of 
the evidence.  
 
Another difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns the outcomes of 
each type of case. Criminal cases are punished by outcomes such as imprisonment, fine, order 
of restitution, probation, and community service.  
 
Civil cases, if successful, result in an award of civil remedies. In general, remedy is a term used 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.112  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to refer to any process, procedure, or consequence of a legal wrong by which a victim of 
misconduct can be redressed for his loss.  
 
Civil remedies generally are of three principal types: monetary (damages), declaratory, and 
equitable. Monetary (damages) remedies are remedies for the victim’s recovery of money 
damages for the injury. Declaratory remedies  are remedies in which the court states or declares 
the rights of the parties. For example, when a court interprets a will or a contract or when a 
court decides who owns personal property, its decisions are declaratory in nature. Equitable 
remedies are remedies used when the legal remedy by itself would be inadequate compensation 
for the wronged suffered. One of the primary equitable remedies is the injunction, which is a 
court order by which a party is required to perform, or is restrained from performing, a 
specific act. 
 
Parallel Proceedings 
Parallel proceedings are simultaneous criminal and civil actions against the same defendant that 
are based upon a single set of facts. The general rule is that criminal and civil actions for fraud 
may proceed simultaneously even though such “parallel proceedings” present a dilemma for 
the defendant. For example, a defendant lawfully may assert his Fifth Amendment right 
against self-incrimination to avoid answering questions or producing certain documents in the 
criminal investigation. He may not do so in the corresponding civil case, however, without 
suffering the possibility of sanctions that can include the dismissal of affirmative defenses or 
the striking of testimony. For example, if a defendant takes the stand in a civil case and 
testifies on his own behalf, he cannot later invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to answer 
questions concerning the same subject matter on cross-examination. If he does, the judge 
may order that his testimony on direct examination be stricken from the record. 
 
Generally, courts have not been sympathetic to the defendant’s dilemma and have allowed 
civil discovery to proceed even though criminal charges are pending. In some instances, the 
court or the parties may seal the civil record by agreement. In rare cases, the court may order 
that the civil case be stayed pending resolution of the criminal case. Normally, however, the 
court will allow the cases to proceed simultaneously despite the substantial prejudice to the 
defendant. In parallel civil and criminal cases in which the government is a party, the criminal 
process, including the use of grand jury subpoenas, may not be used to obtain evidence solely 
for a civil case. 
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.113 
Parallel Investigations 
Parallel investigations  are simultaneous independent investigations conducted by civil regulatory 
agencies and federal prosecutors that involve substantially the same issues and parties. U.S. v. 
Stringer, 521 F.3d 1189 (9th Cir. 2008) recently addressed the applicable boundaries of lawful 
government conduct while conducting parallel investigations. Although parallel investigations 
are generally permissible, the government may not initiate a civil action solely to obtain 
evidence for its criminal prosecution, and it may not affirmatively mislead defendants to 
conceal the existence of a criminal investigation. Stringer reaffirmed the broad discretion that 
courts afford civil regulatory agencies and federal prosecutors in pursuing parallel 
investigations, ruling that so long as targets are generally aware of the possibility of 
prosecution, the government has no obligation to inform them about a criminal investigation. 
Furthermore, where a regulatory agency initiates a legitimate civil investigation before a 
criminal investigation, federal prosecutors may use and guide the civil investigation to 
facilitate criminal prosecution. Thus, Stringer underscores the possibility that a federal criminal 
investigation may be skulking behind every ongoing civil investigation.  
 
Jurisdiction 
Criminal and civil actions for fraud may be brought in federal or state court. Federal courts 
have jurisdiction over federal criminal or civil statutes, certain common law claims involving 
parties who are residents of different states, and controversies in which $75,000 or more is at 
issue. State courts have jurisdiction over state statutes and most common law civil claims.  
 
Corporate Civil and Criminal Liability 
At the federal level and in many states corporate civil and criminal liability is vicarious liability 
(the absolute liability of one party for the misconduct of another party) that is imposed under 
the doctrine of respondeat superior. Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, a corporation is 
liable for the acts of their employees if those acts occur within the scope of employment and 
with some intent to benefit the corporation.  
 
The doctrine of respondeat superior is very broad and will in fact impose liability on a 
corporation even if those in management had no knowledge or participation in the underlying 
criminal events. Moreover, the acts of any em ployee, from the lowest clerk to the CEO, can 
impute liability upon a corporation, and a corporation may be liable for the acts of its 
employees that violate security laws, banking laws, anti-bribery laws, and many others. 
 
In addition, there is no due diligence defense to a federal criminal charge, meaning that it 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.114  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not matter that a corporation had reasonable and effective policies in place to prevent an 
employee from committing the illegal act. However, some states allow management’s due 
diligence as a good-faith affirmative defense to corporate criminal liability.  
 
Corporate Mens Rea 
When a corporation is being charged with a crime that requires proof of a mental state, the 
moving party must only show that the agent who committed the wrongdoing had the 
required state of mind. Thus, the required mental state is attributable to the corporation. For 
example, to impose liability against a corporation for fraud, the moving party must prove that 
an agent of the corporation made the alleged false statements with specific intent to defraud. 
 
Liability of a Corporation’s Directors and Officers 
The current legal environment imposes civil and criminal liabilities on a corporation’s directors 
and officers. Generally, director and officer liability stems from the certain duties imposed by 
law to their corporation. The duties, which are discussed in more detail below, are as follows: 
• Duty of loyalty. Directors and officers must act solely in the best interest of the 
employer/principal, free of any self-dealing, conflicts of interest, or other abuse of the 
principal for personal advantage. 
• Duty of care. Directors and officers must conduct business affairs prudently with the skill 
and attention normally exercised by people in similar positions. 
• Statutory duties. Numerous state and federal laws regulate directors’ and officers’ actions 
and decisions regarding the management of their companies, including: securities laws, 
antitrust laws, racketeering laws, tax laws, intellectual property and patent laws, and state 
corporation laws.  
 
Even though directors and officers may be pursued in criminal proceedings, criminal law 
often imposes mens rea (i.e., intent) requirements that generally make it more difficult to 
impose criminal liability on directors and officers.  
 
 
 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.201 



:


overview of the unit state legal system
basic concept of the law
the materi below introduc the fraud examin to the basic concept of the law legal
issu relat to fraud ar often complex and their interpret might requir the assist
of an experienc attornei the certifi fraud examin alwai should consult with counsel
if legal question aris dure a fraud examin
constitut law
the us constitut and it accompani amend ar the foundat of our legal
system the constitut defin and limit the power of the variou branch of the
govern and guarante basic right to all citizen right such as equal protect under
the law due process and the right to be free from unreason search and seizur
the constitut is the suprem law of the land the legislatur mai not properli pass the
execut branch enforc nor the judiciari uphold ani law or action that violat it
provis
constitut right that ar of particular import to certifi fraud examin includ
those found in the fourth fifth and sixth amend the fourth amend
guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason search and seizur thi
mean that the govern mai not seiz ani record in a crimin case unless reason
ground exist probabl caus to believ that the record would constitut evid of a
crime and that a suspect mai not be arrest unless there is probabl caus to believ that he
commit an offens the fifth amend guarante subject of a crimin investig
the right to refus to answer question or to provid certain person inform that might
be incrimin the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right
to counsel the right to confront crossexamin the wit against them and the right to
a speedi trial
substant and procedur law
addition in the unit state there ar two main categori of law substant law and
procedur law substant law is compris of the basic law of right and duti contract
law tort law crimin law etc as oppos to procedur law which involv rule govern
plead evid jurisdict and so on if someon sai an act is against the law he
mean substant law which includ statut and ordin at everi level common law or
overview of the unit state legal system law
2102 2011 fraud examin manual
case law from all the variou court and state and feder constitut
procedur law set out the rule of the legal system includ the procedur to be follow in
hear a grievanc thi mean deadlin file requir step to follow in bring a
claim rule of evid and so on substant law set the term of ani disput procedur
law dictat how a legal disput is handl
in feder court procedur ar govern by the feder rule of civil procedur and the
feder rule of crimin procedur
there ar special procedur law govern appeal court and evid the feder rule of
appel procedur ar collect in the us code follow titl 28 individu court of
appeal mai supplement the gener rule with their own public these ar list under
the name of the court eg appeal to the fifth circuit manual
the feder rule of evid cover what count as evid the condit of it admiss
in court and the method which author must us in acquir and process evid
each state and some counti publish it own procedur rule most state follow the
gener outlin of the feder rule but procedur rule can be vastli differ if you have a
specif question about a procedur or evidentiari rule at the state or counti level consult a
copi of the rule for the particular jurisdict or your attornei
statutori and common law
there ar two sourc of substant law statutori law and common law statutori law
includ statut pass by the feder or state legislatur and regul pass by
administr bodi the common law consist of the usag and custom of a societi as
interpret by the judiciari it often is refer to as judgemad law crimin law is
statutori while civil action can be base on either statutori or common law
although crimin fraud statut outlaw certain behavior thei often contain provis that
do not have ani obviou connect to basic principl of right and wrong for exampl a
violat of the feder mail fraud statut can be charg onli if the wrongdoer place or
receiv a letter in the us mail regardless of how seriou the underli fraud might be
similarli defend ar liabl under the racket influenc and corrupt organ
rico statut onli if thei engag in a pattern of racket activ through an
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2103
enterpris that is engag in interst commerc while violat of the feder monei
launder statut occur onli if the defend have engag in specifi unlaw activ
and have thereaft conduct a prohibit financi transact certifi fraud
examin prepar crimin case must be familiar with the specif technic element of
the applic statut and thei must carefulli review the evid to make certain that all
essenti element of proof ar met
in contrast to crimin fraud statut civil case brought under the common law usual
contain fewer technic element and incorpor tradit principl of fair and
moral for exampl a plaintiff mai file a common law claim for fraud by alleg simpli
that the defend misrepres import fact upon which the plaintiff reli result in
loss to the plaintiff
the common law is base not on statut pass by the legislatur but upon preced
establish by previous decid case stretch back hundr of year in us and english
court that is decis that establish particular legal principl ar call preced and in a
common law system the decis in an individu case bind judg in later case of a similar
natur until or unless the rule of law establish is overturn by a higher court or the
legislatur the bodi of judici opinion is sometim refer to as case law there ar an
increas number of civil statut in the fraud area includ the feder civil rico and
civil fals claim statut
the court system
civil and crimin case will be file in either state or feder court the power to hear a case
and render a judgment is strictli limit to a court jurisdict which is defin both by
geograph boundari and by the specif power grant to it by the legislatur thi reflect
the basic constitut principl of separ of power among the three branch of
govern the legislatur elect popularli enact the law the execut eg state or
feder prosecutor enforc them with a great deal of discret and the judiciari
interpret and appli them
jurisdict and venu
court ar defin by their jurisdict and venu to hear and decid a case a court must
have jurisdict over the parti and subject matter involv and proper venu
overview of the unit state legal system law
2104 2011 fraud examin manual
jurisdict is the power of a court to hear and decid a given case it refer to the subject
matter or person over which law author mai be exercis by a court a probat court
for instanc onli ha jurisdict to hear case relat to will and other probat matter
lower trial court such as a justic of the peac court mai onli have jurisdict to hear
matter under a certain dollar amount eg case with less than 5000 in controversi
venu refer to the geograph area cover by the court it is the physic locat where
the lawsuit is to be tri a trial court in dalla counti texa for exampl can onli hear
case that have some connect with either parti or event that occur in that counti
venu is technic an element of the court jurisdict thi issu mai be import in
decid where to file charg or claim
determin the proper court requir a threepart test 1 doe the court hear case of the
type in question claim 500000 in damag the plaintiff need a court that hear civil
complaint of that magnitud 2 doe the court have the author to exercis it power
over a particular defend or piec of properti you can sue a nebraska compani in a
nebraska state court becaus court have person jurisdict over all busi that do
busi in that state 3 doe the claim aris within the court venu if the claim for
damag is against the missouri offic of a compani headquart in nebraska determin
the proper venu is essenti if you file the claim in north dakota the court will have no
jurisdict to hear the case
state and feder court system
the us justic system us separ but interlock organ of court state court
can decid nearli everi type of case limit onli by the us constitut their own state
constitut and state law citizen will have most of their legal deal with the state and
local court situat throughout the countri most fraud case will be tri at thi level
probat case marit disput and real estat suit ar heard by state court
feder court ar princip locat in larger citi and hold limit jurisdict thei hear
onli those case over which the constitut or feder law give them author feder
court have jurisdict in onli two kind of case 1 feder question case and 2 divers
jurisdict case
a court ha feder question jurisdict over case base on aris under ani feder law
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2105
in divers case a feder court can hear a state action that involv more than 75000 and
is between parti who ar citizen of differ state divers of citizenship must be
completeal of the plaintiff must be citiz ns of a differ state from all of the
defend for purpos of determin divers jurisdict a parti is a citizen of the state
where he is domicil ie where he is present and intend to make hi perman home a
corpor is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorpor and the state in which it
ha it princip place of busi
state court
most state us a three or fourtier system
lower court try misdemeanor and preliminari for feloni case as well as civil disput
below a certain dollar amount eg 10000 or less
higherlevel trial court sometim call superior court try feloni case and civil disput
abov a certain amount eg 10000 or more
appel court review trial court decis
superior appel court or suprem court review lower appel court decis
mani state have differ system at the trial court and appel court level for try
civil and crimin case local and state crimin court might have limit jurisdict for
exampl some court onli handl traffic violat and minor offens some jurisdict
includ a smallclaim civil court to hear case involv no more than 2000 to 3000
feder court
the feder system us a threetier model
us district court conduct trial on crimin charg and civil complaint under feder
law
court of appeal includ the court of militari appeal review trial court decis
the us suprem court review lower court decis it is sometim call the court of
last resort
each feder district ha a chief prosecutor a polit appointe known as the unit state
attornei and a staff of prosecutor known as assist unit state attornei almost all case
ar prosecut by assist crimin case at the state and local level ar prosecut by the
district attornei offic or the attornei gener offic
the feder system also includ special court these ar
overview of the unit state legal system law
2106 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci court handl matter involv the us bankruptci code
tax court deal with tax law violat
court of feder claim jurisdict over complaint file against the feder govern
and it agenc
court of veteran appeal hear veteran benefit case
court of intern trade cover busi case of intern jurisdict
although feder administr agenc ar not part of the feder judiciari thei ar includ here becaus
appeal from their decis go to the feder court
appeal from the highest state court also mai be heard by the us suprem court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2107
feder court system
overview of the unit state legal system law
us suprem court
9 justic
us court of appeal
feder circuit
us court of appeal
12 circuit
threejudg panel not the entir
circuit court hear almost all case
us administr agenc
in a few case
appeal go to a us
district court
instead of the circuit
court
us district court
50 state
washington dc
puerto rico
virgin island the
canal zone
guam
us tax court
review ir
decis
us court of intern trade
creat in 1980
formerli the us
custom court
us claim court
and some special
agenc eg board of
contract appeal patent
and trademark offic
and merit system
protect board
us bankruptci court
us magistr
on court creat in 1982 by
a congression statut
form by merg the court
of claim and the court of
custom and patent appeal
judg sit in panel of three on
case involv custom
copyright trademark and
patent
2108 2011 fraud examin manual
a typic state judici system
highestlevel appel court
a state highest court
usual call the state suprem
court sometim call the court of
appeal of the suprem judici
court
typic 5 to 9 judg
intermedi appel or
review court
found in 41 of the 50 state
gener 3 judg per panel
trial court
gener jurisdict
call for exampl circuit court
or superior court
law equiti
lower trial court usual presid over by judg
although some state have justic of
the peac or magistr
nonjurylimit jurisdict
in some state
handl by sever
type of court in
other by the
same trial court
traffic
court
hous
rent
small
claim
court
probat
orphan
court
counti or
municip
court
juvenil
court
domest
relat
court
crimin
court
maximum amount vari
depend on the state from
200 to about 5000
seriou crimin case tend
to be handl by the gener
jurisdict trial court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2109
in gener the judg and juri serv import role dure a trial in the trial set the juri
find the fact and the judg appli the law rule on evid and gener moder the
proceed to ensur a fair trial if howev a juri is waiv by the defend and
govern the judg decid both the fact and the law
evid in a crimin or civil case is present base on burden of proof in gener term
the burden of proof is the respons of a parti to prove each element necessari to
establish the exist of a caus of action in a crimin case the prosecut must prove it
case beyond a reason doubt in a civil case the burden of proof usual is a
preponder of the evid a lower standard
after the trial court enter it decis a parti mai file an appeal with a higher court appeal
involv question of law or question involv both law and fact most question of law ar
decid by preced that is prior court decis of equal or higher author that have
consid similar case obvious howev disput exist over what preced should
prevail with both side attempt to persuad the court to interpret exist law in a manner
favor to it client
the right to appeal differ in crimin and civil case becaus of the fifth amend
doubl jeopardi provis which prohibit defend from be tri twice for the same
crime onli a convict defend in a crimin case can appeal a verdict the govern
cannot appeal an acquitt on the merit if a statut author the prosecut to appeal
such an appeal is constitut onli if the appel court can decid the appeal without
subject the defend to a second trial the prosecut mai appeal advers pretrial
rule on the admiss of evid and certain other matter that can termin a
prosecut temporarili but do not result in a decis on the merit in favor of the
defend either parti in a civil case mai appeal a judgment
an appel court will not revers a convict unless it find error that affect the
substanti right of a parti harmless error which supposedli doe not affect the juri
decis is toler defend ar entitl to a fair trialnot a perfect on if the appel
court revers a convict it will usual order a new trial but it mai also direct dismiss of
the case
appeal from decis of the us district court ar heard in the us court of appeal for
the circuit which cover a particular geograph area the unit state is divid into 11
overview of the unit state legal system law
2110 2011 fraud examin manual
judici circuit plu the district of columbia the us suprem court is the highest
appel court in the feder system and mai hear certain appeal from state court
particularli on constitut ground
in the feder system an appeal to the us suprem court is accomplish by appli for a
writ of certiorari rel few appeal writ ar grant the suprem court usual
hear onli those case that present an import question of constitut law or mai be
us to resolv a split or disagr on a point of law among the circuit or that have
consider signific to the judici system beyond the interest of the litig if the
suprem court deni cert the lower court decis stand and the appeal process end
unless the defend can find some collater ground such as alleg constitut error in
state court proceed to attack the judgment as death penalti challeng illustr appeal
on such point often brought by peopl in custodi under habea corpu proceed can
sometim consum a decad or more
the variou state and feder court oper in separ sphere confin by their own
jurisdict limit state court ar inferior to feder court onli in the sens that
thei ar subject to constitut and feder question limit without these factor a
feder court will not interfer in state court proceed a singl act might violat both state
and feder law and action mai be brought in separ court for both violat without
violat the doubl jeopardi protect howev on jurisdict will usual abstain if the
other ha alreadi prosecut
civil and crimin action for fraud
thi section seek to provid an overview of the law as it relat to fraud
crimin versu civil action for fraud
fraud mai be prosecut crimin civilli or both in sequenc or simultan but there
ar a number of differ between crimin and civil action with which the certifi fraud
examin should be familiar the follow is a brief descript of some of the differ
between civil and crimin action more inform about each action is contain in the
chapter on crimin prosecut and the civil justic system
on kei differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern who file the suit
crimin action for fraud ar brought by the govern act through the prosecutor
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2111
offic the prosecutor ha almost unbridl discret in such matter as whether to bring a
crimin case what charg to file who to charg and whether to try the case or negoti a
plea bargain convers civil action mai be brought by privat individu or organ
usual without the involv or permiss of the govern or court howev
corpor civil liabil mai be enforc by both privat individu as well as govern
agenc eg the sec moreov a civil action usual involv a disput over someth
such as the term of a contract or a claim that on part ha violat a legal duti ow to it
by the other parti which can be gener refer to as tort action
anoth kei distinct concern who investig the case crimin case ar investig
by law enforc agenc at time with the assist of the prosecutor offic and the
grand juri the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena
legal order to produc document wit or other thing for testimoni and document
to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur law enforc agenc and the
prosecut can therefor subpoena evid befor charg ar file to determin whether
an offens ha occur in civil action brought by privat parti howev there gener is
no opportun to compel the product of testimoni or other evid until a complaint is
file
moreov crimin investig and prosecut for fraud ar subject to constitut
limit such as those in the fourth fifth and sixth amend and other procedur
rule to protect the right of the defend includ the requir to give miranda
warn in gener these requir have limit applic to civil action violat
of constitut right in a crimin case can result in the suppress or exclus of ani
evid or statement obtain by such mean or in some instanc in dismiss of the
indict
also the burden of proof differ the burden of proof in a crimin case is alwai beyond a
reason doubt in civil case howev the burden of proof is lower usual a preponder of
the evid
anoth differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern the outcom of
each type of case crimin case ar punish by outcom such as imprison fine order
of restitut probat and commun servic
civil case if success result in an award of civil remedi in gener remedi is a term us
overview of the unit state legal system law
2112 2011 fraud examin manual
to refer to ani process procedur or consequ of a legal wrong by which a victim of
misconduct can be redress for hi loss
civil remedi gener ar of three princip type monetari damag declaratori and
equit monetari damag remedi ar remedi for the victim recoveri of monei
damag for the injuri declaratori remedi ar remedi in which the court state or declar
the right of the parti for exampl when a court interpret a will or a contract or when a
court decid who own person properti it decis ar declaratori in natur equit
remedi ar remedi us when the legal remedi by itself would be inadequ compens
for the wrong suffer on of the primari equit remedi is the injunct which is a
court order by which a parti is requir to perform or is restrain from perform a
specif act
parallel proceed
parallel proceed ar simultan crimin and civil action against the same defend that
ar base upon a singl set of fact the gener rule is that crimin and civil action for fraud
mai proce simultan even though such parallel proceed present a dilemma for
the defend for exampl a defend lawfulli mai assert hi fifth amend right
against selfincrimin to avoid answer question or produc certain document in the
crimin investig he mai not do so in the correspond civil case howev without
suffer the possibl of sanction that can includ the dismiss of affirm defens or
the strike of testimoni for exampl if a defend take the stand in a civil case and
testifi on hi own behalf he cannot later invok the fifth amend and refus to answer
question concern the same subject matter on crossexamin if he doe the judg
mai order that hi testimoni on direct examin be stricken from the record
gener court have not been sympathet to the defend dilemma and have allow
civil discoveri to proce even though crimin charg ar pend in some instanc the
court or the parti mai seal the civil record by agreement in rare case the court mai order
that the civil case be stai pend resolut of the crimin case normal howev the
court will allow the case to proce simultan despit the substanti prejudic to the
defend in parallel civil and crimin case in which the govern is a parti the crimin
process includ the us of grand juri subpoena mai not be us to obtain evid sole
for a civil case
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2113
parallel investig
parallel investig ar simultan independ investig conduct by civil regulatori
agenc and feder prosecutor that involv substanti the same issu and parti us v
stringer 521 f3d 1189 9th cir 2008 recent address the applic boundari of law
govern conduct while conduct parallel investig although parallel investig
ar gener permiss the govern mai not initi a civil action sole to obtain
evid for it crimin prosecut and it mai not affirm mislead defend to
conceal the exist of a crimin investig stringer reaffirm the broad discret that
court afford civil regulatori agenc and feder prosecutor in pursu parallel
investig rule that so long as target ar gener awar of the possibl of
prosecut the govern ha no oblig to inform them about a crimin investig
furthermor where a regulatori agenc initi a legitim civil investig befor a
crimin investig feder prosecutor mai us and guid the civil investig to
facilit crimin prosecut thu stringer underscor the possibl that a feder crimin
investig mai be skulk behind everi ongo civil investig
jurisdict
crimin and civil action for fraud mai be brought in feder or state court feder court
have jurisdict over feder crimin or civil statut certain common law claim involv
parti who ar resid of differ state and controversi in which 75000 or more is at
issu state court have jurisdict over state statut and most common law civil claim
corpor civil and crimin liabil
at the feder level and in mani state corpor civil and crimin liabil is vicari liabil
the absolut liabil of on parti for the misconduct of anoth parti that is impos under
the doctrin of respondeat superior under the doctrin of respondeat superior a corpor is
liabl for the act of their employe if those act occur within the scope of employ and
with some intent to benefit the corpor
the doctrin of respondeat superior is veri broad and will in fact impos liabil on a
corpor even if those in manag had no knowledg or particip in the underli
crimin event moreov the act of ani em ploye from the lowest clerk to the ceo can
imput liabil upon a corpor and a corpor mai be liabl for the act of it
employe that violat secur law bank law antibriberi law and mani other
in addit there is no due dilig defens to a feder crimin charg mean that it
overview of the unit state legal system law
2114 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not matter that a corpor had reason and effect polici in place to prevent an
employe from commit the illeg act howev some state allow manag due
dilig as a goodfaith affirm defens to corpor crimin liabil
corpor men rea
when a corpor is be charg with a crime that requir proof of a mental state the
move parti must onli show that the agent who commit the wrongdo had the
requir state of mind thu the requir mental state is attribut to the corpor for
exampl to impos liabil against a corpor for fraud the move parti must prove that
an agent of the corpor made the alleg fals statement with specif intent to defraud
liabil of a corpor director and offic
the current legal environ impos civil and crimin liabil on a corpor director
and offic gener director and offic liabil stem from the certain duti impos by
law to their corpor the duti which ar discuss in more detail below ar as follow
duti of loyalti director and offic must act sole in the best interest of the
employerprincip free of ani selfdeal conflict of interest or other abus of the
princip for person advantag
duti of care director and offic must conduct busi affair prudent with the skill
and attent normal exercis by peopl in similar posit
statutori duti numer state and feder law regul director and offic action
and decis regard the manag of their compani includ secur law
antitrust law racket law tax law intellectu properti and patent law and state
corpor law
even though director and offic mai be pursu in crimin proceed crimin law
often impos men rea ie intent requir that gener make it more difficult to
impos crimin liabil on director and offic
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2201
