2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/Basic Concepts of the Law


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Basic Concepts of the Law 
The material below introduces the fraud examiner to the basic concepts of the law. Legal 
issues related to fraud are often complex, and their interpretation might require the assistance 
of an experienced attorney. The Certified Fraud Examiner always should consult with counsel 
if legal questions arise during a fraud examination.  
 
Constitutional Law 
The U.S. Constitution and its accompanying amendments are the foundation of our legal 
system. The Constitution defines and limits the powers of the various branches of the 
government and guarantees basic rights to all citizens — rights such as equal protection under 
the law, due process, and the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. 
 
The Constitution is the supreme law of the land. The legislature may not properly pass, the 
executive branch enforce, nor the judiciary uphold, any law or action that violates its 
provisions. 
 
Constitutional rights that are of particular importance to Certified Fraud Examiners include 
those found in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. The Fourth Amendment 
guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. This 
means that the government may not seize any records in a criminal case unless reasonable 
grounds exist — “probable cause” — to believe that the records would constitute evidence of a 
crime, and that a suspect may not be arrested unless there is probable cause to believe that he 
committed an offense. The Fifth Amendment guarantees subjects of a criminal investigation 
the right to refuse to answer questions or to provide certain personal information that might 
be incriminating. The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right 
to counsel, the right to confront (cross-examine) the witnesses against them, and the right to 
a speedy trial.  
 
Substantive and Procedural Law 
Additionally, in the United States, there are two main categories of law: substantive law and 
procedural law. Substantive law is comprised of the basic laws of rights and duties (contract 
law, tort law, criminal law, etc.) as opposed to procedural law, which involves rules governing 
pleadings, evidence, jurisdiction, and so on. If someone says an act is “against the law,” he 
means substantive law, which includes statutes and ordinances at every level; common law, or 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.102  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
case law, from all the various courts; and state and federal constitutions.  
 
Procedural law sets out the rules of the legal system, including the procedures to be followed in 
hearing a grievance. This means deadlines, filing requirements, steps to follow in bringing a 
claim, rules of evidence, and so on. Substantive law sets the terms of any dispute; procedural 
law dictates how a legal dispute is handled. 
 
In federal courts, procedures are governed by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.  
 
There are special procedural laws governing appeals courts and evidence. The Federal Rules of 
Appellate Procedure are collected in the U.S. Code (following Title 28); individual courts of 
appeal may supplement the general rules with their own publications. These are listed under 
the name of the court (e.g., Appeals to the Fifth Circuit Manual). 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence cover what counts as evidence, the conditions of its admissibility 
in court, and the methods which authorities must use in acquiring and processing evidence.  
 
Each state (and some counties) publishes its own procedural rules. Most states follow the 
general outline of the federal rules, but procedural rules can be vastly different. If you have a 
specific question about a procedural or evidentiary rule at the state or county level, consult a 
copy of the rules for the particular jurisdiction or your attorney. 
 
Statutory and Common Law 
There are two sources of substantive law: statutory law and common law. Statutory law  
includes statutes passed by the federal or state legislatures (and regulations passed by 
administrative bodies). The common law consists of the usages and customs of a society as 
interpreted by the judiciary; it often is referred to as “judge-made” law. Criminal law is 
statutory, while civil actions can be based on either statutory or common law. 
 
Although criminal fraud statutes outlaw certain behavior, they often contain provisions that 
do not have any obvious connection to basic principles of right and wrong. For example, a 
violation of the federal mail fraud statute can be charged only if the wrongdoers placed or 
received a letter in the U.S. mail, regardless of how serious the underlying fraud might be. 
Similarly, defendants are liable under the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations 
(RICO) statute only if they engage “in a pattern of racketeering activity” through “an 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.103 
enterprise” that is engaged in interstate commerce, while violations of the federal money 
laundering statute occur only if the defendants have engaged in “specified unlawful activity” 
and have thereafter conducted a “prohibited financial transaction.” Certified Fraud 
Examiners preparing criminal cases must be familiar with the specific technical elements of 
the applicable statutes, and they must carefully review the evidence to make certain that all 
essential elements of proof are met. 
 
In contrast to criminal fraud statutes, civil cases brought under the common law usually 
contain fewer technical elements and incorporate traditional principles of fairness and 
morality. For example, a plaintiff may file a common law claim for fraud by alleging simply 
that the defendant misrepresented important facts upon which the plaintiff relied, resulting in 
loss to the plaintiff.  
 
The common law is based not on statutes passed by the legislatures, but upon “precedent” 
established by previously decided cases stretching back hundreds of years in U.S. and English 
courts. That is, decisions that establish particular legal principles are called precedent, and in a 
common law system, the decision in an individual case binds judges in later cases of a similar 
nature, until or unless the rule of law established is overturned by a higher court or the 
legislature. The body of judicial opinions is sometimes referred to as case law. There are an 
increasing number of civil statutes in the fraud area, including the federal Civil RICO and 
Civil False Claims statutes. 
 
 



:


basic concept of the law
the materi below introduc the fraud examin to the basic concept of the law legal
issu relat to fraud ar often complex and their interpret might requir the assist
of an experienc attornei the certifi fraud examin alwai should consult with counsel
if legal question aris dure a fraud examin
constitut law
the us constitut and it accompani amend ar the foundat of our legal
system the constitut defin and limit the power of the variou branch of the
govern and guarante basic right to all citizen right such as equal protect under
the law due process and the right to be free from unreason search and seizur
the constitut is the suprem law of the land the legislatur mai not properli pass the
execut branch enforc nor the judiciari uphold ani law or action that violat it
provis
constitut right that ar of particular import to certifi fraud examin includ
those found in the fourth fifth and sixth amend the fourth amend
guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason search and seizur thi
mean that the govern mai not seiz ani record in a crimin case unless reason
ground exist probabl caus to believ that the record would constitut evid of a
crime and that a suspect mai not be arrest unless there is probabl caus to believ that he
commit an offens the fifth amend guarante subject of a crimin investig
the right to refus to answer question or to provid certain person inform that might
be incrimin the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right
to counsel the right to confront crossexamin the wit against them and the right to
a speedi trial
substant and procedur law
addition in the unit state there ar two main categori of law substant law and
procedur law substant law is compris of the basic law of right and duti contract
law tort law crimin law etc as oppos to procedur law which involv rule govern
plead evid jurisdict and so on if someon sai an act is against the law he
mean substant law which includ statut and ordin at everi level common law or
overview of the unit state legal system law
2102 2011 fraud examin manual
case law from all the variou court and state and feder constitut
procedur law set out the rule of the legal system includ the procedur to be follow in
hear a grievanc thi mean deadlin file requir step to follow in bring a
claim rule of evid and so on substant law set the term of ani disput procedur
law dictat how a legal disput is handl
in feder court procedur ar govern by the feder rule of civil procedur and the
feder rule of crimin procedur
there ar special procedur law govern appeal court and evid the feder rule of
appel procedur ar collect in the us code follow titl 28 individu court of
appeal mai supplement the gener rule with their own public these ar list under
the name of the court eg appeal to the fifth circuit manual
the feder rule of evid cover what count as evid the condit of it admiss
in court and the method which author must us in acquir and process evid
each state and some counti publish it own procedur rule most state follow the
gener outlin of the feder rule but procedur rule can be vastli differ if you have a
specif question about a procedur or evidentiari rule at the state or counti level consult a
copi of the rule for the particular jurisdict or your attornei
statutori and common law
there ar two sourc of substant law statutori law and common law statutori law
includ statut pass by the feder or state legislatur and regul pass by
administr bodi the common law consist of the usag and custom of a societi as
interpret by the judiciari it often is refer to as judgemad law crimin law is
statutori while civil action can be base on either statutori or common law
although crimin fraud statut outlaw certain behavior thei often contain provis that
do not have ani obviou connect to basic principl of right and wrong for exampl a
violat of the feder mail fraud statut can be charg onli if the wrongdoer place or
receiv a letter in the us mail regardless of how seriou the underli fraud might be
similarli defend ar liabl under the racket influenc and corrupt organ
rico statut onli if thei engag in a pattern of racket activ through an
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2103
enterpris that is engag in interst commerc while violat of the feder monei
launder statut occur onli if the defend have engag in specifi unlaw activ
and have thereaft conduct a prohibit financi transact certifi fraud
examin prepar crimin case must be familiar with the specif technic element of
the applic statut and thei must carefulli review the evid to make certain that all
essenti element of proof ar met
in contrast to crimin fraud statut civil case brought under the common law usual
contain fewer technic element and incorpor tradit principl of fair and
moral for exampl a plaintiff mai file a common law claim for fraud by alleg simpli
that the defend misrepres import fact upon which the plaintiff reli result in
loss to the plaintiff
the common law is base not on statut pass by the legislatur but upon preced
establish by previous decid case stretch back hundr of year in us and english
court that is decis that establish particular legal principl ar call preced and in a
common law system the decis in an individu case bind judg in later case of a similar
natur until or unless the rule of law establish is overturn by a higher court or the
legislatur the bodi of judici opinion is sometim refer to as case law there ar an
increas number of civil statut in the fraud area includ the feder civil rico and
civil fals claim statut
