2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/The Court System


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


The Court System 
Civil and criminal cases will be filed in either state or federal court. The power to hear a case 
and render a judgment is strictly limited to a court’s jurisdiction, which is defined both by 
geographic boundaries and by the specific powers granted to it by the legislature. This reflects 
the basic constitutional principle of separation of powers among the three branches of 
government: the legislature, elected popularly, enacts the laws; the executive (e.g., state or 
federal prosecutors) enforces them (with a great deal of discretion); and the judiciary 
interprets and applies them.  
 
Jurisdiction and Venue 
Courts are defined by their jurisdiction and venue. To hear and decide a case, a court must 
have jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter involved and proper venue.  
 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.104  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and decide a given case; it refers to the subject 
matter or persons over which lawful authority may be exercised by a court. A probate court, 
for instance, only has jurisdiction to hear cases related to wills and other probate matters. 
Lower trial courts (such as a justice of the peace court) may only have jurisdiction to hear 
matters under a certain dollar amount, e.g., cases with less than $5,000 in controversy.  
 
Venue refers to the geographical area covered by the court; it is the physical location where 
the lawsuit is to be tried. A trial court in Dallas County, Texas, for example, can only hear 
cases that have some connection with either parties or events that occurred in that county. 
Venue is technically an element of the court’s jurisdiction. This issue may be important in 
deciding where to file charges or claims.  
 
Determining the proper court requires a three-part test. (1) Does the court hear cases of the 
type in question? Claiming $500,000 in damages, the plaintiff needs a court that hears civil 
complaints of that magnitude. (2) Does the court have the authority to exercise its power 
over a particular defendant or piece of property? You can sue a Nebraska company in a 
Nebraska state court because courts have personal jurisdiction over all businesses that do 
business in that state. (3) Does the claim arise within the court’s venue? If the claim for 
damages is against the Missouri office of a company headquartered in Nebraska, determining 
the proper venue is essential. If you file the claim in North Dakota, the court will have no 
jurisdiction to hear the case.  
 
State and Federal Court Systems  
The U.S. justice system uses separate but interlocking organizations of courts. State courts 
can decide nearly every type of case, limited only by the U.S. Constitution, their own state 
constitutions, and state law. Citizens will have most of their legal dealings with the state and 
local courts situated throughout the country. Most fraud cases will be tried at this level. 
Probate cases, marital disputes, and real estate suits are heard by state courts. 
 
Federal courts are principally located in larger cities and hold limited jurisdictions. They hear 
only those cases over which the Constitution or federal law gives them authority. Federal 
courts have jurisdiction in only two kinds of cases: (1) federal question cases, and (2) diversity 
jurisdiction cases.  
 
A court has federal question jurisdiction over cases based on (arising under) any federal law.  
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.105 
In diversity cases, a federal court can hear a state action that involves more than $75,000 and 
is between parties who are citizens of different states. Diversity of citizenship must be 
complete—all of the plaintiffs must be citize ns of a different state(s) from all of the 
defendants. For purposes of determining diversity jurisdiction, a party is a citizen of the state 
where he is domiciled (i.e., where he is present and intends to make his permanent home). A 
corporation is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorporated and the state in which it 
has its principal place of business. 
 
State Courts 
Most states use a three- or four-tier system. 
• Lower courts try misdemeanors and preliminaries for felony cases, as well as civil disputes 
below a certain dollar amount (e.g., $10,000 or less).  
• Higher-level trial courts (sometimes called Superior courts) try felony cases and civil disputes 
above a certain amount (e.g., $10,000 or more). 
• Appellate courts review trial court decisions. 
• Superior appellate courts, or Supreme courts, review lower appellate court decisions. 
 
Many states have different systems — at the trial court and appellate court levels — for trying 
civil and criminal cases. Local and state criminal courts might have limited jurisdiction; for 
example, some courts only handle traffic violations and minor offenses. Some jurisdictions 
include a small-claims civil court to hear cases involving no more than $2,000 to $3,000. 
 
Federal Courts 
The federal system uses a three-tier model. 
• U.S. District Courts conduct trials on criminal charges and civil complaints under federal 
law. 
• Courts of Appeal, including the Court of Military Appeals, reviews trial court decisions. 
• The U.S. Supreme Court  reviews lower court decisions. It is sometimes called the court of 
last resort. 
 
Each federal district has a chief prosecutor, a political appointee, known as the United States 
Attorney, and a staff of prosecutors, known as Assistant United States Attorneys. Almost all cases 
are prosecuted by assistants. Criminal cases at the state and local level are prosecuted by the 
District Attorney’s office or the Attorney General’s office. 
 
The federal system also includes specialized courts. These are:  
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.106  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Bankruptcy Court — handles matters involving the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.  
• Tax Court — deals with tax law violations.  
• Court of Federal Claims — jurisdiction over complaints filed against the federal government 
and its agencies.  
• Court of Veterans Appeals — hears veterans’ benefits cases. 
• Court of International Trade — covers business cases of international jurisdiction. 

*Although federal administration agencies are not part of the federal judiciary, they are included here because
appeals from their decisions go to the federal courts.
**Appeals from the highest state court also may be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court.
  
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.107 

FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
 
 U.S. SUPREME COURT **
 9 Justices 

 U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 
 Federal Circuit

 U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 
 12 Circuits
 (Three-judge panels, not the entire 
 circuit court, hear almost all cases.) 
 
 U.S. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES
 (In a few cases,
 appeals go to a U.S.
 District Court,
 instead of the circuit
 courts.)
 
 U.S. DISTRICT COURTS
 50 States
 Washington, D.C.
 Puerto Rico,
 Virgin Islands, The
 Canal Zone,
 Guam
 
 US TAX COURT 
 (Reviews IRS 
 decisions.) 

 
 U.S. COURT OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
 (Created in 1980, 
 formerly the U.S. 
 Customs Court.)

 U.S. CLAIMS COURTS
 and some special
 agencies (E.g., Board of
 Contract Appeals, Patent
 and Trademark Office,
 and Merit Systems
 Protection Board)

 U.S. BANKRUPTCY COURTS
 U.S. MAGISTRATES

(One court created in 1982, by 
a congressional statute;  
formed by merging the Court
of Claims and the Court of 
Custom and Patent Appeals;  
judges sit in panels of three on 
cases involving customs, 
copyright, trademarks, and 
patents.)
 
2.108  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A TYPICAL STATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
 
 HIGHEST–LEVEL APPELLATE COURT  
 (A state’s highest court; 
 usually called the State Supreme 
 Court; sometimes called the Court of 
 Appeals of the Supreme Judicial 
 Court) 
 Typically, 5 to 9 judges 
 
 
 
 
 INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE OR 
 REVIEWING COURTS  
 (Found in 41 of the 50 states) 
 Generally, 3 Judges per Panel 
 
 
 
 
 TRIAL COURTS 
 General Jurisdiction
  (Called, for example, Circuit Courts 
 or Superior Courts) 
 LAW                     EQUITY 
 
 
 
 LOWER TRIAL COURTS   (Usually presided over by judges, 
 although some states have justices of 
 the peace or magistrates) 
 Nonjury—Limited Jurisdiction   
 
 (In some states, 
 handled by several 
 types of courts; in 
 others, by the 
 same trial court) 
 Traffic 
 Courts
  
 Housing 
 (Rent) 
 
 Small 
 Claims 
 Courts 
 
 Probate 
 (Orphan’s) 
 Courts 
 
 County or 
 Municipal 
 Courts 
 
 Juvenile 
 Courts 
 
 Domestic 
 Relations 
 Courts 
 Criminal 
 Courts 
 (Maximum amounts vary, 
 depending on the state, from 
 $200 to about $5,000) 
 (Serious criminal cases tend 
 to be handled by the general 
 jurisdiction trial courts) 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.109 
In general, the judge and jury serve important roles during a trial. In the trial setting, the jury 
finds the facts, and the judge applies the law, rules on evidence, and generally moderates the 
proceeding to ensure a fair trial. If, however, a jury is waived by the defendant and 
government, the judge decides both the facts and the law.  
 
Evidence in a criminal or civil case is presented based on burdens of proof. In general terms, 
the burden of proof is the responsibility of a party to prove each element necessary to 
establish the existence of a cause of action. In a criminal case, the prosecution must prove its 
case beyond a reasonable doubt; in a civil case, the burden of proof usually is a 
preponderance of the evidence — a lower standard. 
 
After the trial court enters its decision, a party may file an appeal with a higher court. Appeals 
involve questions of law or questions involving both law and fact. Most questions of law are 
decided by precedent, that is, prior court decisions of equal or higher authority that have 
considered similar cases. Obviously, however, disputes exist over what precedent should 
prevail, with both sides attempting to persuade the court to interpret existing law in a manner 
favorable to its client. 
 
The right to appeal differs in criminal and civil cases. Because of the Fifth Amendment’s 
double jeopardy provisions, which prohibits defendants from being tried twice for the same 
crime, only a convicted defendant in a criminal case can appeal a verdict. The government 
cannot appeal an acquittal on the merits. If a statute authorizes the prosecution to appeal, 
such an appeal is constitutional only if the appellate court can decide the appeal without 
subjecting the defendant to a second trial. The prosecution may appeal adverse pre-trial 
rulings on the admissibility of evidence and certain other matters that can terminate a 
prosecution temporarily (but do not result in a decision on the merits in favor of the 
defendant). Either party in a civil case may appeal a judgment. 
 
An appellate court will not reverse a conviction unless it finds error that affected the 
“substantial rights” of a party; “harmless error,” which supposedly does not affect the jury’s 
decision, is tolerated. Defendants are entitled to a fair trial—not a perfect one. If the appellate 
court reverses a conviction, it will usually order a new trial, but it may also direct dismissal of 
the case. 
 
Appeals from decisions of the U.S. District Courts are heard in the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the “Circuit,” which covers a particular geographic area. The United States is divided into 11 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.110  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
judicial circuits, plus the District of Columbia. The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest 
appellate court in the federal system and may hear certain appeals from state courts, 
particularly on constitutional grounds. 
 
In the federal system, an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court is accomplished by applying for a 
Writ of Certiorari. Relatively few appeals — “writs” — are granted. The Supreme Court usually 
hears only those cases that present an important question of constitutional law, or may be 
used to resolve a “split” or disagreement on a point of law among the circuits, or that have 
considerable significance to the judicial system beyond the interest of the litigants. If the 
Supreme Court “denies Cert.,” the lower court decision stands and the appeal process ends 
unless the defendant can find some collateral ground, such as alleged constitutional errors in 
state court proceedings, to attack the judgment. As death penalty challenges illustrate, appeals 
on such points, often brought by people in custody under “Habeas Corpus” proceedings, can 
sometimes consume a decade or more. 
 
The various state and federal courts operate in separate spheres, confined by their own 
jurisdictional limitations. State courts are “inferior” to federal courts only in the sense that 
they are subject to Constitutional and “federal question” limitations. Without these factors, a 
federal court will not interfere in state court proceedings. A single act might violate both state 
and federal law, and actions may be brought in separate courts for both violations without 
violating the double jeopardy protection. However, one jurisdiction will usually abstain if the 
other has already prosecuted. 
 
 



:


the court system
civil and crimin case will be file in either state or feder court the power to hear a case
and render a judgment is strictli limit to a court jurisdict which is defin both by
geograph boundari and by the specif power grant to it by the legislatur thi reflect
the basic constitut principl of separ of power among the three branch of
govern the legislatur elect popularli enact the law the execut eg state or
feder prosecutor enforc them with a great deal of discret and the judiciari
interpret and appli them
jurisdict and venu
court ar defin by their jurisdict and venu to hear and decid a case a court must
have jurisdict over the parti and subject matter involv and proper venu
overview of the unit state legal system law
2104 2011 fraud examin manual
jurisdict is the power of a court to hear and decid a given case it refer to the subject
matter or person over which law author mai be exercis by a court a probat court
for instanc onli ha jurisdict to hear case relat to will and other probat matter
lower trial court such as a justic of the peac court mai onli have jurisdict to hear
matter under a certain dollar amount eg case with less than 5000 in controversi
venu refer to the geograph area cover by the court it is the physic locat where
the lawsuit is to be tri a trial court in dalla counti texa for exampl can onli hear
case that have some connect with either parti or event that occur in that counti
venu is technic an element of the court jurisdict thi issu mai be import in
decid where to file charg or claim
determin the proper court requir a threepart test 1 doe the court hear case of the
type in question claim 500000 in damag the plaintiff need a court that hear civil
complaint of that magnitud 2 doe the court have the author to exercis it power
over a particular defend or piec of properti you can sue a nebraska compani in a
nebraska state court becaus court have person jurisdict over all busi that do
busi in that state 3 doe the claim aris within the court venu if the claim for
damag is against the missouri offic of a compani headquart in nebraska determin
the proper venu is essenti if you file the claim in north dakota the court will have no
jurisdict to hear the case
state and feder court system
the us justic system us separ but interlock organ of court state court
can decid nearli everi type of case limit onli by the us constitut their own state
constitut and state law citizen will have most of their legal deal with the state and
local court situat throughout the countri most fraud case will be tri at thi level
probat case marit disput and real estat suit ar heard by state court
feder court ar princip locat in larger citi and hold limit jurisdict thei hear
onli those case over which the constitut or feder law give them author feder
court have jurisdict in onli two kind of case 1 feder question case and 2 divers
jurisdict case
a court ha feder question jurisdict over case base on aris under ani feder law
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2105
in divers case a feder court can hear a state action that involv more than 75000 and
is between parti who ar citizen of differ state divers of citizenship must be
completeal of the plaintiff must be citiz ns of a differ state from all of the
defend for purpos of determin divers jurisdict a parti is a citizen of the state
where he is domicil ie where he is present and intend to make hi perman home a
corpor is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorpor and the state in which it
ha it princip place of busi
state court
most state us a three or fourtier system
lower court try misdemeanor and preliminari for feloni case as well as civil disput
below a certain dollar amount eg 10000 or less
higherlevel trial court sometim call superior court try feloni case and civil disput
abov a certain amount eg 10000 or more
appel court review trial court decis
superior appel court or suprem court review lower appel court decis
mani state have differ system at the trial court and appel court level for try
civil and crimin case local and state crimin court might have limit jurisdict for
exampl some court onli handl traffic violat and minor offens some jurisdict
includ a smallclaim civil court to hear case involv no more than 2000 to 3000
feder court
the feder system us a threetier model
us district court conduct trial on crimin charg and civil complaint under feder
law
court of appeal includ the court of militari appeal review trial court decis
the us suprem court review lower court decis it is sometim call the court of
last resort
each feder district ha a chief prosecutor a polit appointe known as the unit state
attornei and a staff of prosecutor known as assist unit state attornei almost all case
ar prosecut by assist crimin case at the state and local level ar prosecut by the
district attornei offic or the attornei gener offic
the feder system also includ special court these ar
overview of the unit state legal system law
2106 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci court handl matter involv the us bankruptci code
tax court deal with tax law violat
court of feder claim jurisdict over complaint file against the feder govern
and it agenc
court of veteran appeal hear veteran benefit case
court of intern trade cover busi case of intern jurisdict
although feder administr agenc ar not part of the feder judiciari thei ar includ here becaus
appeal from their decis go to the feder court
appeal from the highest state court also mai be heard by the us suprem court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2107
feder court system
overview of the unit state legal system law
us suprem court
9 justic
us court of appeal
feder circuit
us court of appeal
12 circuit
threejudg panel not the entir
circuit court hear almost all case
us administr agenc
in a few case
appeal go to a us
district court
instead of the circuit
court
us district court
50 state
washington dc
puerto rico
virgin island the
canal zone
guam
us tax court
review ir
decis
us court of intern trade
creat in 1980
formerli the us
custom court
us claim court
and some special
agenc eg board of
contract appeal patent
and trademark offic
and merit system
protect board
us bankruptci court
us magistr
on court creat in 1982 by
a congression statut
form by merg the court
of claim and the court of
custom and patent appeal
judg sit in panel of three on
case involv custom
copyright trademark and
patent
2108 2011 fraud examin manual
a typic state judici system
highestlevel appel court
a state highest court
usual call the state suprem
court sometim call the court of
appeal of the suprem judici
court
typic 5 to 9 judg
intermedi appel or
review court
found in 41 of the 50 state
gener 3 judg per panel
trial court
gener jurisdict
call for exampl circuit court
or superior court
law equiti
lower trial court usual presid over by judg
although some state have justic of
the peac or magistr
nonjurylimit jurisdict
in some state
handl by sever
type of court in
other by the
same trial court
traffic
court
hous
rent
small
claim
court
probat
orphan
court
counti or
municip
court
juvenil
court
domest
relat
court
crimin
court
maximum amount vari
depend on the state from
200 to about 5000
seriou crimin case tend
to be handl by the gener
jurisdict trial court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2109
in gener the judg and juri serv import role dure a trial in the trial set the juri
find the fact and the judg appli the law rule on evid and gener moder the
proceed to ensur a fair trial if howev a juri is waiv by the defend and
govern the judg decid both the fact and the law
evid in a crimin or civil case is present base on burden of proof in gener term
the burden of proof is the respons of a parti to prove each element necessari to
establish the exist of a caus of action in a crimin case the prosecut must prove it
case beyond a reason doubt in a civil case the burden of proof usual is a
preponder of the evid a lower standard
after the trial court enter it decis a parti mai file an appeal with a higher court appeal
involv question of law or question involv both law and fact most question of law ar
decid by preced that is prior court decis of equal or higher author that have
consid similar case obvious howev disput exist over what preced should
prevail with both side attempt to persuad the court to interpret exist law in a manner
favor to it client
the right to appeal differ in crimin and civil case becaus of the fifth amend
doubl jeopardi provis which prohibit defend from be tri twice for the same
crime onli a convict defend in a crimin case can appeal a verdict the govern
cannot appeal an acquitt on the merit if a statut author the prosecut to appeal
such an appeal is constitut onli if the appel court can decid the appeal without
subject the defend to a second trial the prosecut mai appeal advers pretrial
rule on the admiss of evid and certain other matter that can termin a
prosecut temporarili but do not result in a decis on the merit in favor of the
defend either parti in a civil case mai appeal a judgment
an appel court will not revers a convict unless it find error that affect the
substanti right of a parti harmless error which supposedli doe not affect the juri
decis is toler defend ar entitl to a fair trialnot a perfect on if the appel
court revers a convict it will usual order a new trial but it mai also direct dismiss of
the case
appeal from decis of the us district court ar heard in the us court of appeal for
the circuit which cover a particular geograph area the unit state is divid into 11
overview of the unit state legal system law
2110 2011 fraud examin manual
judici circuit plu the district of columbia the us suprem court is the highest
appel court in the feder system and mai hear certain appeal from state court
particularli on constitut ground
in the feder system an appeal to the us suprem court is accomplish by appli for a
writ of certiorari rel few appeal writ ar grant the suprem court usual
hear onli those case that present an import question of constitut law or mai be
us to resolv a split or disagr on a point of law among the circuit or that have
consider signific to the judici system beyond the interest of the litig if the
suprem court deni cert the lower court decis stand and the appeal process end
unless the defend can find some collater ground such as alleg constitut error in
state court proceed to attack the judgment as death penalti challeng illustr appeal
on such point often brought by peopl in custodi under habea corpu proceed can
sometim consum a decad or more
the variou state and feder court oper in separ sphere confin by their own
jurisdict limit state court ar inferior to feder court onli in the sens that
thei ar subject to constitut and feder question limit without these factor a
feder court will not interfer in state court proceed a singl act might violat both state
and feder law and action mai be brought in separ court for both violat without
violat the doubl jeopardi protect howev on jurisdict will usual abstain if the
other ha alreadi prosecut
