2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/Civil and Criminal Actions for Fraud


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Civil and Criminal Actions for Fraud 
This section seeks to provide an overview of the law as it relates to fraud.  
 
Criminal Versus Civil Actions for Fraud 
Fraud may be prosecuted criminally, civilly, or both, in sequence or simultaneously, but there 
are a number of differences between criminal and civil actions with which the Certified Fraud 
Examiner should be familiar. The following is a brief description of some of the differences 
between civil and criminal actions. More information about each action is contained in the 
chapters on Criminal Prosecutions and the Civil Justice System. 
 
One key difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns who files the suit. 
Criminal actions for fraud are brought by the government acting through the prosecutor’s 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.111 
office. The prosecutor has almost unbridled discretion in such matters as whether to bring a 
criminal case, what charges to file, who to charge, and whether to try the case or negotiate a 
plea bargain. Conversely, civil actions may be brought by private individuals or organizations, 
usually without the involvement or permission of the government or court. However, 
corporate civil liability may be enforced by both private individuals as well as government 
agencies (e.g., the SEC). Moreover, a civil action usually involves a dispute over something 
(such as the terms of a contract) or a claim that one part has violated a legal duty owed to it 
by the other party, which can be generally referred to as tort actions. 
 
Another key distinction concerns who investigates the cases. Criminal cases are investigated 
by law enforcement agencies, at times with the assistance of the prosecutor’s office and the 
grand jury. The grand jury  is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas —
 legal orders to produce documents, witnesses, or other things — for testimony and documents 
to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. Law enforcement agencies and the 
prosecution can therefore subpoena evidence before charges are filed to determine whether 
an offense has occurred. In civil actions brought by private parties, however, there generally is 
no opportunity to compel the production of testimony or other evidence until a complaint is 
filed. 
 
Moreover, criminal investigations and prosecutions for fraud are subject to constitutional 
limitations, such as those in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments, and other procedural 
rules to protect the rights of the defendant, including the requirement to give Miranda 
warnings. In general, these requirements have limited applicability to civil actions. Violations 
of constitutional rights in a criminal case can result in the “suppression,” or exclusion, of any 
evidence or statement obtained by such means, or in some instances, in dismissal of the 
indictment. 
 
Also, the burden of proof differs. The burden of proof in a criminal case is always beyond a 
reasonable doubt. In civil cases, however, the burden of proof is lower, usually a preponderance of 
the evidence.  
 
Another difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns the outcomes of 
each type of case. Criminal cases are punished by outcomes such as imprisonment, fine, order 
of restitution, probation, and community service.  
 
Civil cases, if successful, result in an award of civil remedies. In general, remedy is a term used 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.112  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to refer to any process, procedure, or consequence of a legal wrong by which a victim of 
misconduct can be redressed for his loss.  
 
Civil remedies generally are of three principal types: monetary (damages), declaratory, and 
equitable. Monetary (damages) remedies are remedies for the victim’s recovery of money 
damages for the injury. Declaratory remedies  are remedies in which the court states or declares 
the rights of the parties. For example, when a court interprets a will or a contract or when a 
court decides who owns personal property, its decisions are declaratory in nature. Equitable 
remedies are remedies used when the legal remedy by itself would be inadequate compensation 
for the wronged suffered. One of the primary equitable remedies is the injunction, which is a 
court order by which a party is required to perform, or is restrained from performing, a 
specific act. 
 
Parallel Proceedings 
Parallel proceedings are simultaneous criminal and civil actions against the same defendant that 
are based upon a single set of facts. The general rule is that criminal and civil actions for fraud 
may proceed simultaneously even though such “parallel proceedings” present a dilemma for 
the defendant. For example, a defendant lawfully may assert his Fifth Amendment right 
against self-incrimination to avoid answering questions or producing certain documents in the 
criminal investigation. He may not do so in the corresponding civil case, however, without 
suffering the possibility of sanctions that can include the dismissal of affirmative defenses or 
the striking of testimony. For example, if a defendant takes the stand in a civil case and 
testifies on his own behalf, he cannot later invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to answer 
questions concerning the same subject matter on cross-examination. If he does, the judge 
may order that his testimony on direct examination be stricken from the record. 
 
Generally, courts have not been sympathetic to the defendant’s dilemma and have allowed 
civil discovery to proceed even though criminal charges are pending. In some instances, the 
court or the parties may seal the civil record by agreement. In rare cases, the court may order 
that the civil case be stayed pending resolution of the criminal case. Normally, however, the 
court will allow the cases to proceed simultaneously despite the substantial prejudice to the 
defendant. In parallel civil and criminal cases in which the government is a party, the criminal 
process, including the use of grand jury subpoenas, may not be used to obtain evidence solely 
for a civil case. 
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.113 
Parallel Investigations 
Parallel investigations  are simultaneous independent investigations conducted by civil regulatory 
agencies and federal prosecutors that involve substantially the same issues and parties. U.S. v. 
Stringer, 521 F.3d 1189 (9th Cir. 2008) recently addressed the applicable boundaries of lawful 
government conduct while conducting parallel investigations. Although parallel investigations 
are generally permissible, the government may not initiate a civil action solely to obtain 
evidence for its criminal prosecution, and it may not affirmatively mislead defendants to 
conceal the existence of a criminal investigation. Stringer reaffirmed the broad discretion that 
courts afford civil regulatory agencies and federal prosecutors in pursuing parallel 
investigations, ruling that so long as targets are generally aware of the possibility of 
prosecution, the government has no obligation to inform them about a criminal investigation. 
Furthermore, where a regulatory agency initiates a legitimate civil investigation before a 
criminal investigation, federal prosecutors may use and guide the civil investigation to 
facilitate criminal prosecution. Thus, Stringer underscores the possibility that a federal criminal 
investigation may be skulking behind every ongoing civil investigation.  
 
Jurisdiction 
Criminal and civil actions for fraud may be brought in federal or state court. Federal courts 
have jurisdiction over federal criminal or civil statutes, certain common law claims involving 
parties who are residents of different states, and controversies in which $75,000 or more is at 
issue. State courts have jurisdiction over state statutes and most common law civil claims.  
 
Corporate Civil and Criminal Liability 
At the federal level and in many states corporate civil and criminal liability is vicarious liability 
(the absolute liability of one party for the misconduct of another party) that is imposed under 
the doctrine of respondeat superior. Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, a corporation is 
liable for the acts of their employees if those acts occur within the scope of employment and 
with some intent to benefit the corporation.  
 
The doctrine of respondeat superior is very broad and will in fact impose liability on a 
corporation even if those in management had no knowledge or participation in the underlying 
criminal events. Moreover, the acts of any em ployee, from the lowest clerk to the CEO, can 
impute liability upon a corporation, and a corporation may be liable for the acts of its 
employees that violate security laws, banking laws, anti-bribery laws, and many others. 
 
In addition, there is no due diligence defense to a federal criminal charge, meaning that it 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.114  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not matter that a corporation had reasonable and effective policies in place to prevent an 
employee from committing the illegal act. However, some states allow management’s due 
diligence as a good-faith affirmative defense to corporate criminal liability.  
 
Corporate Mens Rea 
When a corporation is being charged with a crime that requires proof of a mental state, the 
moving party must only show that the agent who committed the wrongdoing had the 
required state of mind. Thus, the required mental state is attributable to the corporation. For 
example, to impose liability against a corporation for fraud, the moving party must prove that 
an agent of the corporation made the alleged false statements with specific intent to defraud. 
 
Liability of a Corporation’s Directors and Officers 
The current legal environment imposes civil and criminal liabilities on a corporation’s directors 
and officers. Generally, director and officer liability stems from the certain duties imposed by 
law to their corporation. The duties, which are discussed in more detail below, are as follows: 
• Duty of loyalty. Directors and officers must act solely in the best interest of the 
employer/principal, free of any self-dealing, conflicts of interest, or other abuse of the 
principal for personal advantage. 
• Duty of care. Directors and officers must conduct business affairs prudently with the skill 
and attention normally exercised by people in similar positions. 
• Statutory duties. Numerous state and federal laws regulate directors’ and officers’ actions 
and decisions regarding the management of their companies, including: securities laws, 
antitrust laws, racketeering laws, tax laws, intellectual property and patent laws, and state 
corporation laws.  
 
Even though directors and officers may be pursued in criminal proceedings, criminal law 
often imposes mens rea (i.e., intent) requirements that generally make it more difficult to 
impose criminal liability on directors and officers.  
 
 
 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.201 



:


civil and crimin action for fraud
thi section seek to provid an overview of the law as it relat to fraud
crimin versu civil action for fraud
fraud mai be prosecut crimin civilli or both in sequenc or simultan but there
ar a number of differ between crimin and civil action with which the certifi fraud
examin should be familiar the follow is a brief descript of some of the differ
between civil and crimin action more inform about each action is contain in the
chapter on crimin prosecut and the civil justic system
on kei differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern who file the suit
crimin action for fraud ar brought by the govern act through the prosecutor
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2111
offic the prosecutor ha almost unbridl discret in such matter as whether to bring a
crimin case what charg to file who to charg and whether to try the case or negoti a
plea bargain convers civil action mai be brought by privat individu or organ
usual without the involv or permiss of the govern or court howev
corpor civil liabil mai be enforc by both privat individu as well as govern
agenc eg the sec moreov a civil action usual involv a disput over someth
such as the term of a contract or a claim that on part ha violat a legal duti ow to it
by the other parti which can be gener refer to as tort action
anoth kei distinct concern who investig the case crimin case ar investig
by law enforc agenc at time with the assist of the prosecutor offic and the
grand juri the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena
legal order to produc document wit or other thing for testimoni and document
to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur law enforc agenc and the
prosecut can therefor subpoena evid befor charg ar file to determin whether
an offens ha occur in civil action brought by privat parti howev there gener is
no opportun to compel the product of testimoni or other evid until a complaint is
file
moreov crimin investig and prosecut for fraud ar subject to constitut
limit such as those in the fourth fifth and sixth amend and other procedur
rule to protect the right of the defend includ the requir to give miranda
warn in gener these requir have limit applic to civil action violat
of constitut right in a crimin case can result in the suppress or exclus of ani
evid or statement obtain by such mean or in some instanc in dismiss of the
indict
also the burden of proof differ the burden of proof in a crimin case is alwai beyond a
reason doubt in civil case howev the burden of proof is lower usual a preponder of
the evid
anoth differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern the outcom of
each type of case crimin case ar punish by outcom such as imprison fine order
of restitut probat and commun servic
civil case if success result in an award of civil remedi in gener remedi is a term us
overview of the unit state legal system law
2112 2011 fraud examin manual
to refer to ani process procedur or consequ of a legal wrong by which a victim of
misconduct can be redress for hi loss
civil remedi gener ar of three princip type monetari damag declaratori and
equit monetari damag remedi ar remedi for the victim recoveri of monei
damag for the injuri declaratori remedi ar remedi in which the court state or declar
the right of the parti for exampl when a court interpret a will or a contract or when a
court decid who own person properti it decis ar declaratori in natur equit
remedi ar remedi us when the legal remedi by itself would be inadequ compens
for the wrong suffer on of the primari equit remedi is the injunct which is a
court order by which a parti is requir to perform or is restrain from perform a
specif act
parallel proceed
parallel proceed ar simultan crimin and civil action against the same defend that
ar base upon a singl set of fact the gener rule is that crimin and civil action for fraud
mai proce simultan even though such parallel proceed present a dilemma for
the defend for exampl a defend lawfulli mai assert hi fifth amend right
against selfincrimin to avoid answer question or produc certain document in the
crimin investig he mai not do so in the correspond civil case howev without
suffer the possibl of sanction that can includ the dismiss of affirm defens or
the strike of testimoni for exampl if a defend take the stand in a civil case and
testifi on hi own behalf he cannot later invok the fifth amend and refus to answer
question concern the same subject matter on crossexamin if he doe the judg
mai order that hi testimoni on direct examin be stricken from the record
gener court have not been sympathet to the defend dilemma and have allow
civil discoveri to proce even though crimin charg ar pend in some instanc the
court or the parti mai seal the civil record by agreement in rare case the court mai order
that the civil case be stai pend resolut of the crimin case normal howev the
court will allow the case to proce simultan despit the substanti prejudic to the
defend in parallel civil and crimin case in which the govern is a parti the crimin
process includ the us of grand juri subpoena mai not be us to obtain evid sole
for a civil case
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2113
parallel investig
parallel investig ar simultan independ investig conduct by civil regulatori
agenc and feder prosecutor that involv substanti the same issu and parti us v
stringer 521 f3d 1189 9th cir 2008 recent address the applic boundari of law
govern conduct while conduct parallel investig although parallel investig
ar gener permiss the govern mai not initi a civil action sole to obtain
evid for it crimin prosecut and it mai not affirm mislead defend to
conceal the exist of a crimin investig stringer reaffirm the broad discret that
court afford civil regulatori agenc and feder prosecutor in pursu parallel
investig rule that so long as target ar gener awar of the possibl of
prosecut the govern ha no oblig to inform them about a crimin investig
furthermor where a regulatori agenc initi a legitim civil investig befor a
crimin investig feder prosecutor mai us and guid the civil investig to
facilit crimin prosecut thu stringer underscor the possibl that a feder crimin
investig mai be skulk behind everi ongo civil investig
jurisdict
crimin and civil action for fraud mai be brought in feder or state court feder court
have jurisdict over feder crimin or civil statut certain common law claim involv
parti who ar resid of differ state and controversi in which 75000 or more is at
issu state court have jurisdict over state statut and most common law civil claim
corpor civil and crimin liabil
at the feder level and in mani state corpor civil and crimin liabil is vicari liabil
the absolut liabil of on parti for the misconduct of anoth parti that is impos under
the doctrin of respondeat superior under the doctrin of respondeat superior a corpor is
liabl for the act of their employe if those act occur within the scope of employ and
with some intent to benefit the corpor
the doctrin of respondeat superior is veri broad and will in fact impos liabil on a
corpor even if those in manag had no knowledg or particip in the underli
crimin event moreov the act of ani em ploye from the lowest clerk to the ceo can
imput liabil upon a corpor and a corpor mai be liabl for the act of it
employe that violat secur law bank law antibriberi law and mani other
in addit there is no due dilig defens to a feder crimin charg mean that it
overview of the unit state legal system law
2114 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not matter that a corpor had reason and effect polici in place to prevent an
employe from commit the illeg act howev some state allow manag due
dilig as a goodfaith affirm defens to corpor crimin liabil
corpor men rea
when a corpor is be charg with a crime that requir proof of a mental state the
move parti must onli show that the agent who commit the wrongdo had the
requir state of mind thu the requir mental state is attribut to the corpor for
exampl to impos liabil against a corpor for fraud the move parti must prove that
an agent of the corpor made the alleg fals statement with specif intent to defraud
liabil of a corpor director and offic
the current legal environ impos civil and crimin liabil on a corpor director
and offic gener director and offic liabil stem from the certain duti impos by
law to their corpor the duti which ar discuss in more detail below ar as follow
duti of loyalti director and offic must act sole in the best interest of the
employerprincip free of ani selfdeal conflict of interest or other abus of the
princip for person advantag
duti of care director and offic must conduct busi affair prudent with the skill
and attent normal exercis by peopl in similar posit
statutori duti numer state and feder law regul director and offic action
and decis regard the manag of their compani includ secur law
antitrust law racket law tax law intellectu properti and patent law and state
corpor law
even though director and offic mai be pursu in crimin proceed crimin law
often impos men rea ie intent requir that gener make it more difficult to
impos crimin liabil on director and offic
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2201
