2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software/SNAP! Reporter


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


SNAP! Reporter 
Snap! Reporter is a data mining software program designed for use with Lotus Notes, 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, and Access databases.  Its chief virtue is its ease of use. Most 
software requires a familiarity with databases and data mining techniques, but anyone with 
basic spreadsheet skills can produce reports and graphics with this product. In Snap!, data 
retrieval and analysis are automated with one-button functions; some tasks are accomplished 
by drag-and-drop.  
 
Snap! produces Gantt Charts (i.e., graphical representations of projects) and counts 
occurrences of key words rather than only charting actual numbers. The software also 
creates stacked non-columnar reports and generates multiple Relationized Data Sets from 
one originating record—functions not available in other products. Snap! is not as powerful 
as some other data mining software, but it is easier to use. It is adequate to most tasks, 
though some complex cases may need a stronger package. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 



:


snap report
snap report is a data mine softwar program design for us with lotu note
microsoft excel spreadsheet and access databas it chief virtu is it eas of us most
softwar requir a familiar with databas and data mine techniqu but anyon with
basic spreadsheet skill can produc report and graphic with thi product in snap data
retriev and analysi ar autom with onebutton function some task ar accomplish
by draganddrop
snap produc gantt chart ie graphic represent of project and count
occurr of kei word rather than onli chart actual number the softwar also
creat stack noncolumnar report and gener multipl relation data set from
on origin recordfunct not avail in other product snap is not as power
as some other data mine softwar but it is easier to us it is adequ to most task
though some complex case mai need a stronger packag
data analysi and report tool investig
3630 2011 fraud examin manual
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
