2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Using Data Analysis Software/Advantages of Using Data Analysis Software


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Advantages of Using Data Analysis Software 
There are five significant advantages to using data analysis software. First, data analysis 
software allows the fraud examiner to centralize an investigation, relying less on others to 
gather pertinent information. Because of the amount of information data mining software is 
able to sort through, the examiner no longer has to rely on different sources for information. 
In the past, when analyzing a company’s books for possible discrepancies, the examiner 
would have to ask for the assistance of several persons within the accounting department to 
locate the pertinent information. Now, however, the data analysis program will do all the 
“leg work,” ensuring an above-the-board investigation without many variables. 
 
Second, data analysis software allows the fraud examiner to ensure that an investigation is 
accurate and complete. In the past, an audit or fraud examination could only be complete to 
the extent that the investigator was able to sift through information. When looking at one 
month’s worth of a company’s transactions, a fraud examiner might be forced to research 
more than one million transactions. Given the amount of time an auditor generally has to 
conduct a single examination, the depth of a manual audit can be suspect at best. By using a 
data analysis program, the fraud examiner can run several different analysis patterns in a 
matter of hours, enabling him to look at greater volumes of information from a number of 
different angles. These procedures lead to a more comprehensive examination. 
 
Third, data analysis allows the fraud examiner to base predictions about the probability of a 
fraudulent situation on reliable statistical information. By utilizing data mining software, the 
fraud examiner can base any strong suspicions of fraudulent activities on hard numbers. 
Because the software will compare one month’s expenditures with the same data for the rest 
of the months of the year, the fraud examiner can point conclusively to troubled areas. With 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.605 
hard data to support a fraud examiner’s suspicions, a company is more likely to conduct 
further investigations into the wrongdoing. 
 
Fourth, data analysis allows the fraud examiner to search entire data files for red flags of 
possible fraud. The number of checkpoints a fraud examiner can set up using a data analysis 
program is staggering. By cutting down on the paperwork involved in an investigation, the 
fraud examiner is able to execute a number of different searches and analyses of the 
company’s raw data.  
 
Finally, data analysis can assist the fraud examiner in developing reference files for ongoing 
fraud detection and investigation work. By performing audits and examinations with data 
analysis software, the fraud examiner will begin to recognize trends and set up a list of 
precedents for individual accounting situations, such as a monthly statement reconciliation. 
In doing so, the fraud examiner can establish a “norm” with which to compare individual 
months or years. These precedents can also be used by the fraud examiner in general terms, 
and the knowledge can be applied to nearly any fraud investigation. 
 



:


advantag of us data analysi softwar
there ar five signific advantag to us data analysi softwar first data analysi
softwar allow the fraud examin to central an investig reli less on other to
gather pertin inform becaus of the amount of inform data mine softwar is
abl to sort through the examin no longer ha to reli on differ sourc for inform
in the past when analyz a compani book for possibl discrep the examin
would have to ask for the assist of sever person within the account depart to
locat the pertin inform now howev the data analysi program will do all the
leg work ensur an abovetheboard investig without mani variabl
second data analysi softwar allow the fraud examin to ensur that an investig is
accur and complet in the past an audit or fraud examin could onli be complet to
the extent that the investig wa abl to sift through inform when look at on
month worth of a compani transact a fraud examin might be forc to research
more than on million transact given the amount of time an auditor gener ha to
conduct a singl examin the depth of a manual audit can be suspect at best by us a
data analysi program the fraud examin can run sever differ analysi pattern in a
matter of hour enabl him to look at greater volum of inform from a number of
differ angl these procedur lead to a more comprehens examin
third data analysi allow the fraud examin to base predict about the probabl of a
fraudul situat on reliabl statist inform by util data mine softwar the
fraud examin can base ani strong suspicion of fraudul activ on hard number
becaus the softwar will compar on month expenditur with the same data for the rest
of the month of the year the fraud examin can point conclus to troubl area with
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3605
hard data to support a fraud examin suspicion a compani is more like to conduct
further investig into the wrongdo
fourth data analysi allow the fraud examin to search entir data file for red flag of
possibl fraud the number of checkpoint a fraud examin can set up us a data analysi
program is stagger by cut down on the paperwork involv in an investig the
fraud examin is abl to execut a number of differ search and analys of the
compani raw data
final data analysi can assist the fraud examin in develop refer file for ongo
fraud detect and investig work by perform audit and examin with data
analysi softwar the fraud examin will begin to recogn trend and set up a list of
preced for individu account situat such as a monthli statement reconcili
in do so the fraud examin can establish a norm with which to compar individu
month or year these preced can also be us by the fraud examin in gener term
and the knowledg can be appli to nearli ani fraud investig
