2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Using Data Analysis Software/Compliance Verification


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Compliance Verification 
This function determines whether company policies are met by employee transactions. If a 
company limits the amount of its reimbursements, the software can check to see that this 
limit is being observed. Many times fraud exam iners can find early indications of fraud by 
testing detail data for values above or below specified amounts. For example, when 
employees are out of town, do they adhere to the company policy of not spending more 
than $30 a day for meals? For starters, we can look at the expense reports and select those 
with meal expenses exceeding $30. With the in formation returned from this simple query, we 
have a starting point for suspecting fraud. Even though these variances are small ($2 and $3), 
the time taken to research small variances can be well invested. The trail might lead to 
something big. After further investigation, you might learn that the employee did not have 
supporting documentation to submit because a vendor’s sales representative paid for all the 
meals. If this is the case, you have two fraud suspects, the employee and the employee’s boss 
who approved the report. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.609 



:


complianc verif
thi function determin whether compani polici ar met by employe transact if a
compani limit the amount of it reimburs the softwar can check to see that thi
limit is be observ mani time fraud exam iner can find earli indic of fraud by
test detail data for valu abov or below specifi amount for exampl when
employe ar out of town do thei adher to the compani polici of not spend more
than 30 a dai for meal for starter we can look at the expens report and select those
with meal expens exceed 30 with the in format return from thi simpl queri we
have a start point for suspect fraud even though these varianc ar small 2 and 3
the time taken to research small varianc can be well invest the trail might lead to
someth big after further investig you might learn that the employe did not have
support document to submit becaus a vendor sale repres paid for all the
meal if thi is the case you have two fraud suspect the employe and the employe boss
who approv the report
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3609
