2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS/Using Data Analysis Software/Data Analysis Checklist


:


Investigation


:


Data Analysis


:


Data Analysis Checklist 
The following are some key issues to address as one conducts a data analysis. 
• Ensure data validity and data integrity. There is always a concern when the examiner 
moves data from one venue to another. One of the concerns is data validity. Is the data 
valid and pertinent to the investigation? The second concern is integrity. Is the valid data 
that was selected correct? A simple check or au dit of the validity and integrity of the data 
should be the first step in the data analysis.    
• Consider data format and structure. This consideration is important when the examiner 
wishes to import or export data with his computer. A date can be formatted into a 
number of different styles, such as mm/dd/yyyy. The structure of the data will also be 
important along with the extension. A text file will have a .txt extension associated with 
it. What format is the current data in? What format will the computer require? How does 
the examiner get the data from here to there if the data formats and structures are 
different? 
• Count the zeros. The examiner should perform a preliminary analysis to ensure that the 
key strategic issue he is about to develop is worth the effort before initiating his fraud 
investigation. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.614   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consider the spectrum of distinct levels of aggregation at which fraud monitoring is 
required. Determine the lowest level (transaction level), the highest level (multiparty 
criminal conspiracies), and the intervening layers that may be present in your industry 
and respective data. 
• Begin with the end in mind. In his book, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen 
Covey states that beginning with the end in mind is good habit. When you develop your 
fraud intelligence action plan, be certain to consider the end result. One question to ask 
may be, “Will this algorithm/consultant hold up under the intense scrutiny of a court of 
law?”  
 



:


data analysi checklist
the follow ar some kei issu to address as on conduct a data analysi
ensur data valid and data integr there is alwai a concern when the examin
move data from on venu to anoth on of the concern is data valid is the data
valid and pertin to the investig the second concern is integr is the valid data
that wa select correct a simpl check or au dit of the valid and integr of the data
should be the first step in the data analysi
consid data format and structur thi consider is import when the examin
wish to import or export data with hi comput a date can be format into a
number of differ style such as mmddyyyi the structur of the data will also be
import along with the extens a text file will have a txt extens associ with
it what format is the current data in what format will the comput requir how doe
the examin get the data from here to there if the data format and structur ar
differ
count the zero the examin should perform a preliminari analysi to ensur that the
kei strateg issu he is about to develop is worth the effort befor initi hi fraud
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3614 2011 fraud examin manual
consid the spectrum of distinct level of aggreg at which fraud monitor is
requir determin the lowest level transact level the highest level multiparti
crimin conspiraci and the interven layer that mai be present in your industri
and respect data
begin with the end in mind in hi book the seven habit of highli effect peopl stephen
covei state that begin with the end in mind is good habit when you develop your
fraud intellig action plan be certain to consid the end result on question to ask
mai be will thi algorithmconsult hold up under the intens scrutini of a court of
law
