2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Fraud Versus Computer Crime/Computer Crime


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Computer Crime 
A line that should be drawn is that between computer fraud and computer crime, terms that 
are commonly used interchangeably with little distinction made between the two. Some 
substantial differences exist between them, however, as we shall see. 
 
Computer Fraud 
A general definition of computer fraud is: 
 
Any defalcation or embezzlement accomplished by tampering with computer programs, data 
files, operations, equipment, or media, and resulting in losses sustained by the organization 
whose computer system was manipulated. 
 
The distinguishing characteristic of computer fraud is that access occurs with the intent to 
execute a fraudulent scheme. Computer fraud statutes have established two very important 
principles:  
• First, the statutes contain definitions of computer-related terms. These statutes allow the 
prosecutor to sidestep having to explain to the jury technical “computer speak” and its 
cumbersome fit with common law terminology. 
• Second, the statutes create an offense based on proof of access with a particular intent. 
Success in carrying away property (money) does not have to be proven. Tracing the flow 
of proceeds is likely to be difficult without paper records and access might be the only 
provable event. 
 
Most states have defined computer fraud as an attempt crime. By viewing the computer as a 
protected asset, the protection is independent of the actual loss to the owner as a result of 
the intrusion. 
 
Computer Crime 
Computer crime  differs from computer fraud in two major ways. Employees who, as a part of 
their normal duties, have access to the computers are deemed to have authorized access and 
thus do not come under the law against access. Manipulation (alteration) or destruction of 
data (including computer software) is independent of fraudulent or other schemes. Such 
action does not fit into the normal vandalism crimes because the data is intangible. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1805 



:


comput crime
a line that should be drawn is that between comput fraud and comput crime term that
ar commonli us interchang with littl distinct made between the two some
substanti differ exist between them howev as we shall see
comput fraud
a gener definit of comput fraud is
ani defalc or embezzl accomplish by tamper with comput program data
file oper equip or media and result in loss sustain by the organ
whose comput system wa manipul
the distinguish characterist of comput fraud is that access occur with the intent to
execut a fraudul scheme comput fraud statut have establish two veri import
principl
first the statut contain definit of computerrel term these statut allow the
prosecutor to sidestep have to explain to the juri technic comput speak and it
cumbersom fit with common law terminolog
second the statut creat an offens base on proof of access with a particular intent
success in carri awai properti monei doe not have to be proven trace the flow
of proce is like to be difficult without paper record and access might be the onli
provabl event
most state have defin comput fraud as an attempt crime by view the comput as a
protect asset the protect is independ of the actual loss to the owner as a result of
the intrus
comput crime
comput crime differ from comput fraud in two major wai employe who as a part of
their normal duti have access to the comput ar deem to have author access and
thu do not come under the law against access manipul alter or destruct of
data includ comput softwar is independ of fraudul or other scheme such
action doe not fit into the normal vandal crime becaus the data is intang
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11805
