2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Hacking/Anti-Hacker Measures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Anti-Hacker Measures 
Because hackers require dial-in capability to gain access, the best prevention strategy is to 
eliminate as many dial-in ports as possible. Unfortunately, the trend today is to install more, 
not fewer, dial-in capabilities because telecommuting and customer connectivity are driving 
the demand for more dial-in capability. The following are some preventive measures that can 
be implemented: 
• Welcome screens are usually proudly displayed at sign-in with a message such as: 
 
Welcome to the XYZ Corporation Computer network. 
 
To discourage unauthorized use, such a screen might be replaced with one that informs 
the user that he is about to access a proprietary network. Additionally, the screen should 
warn that unauthorized access is prohibited and will be prosecuted under the law. The 
screen should not identify either the organization or the network. 
• Security policies should be established and disseminated throughout the organization. 
These policies should include training for all employees, customers (who will appreciate 
the additional security), and others who have a need to access the network. 
• Call-back modems should be used wherever practical. These modems will answer an 
incoming call and require the sender to enter a password. Once the caller has identified 
himself, the modem will terminate the connection, and dial a previously established 
phone number. When the prearranged number is called, the sender must again perform 
the sign-on procedure.  
• Security software packages should be secured to the highest level possible. Most major 
software companies today have to release updates and patches to their software every so 
often. Check your software vendor’s websites on a regular basis for new security patches 
or use the new automated patching features that some companies offer. 
• Passwords should be used in accordance with sound security practices. For example: 
? Passwords should be changed periodically (every 90 days is suggested). 
? Passwords should be of sufficient length to deter guessing (a minimum of 8 
characters is suggested). 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1812                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Passwords of transferred or terminated employees should be changed immediately. 
• Most purchased software comes with a ve ndor supplied password that is used for 
installation and then deleted. All packages should be audited to ensure that these default 
passwords (which are widely known) have been changed. 
• Encryption should be considered for sensitive data files, password files, and sensitive 
computer programs. 
• Communications software should terminate any connection (whether dial-in or direct 
connect) after: 
? A reasonable number of unsuccessful attempts to enter a valid password (usually no 
more than three). 
? A terminal (direct connect or dial-in) has been connected for a period of time with 
no activity. This is called “timing-out.”  
The terminated connection will require redialing into the network and/or re-performing 
the log-in and verification process. Some companies require the data security officer to 
issue a new password before the user can log-in again. 
• Hacker publications and communications should be reviewed to learn the current jargon 
and hacker “handles,” which are the names that hackers use for their online personas. 
Hackers have used the Internet quite efficiently to communicate with each other, while 
producing a significant amount of hacking documentation and programs. Almost any 
hacker website will contain a large number of text files that explain “how to hack,” or 
how various systems operate. Many of these files will also explain the standard 
vulnerabilities of the systems, and the best methods to penetrate their security. 
 



:


antihack measur
becaus hacker requir dialin capabl to gain access the best prevent strategi is to
elimin as mani dialin port as possibl unfortun the trend todai is to instal more
not fewer dialin capabl becaus telecommut and custom connect ar drive
the demand for more dialin capabl the follow ar some prevent measur that can
be implement
welcom screen ar usual proudli displai at signin with a messag such as
welcom to the xyz corpor comput network
to discourag unauthor us such a screen might be replac with on that inform
the user that he is about to access a proprietari network addition the screen should
warn that unauthor access is prohibit and will be prosecut under the law the
screen should not identifi either the organ or the network
secur polici should be establish and dissemin throughout the organ
these polici should includ train for all employe custom who will appreci
the addit secur and other who have a need to access the network
callback modem should be us wherev practic these modem will answer an
incom call and requir the sender to enter a password onc the caller ha identifi
himself the modem will termin the connect and dial a previous establish
phone number when the prearrang number is call the sender must again perform
the signon procedur
secur softwar packag should be secur to the highest level possibl most major
softwar compani todai have to releas updat and patch to their softwar everi so
often check your softwar vendor websit on a regular basi for new secur patch
or us the new autom patch featur that some compani offer
password should be us in accord with sound secur practic for exampl
password should be chang period everi 90 dai is suggest
password should be of suffici length to deter guess a minimum of 8
charact is suggest
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11812 2011 fraud examin manual
password of transfer or termin employe should be chang immedi
most purchas softwar come with a ve ndor suppli password that is us for
instal and then delet all packag should be audit to ensur that these default
password which ar wide known have been chang
encrypt should be consid for sensit data file password file and sensit
comput program
commun softwar should termin ani connect whether dialin or direct
connect after
a reason number of unsuccess attempt to enter a valid password usual no
more than three
a termin direct connect or dialin ha been connect for a period of time with
no activ thi is call timingout
the termin connect will requir redial into the network andor reperform
the login and verif process some compani requir the data secur offic to
issu a new password befor the user can login again
hacker public and commun should be review to learn the current jargon
and hacker handl which ar the name that hacker us for their onlin persona
hacker have us the internet quit effici to commun with each other while
produc a signific amount of hack document and program almost ani
hacker websit will contain a larg number of text file that explain how to hack or
how variou system oper mani of these file will also explain the standard
vulner of the system and the best method to penetr their secur
