2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Internet Fraud/Counterfeit Check Scams


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Counterfeit Check Scams 
This scam has several variations but usually starts with the victim offering something for sale 
on the Internet. Usually it is a big ticket item. Somehow the fraudster has obtained a 
legitimate check from a person or company, scanned it, and altered it to support the scheme. 
The fraudster then contracts with the victim to buy the item but must supply a down 
payment first. The check is delivered by a highly recognized international carrier such as 
FedEx, further adding to the false impression that this is a legitimate deal. The victim 
deposits the check, but before it clears, the fraudster requests a refund and backs out of the 
deal offering to let the victim keep a portion of the funds for his trouble. The victim 
forwards part of the money back. Of course the victim later learns that his bank has reversed 
the deposit amount because the check was no good. The fraudsters usually claim to be in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1829 
another country and must therefore use a “middle man” such as a lawyer to facilitate the 
transaction on their behalf. This is designed to create a sense of false security for the victim. 
 
Another variation on this scheme involves a seemingly chance meeting in a harmless chat 
room. Once the chat relationship develops the fr audster explains that they are in a foreign 
country and need some help. It seems that they are unable to cash certain traveler’s checks in 
their country and ask for the victim’s help to cash the checks for them in the United States 
and then send them a money order, less a small token of their appreciation. They usually 
invent some unfortunate circumstance or urgency for the request. The first time it occurs the 
checks are good and everything works out. In a second request, they ask for the victim’s help 
again, this time it’s a much larger amount and this time the checks are counterfeit. The 
victim unknowingly participates in a forgery by passing the counterfeit checks.  
 



:


counterfeit check scam
thi scam ha sever variat but usual start with the victim offer someth for sale
on the internet usual it is a big ticket item somehow the fraudster ha obtain a
legitim check from a person or compani scan it and alter it to support the scheme
the fraudster then contract with the victim to bui the item but must suppli a down
payment first the check is deliv by a highli recogn intern carrier such as
fedex further ad to the fals impress that thi is a legitim deal the victim
deposit the check but befor it clear the fraudster request a refund and back out of the
deal offer to let the victim keep a portion of the fund for hi troubl the victim
forward part of the monei back of cours the victim later learn that hi bank ha revers
the deposit amount becaus the check wa no good the fraudster usual claim to be in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11829
anoth countri and must therefor us a middl man such as a lawyer to facilit the
transact on their behalf thi is design to creat a sens of fals secur for the victim
anoth variat on thi scheme involv a seemingli chanc meet in a harmless chat
room onc the chat relationship develop the fr audster explain that thei ar in a foreign
countri and need some help it seem that thei ar unabl to cash certain travel check in
their countri and ask for the victim help to cash the check for them in the unit state
and then send them a monei order less a small token of their appreci thei usual
invent some unfortun circumst or urgenc for the request the first time it occur the
check ar good and everyth work out in a second request thei ask for the victim help
again thi time it a much larger amount and thi time the check ar counterfeit the
victim unknowingli particip in a forgeri by pass the counterfeit check
