2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Internet Fraud/Phishing/ROCK PHISHING


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


ROCK PHISHING 
One type of phishing attack has been particularly effective — the rock phish. It’s estimated 
that rock phishing accounts for roughly half of all phishing attacks (as measured by the 
number of unique URLs). Rock phishers have targeted national and regional banks 
throughout the U.S., Europe, and Latin America. Toward the end of 2007 they broadened 
their scope to include online brokerages, information services, treasury management 
companies, and even social networking sites. 
 
Like most phishers, rock phishers use botnets to send massive amounts of phishing e-mails 
to huge volumes of Internet users. The e-mails contain a message from a financial 
institution, hopefully enticing users to click on a fraudulent URL. There is some indication 
that they cycle through multiple e-mail lists and attempt to reach the Internet users most 
likely to use the brands that they are targeting. Unlike most phishers, they don’t compromise 
a Web server and install a phishing site. Instead, an elaborate process is implemented 
whereby multiple domain names are registered at multiple registrars — often with less known 
country-code based top-level domains. Multiple DNS (domain name system) servers are also 
set up, which provide names to IP services for the pool of domain names. The IP addresses 
used — and there may be upwards of 100 at a time — point to multiple compromised servers 
that simply forward Web connections to the real phish sites. These proxy servers typically 
handle connections for multiple targets at a time.  
 
It is interesting to note that before these bogus domains are identified and blocked, 
fraudsters have already done the damage. Looking at a rock phish URL one sees random 
numbers with a few alphabet characters in it — these are alphanumeric figures. These figures 
are used to make the URL string unique, complex, and difficult to differentiate from a 
legitimate one. 
 
Rock phishers have an advanced grasp of technology, using fast flux architecture to change 
name servers and site location in an instant, automating proxy servers to such an extent that 
if one is downed, it automatically switches to the next. Therefore, they are able to lengthen 
the life span of rock phish URLs and make them stealthier. 
 
One of the best ways to combat rock phishing is to implement a sender policy framework 
(SPF) or Domain Keys on your e-mail system. More and more, ISPs are rejecting, or at least 
sending to the spam folder, e-mail that fails SPF or Domain Key authentication.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1833 



:


rock phish
on type of phish attack ha been particularli effect the rock phish it estim
that rock phish account for roughli half of all phish attack as measur by the
number of uniqu url rock phisher have target nation and region bank
throughout the us europ and latin america toward the end of 2007 thei broaden
their scope to includ onlin brokerag inform servic treasuri manag
compani and even social network site
like most phisher rock phisher us botnet to send massiv amount of phish email
to huge volum of internet user the email contain a messag from a financi
institut hopefulli entic user to click on a fraudul url there is some indic
that thei cycl through multipl email list and attempt to reach the internet user most
like to us the brand that thei ar target unlik most phisher thei dont compromis
a web server and instal a phish site instead an elabor process is implement
wherebi multipl domain name ar regist at multipl registrar often with less known
countrycod base toplevel domain multipl dn domain name system server ar also
set up which provid name to ip servic for the pool of domain name the ip address
us and there mai be upward of 100 at a time point to multipl compromis server
that simpli forward web connect to the real phish site these proxi server typic
handl connect for multipl target at a time
it is interest to note that befor these bogu domain ar identifi and block
fraudster have alreadi done the damag look at a rock phish url on see random
number with a few alphabet charact in it these ar alphanumer figur these figur
ar us to make the url string uniqu complex and difficult to differenti from a
legitim on
rock phisher have an advanc grasp of technolog us fast flux architectur to chang
name server and site locat in an instant autom proxi server to such an extent that
if on is down it automat switch to the next therefor thei ar abl to lengthen
the life span of rock phish url and make them stealthier
on of the best wai to combat rock phish is to implement a sender polici framework
spf or domain kei on your email system more and more isp ar reject or at least
send to the spam folder email that fail spf or domain kei authent
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11833
