2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Internet Fraud/Combating Internet Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Combating Internet Fraud 
Conducting business on the Internet is generally a safe proposition that can be made even 
more so through a few additional safety precautions.  
• Encryption — Any confidential information or credit card numbers should be encrypted in 
their entirety. An encryption system is made up of a cryptographic function, which 
scrambles an electronic transmission, and an inverse decrypt function, which restores the 
transmission to its original state. Encryption hardware and software can be used to 
scramble any communication by utilizing a complex mathematical formula. The only way 
to unscramble an encrypted message is to provide the unique answer key, thus unlocking 
the message. Encryption is the best method to stymie would-be interceptors of company 
transactions. 
• Customer validation — Because the Internet offers users an additional layer of anonymity, 
businesses should install some form of a customer validation safeguard in their Internet 
purchasing system. This may include a customer code or password that the customer can 
identify himself with before purchasing a product. As well, the business should 
distinguish itself to the customer, ensuring that no one else can falsely assume the 
company’s identity. 
• Internal network security — Organizations that conduct business on the Web should never, 
under any circumstances, keep their financial information database on their Web server. 
A knowledgeable computer hacker can sometimes penetrate Internet websites, and 
financial information is the primary target of these hackers, for obvious reasons. 
Therefore, the database that maintains a company’s financial information should be a 
completely internal system, untouchable from the Internet. This safeguard will help 
ensure that sensitive information is not compromised in any way. 
• Firewalls — Firewalls are advanced software programs that effectively “lock up” access to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1834                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an Internet site or e-mail transmission. Firewalls are designed to control the interface 
between a network and the Internet. This technology surveys incoming and outgoing 
transmissions between the network and the Internet, stopping any questionable 
transmission attempt to access a sensitive area. While firewalls are not foolproof, they do 
provide an additional layer of protection against Internet attacks or breaches of security. 
 
More information about scams perpetrated agai nst businesses and individuals can be found 
in the previous chapter, “Consumer Fraud.”  
 
 



:


combat internet fraud
conduct busi on the internet is gener a safe proposit that can be made even
more so through a few addit safeti precaut
encrypt ani confidenti inform or credit card number should be encrypt in
their entireti an encrypt system is made up of a cryptograph function which
scrambl an electron transmiss and an invers decrypt function which restor the
transmiss to it origin state encrypt hardwar and softwar can be us to
scrambl ani commun by util a complex mathemat formula the onli wai
to unscrambl an encrypt messag is to provid the uniqu answer kei thu unlock
the messag encrypt is the best method to stymi wouldb interceptor of compani
transact
custom valid becaus the internet offer user an addit layer of anonym
busi should instal some form of a custom valid safeguard in their internet
purchas system thi mai includ a custom code or password that the custom can
identifi himself with befor purchas a product as well the busi should
distinguish itself to the custom ensur that no on els can fals assum the
compani ident
intern network secur organ that conduct busi on the web should never
under ani circumst keep their financi inform databas on their web server
a knowledg comput hacker can sometim penetr internet websit and
financi inform is the primari target of these hacker for obviou reason
therefor the databas that maintain a compani financi inform should be a
complet intern system untouch from the internet thi safeguard will help
ensur that sensit inform is not compromis in ani wai
firewal firewal ar advanc softwar program that effect lock up access to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11834 2011 fraud examin manual
an internet site or email transmiss firewal ar design to control the interfac
between a network and the internet thi technolog survei incom and outgo
transmiss between the network and the internet stop ani question
transmiss attempt to access a sensit area while firewal ar not foolproof thei do
provid an addit layer of protect against internet attack or breach of secur
more inform about scam perpetr agai nst busi and individu can be found
in the previou chapter consum fraud
