2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Other Network Security


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Other Network Security 
Securing a computer network by means of logical controls is a difficult but necessary 
requirement for ensuring the safety of a computer system from attacks by outsiders. Logical 
controls include management security policies, user authentication systems, data access 
controls, network firewalls, security awareness training, encryption algorithms, penetration 
testing, intrusion detection software, and incident response plans.  
 
Network security can also be provided by a combination of design, hardware devices, and 
software. Data encryption is carried out by a combination of hardware and software. 
Encrypted data is scrambled by a formula using a unique key and can only be unscrambled 
with the same formula and key at the receiving end. The decision to use encryption should be 
made in light of the risks and after a cost-benefit analysis. Drawbacks to encryption are the 
cost of the hardware and software, the cost of the administration, and the inherent delays 
incurred by the extra steps required for processing. 
 
Digital signatures are becoming more common, in part because Congress and many states 
have passed legislation to legitimize the electronic “signing” of documents. In 2000 the 
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-SIGN Act) became 
effective. This federal statute basically provides a mechanism whereby any document that is 
required to be signed, can be signed “electr onically.” The E-SIGN Act does not require a 
party to use or accept electronic signatures, electronic contracts or electronic records, but 
rather seeks to facilitate the use of electronic signatures and documents by upholding their 
legal effect regardless of the type or method selected by the parties. The E-SIGN Act is also 
technology-neutral and does not require a specific type or method that businesses and 
consumers must use or accept in order to conduct their electronic transaction. The Act 
regulates any transactions involving interstate or foreign commerce. However, many states 
have enacted their own digital signature laws, which regulate purely intrastate transactions. 
Additionally, many state and federal agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, are encouraging the use of electronic filing and digital 
signatures as a means to speed up the collection and processing of information. 
 
Biological access verification, long the favorite stuff of movie makers, is now available.  
This verification technique includes fingerprints, palm prints, voice prints, signatures, and 
retina scans. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1841 
Profiling software authenticates users by monitoring their statistical characteristics, such as 
typing speed and keystroke touch. Smart card access devices are similar to an ATM card; like 
ATM cards, they are susceptible to loss and forgery. 
 
The most effective components of internal security are education, reporting facilities, and 
vigorous disciplinary action for offenders, including prosecution of illegal acts. An 
enterprise-wide employee awareness program should be combined with formal training in 
the area of information security. For employees to fulfill their security responsibilities they 
should know what information needs to be kept confidential, how to recognize threats to 
security, and how to use backups and other aids for their desktop machines. Giving 
employees incentives such as bonuses to follow security guidelines, however, will be the 
most effective motivator. 
 
Protecting the network from external threats requires some additional considerations. The 
less an external perpetrator knows about the technology environment (for example, type of 
hardware and software packages used), the harder it is to obtain fraudulent access. Part of 
the security policy should address how much and what kind of information regarding the 
technology of an organization should be made public.  
 
Organizations should guard against providing too much access to third parties. There is 
pressure to establish connectivity by marketing, purchasing, research, and other branches. 
Connectivity should be granted only after it has been established that the benefits outweigh 
the risks and costs. 
 



:


other network secur
secur a comput network by mean of logic control is a difficult but necessari
requir for ensur the safeti of a comput system from attack by outsid logic
control includ manag secur polici user authent system data access
control network firewal secur awar train encrypt algorithm penetr
test intrus detect softwar and incid respons plan
network secur can also be provid by a combin of design hardwar devic and
softwar data encrypt is carri out by a combin of hardwar and softwar
encrypt data is scrambl by a formula us a uniqu kei and can onli be unscrambl
with the same formula and kei at the receiv end the decis to us encrypt should be
made in light of the risk and after a costbenefit analysi drawback to encrypt ar the
cost of the hardwar and softwar the cost of the administr and the inher delai
incur by the extra step requir for process
digit signatur ar becom more common in part becaus congress and mani state
have pass legisl to legitim the electron sign of document in 2000 the
electron signatur in global and nation commerc act esign act becam
effect thi feder statut basic provid a mechan wherebi ani document that is
requir to be sign can be sign electr onic the esign act doe not requir a
parti to us or accept electron signatur electron contract or electron record but
rather seek to facilit the us of electron signatur and document by uphold their
legal effect regardless of the type or method select by the parti the esign act is also
technologyneutr and doe not requir a specif type or method that busi and
consum must us or accept in order to conduct their electron transact the act
regul ani transact involv interst or foreign commerc howev mani state
have enact their own digit signatur law which regul pure intrast transact
addition mani state and feder agenc includ the intern revenu servic and the
secur and exchang commiss ar encourag the us of electron file and digit
signatur as a mean to speed up the collect and process of inform
biolog access verif long the favorit stuff of movi maker is now avail
thi verif techniqu includ fingerprint palm print voic print signatur and
retina scan
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11841
profil softwar authent user by monitor their statist characterist such as
type speed and keystrok touch smart card access devic ar similar to an atm card like
atm card thei ar suscept to loss and forgeri
the most effect compon of intern secur ar educ report facil and
vigor disciplinari action for offend includ prosecut of illeg act an
enterprisewid employe awar program should be combin with formal train in
the area of inform secur for employe to fulfil their secur respons thei
should know what inform need to be kept confidenti how to recogn threat to
secur and how to us backup and other aid for their desktop machin give
employe incent such as bonus to follow secur guidelin howev will be the
most effect motiv
protect the network from extern threat requir some addit consider the
less an extern perpetr know about the technolog environ for exampl type of
hardwar and softwar packag us the harder it is to obtain fraudul access part of
the secur polici should address how much and what kind of inform regard the
technolog of an organ should be made public
organ should guard against provid too much access to third parti there is
pressur to establish connect by market purchas research and other branch
connect should be grant onli after it ha been establish that the benefit outweigh
the risk and cost
