2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Internal Controls in the Data Center


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Internal Controls in the Data Center 
In most instances, computer-related crimes are very difficult to detect. An intruder may be 
able to gain unauthorized access to a network or computer system, perpetrate whatever 
criminal activity was planned, and retreat without anyone being aware of the intrusion, much 
less the criminal activity that has taken place. So how does an organization become aware 
that its information resources have been compromised by someone — either inside or outside 
of the organization — with criminal intent? A few possibilities include: 
• A strong set of policies and standards to define for employees and management what the 
company deems as unacceptable or unauthorized activities. 
• Strong physical security to thwart those intent upon the theft of physical assets of the 
organization. 
• Central Systems access control and data object protection. 
• Strong security for the organization’s application programs. 
• Intrusion detection hardware and software for network and communications resources. 
• Auditing of system and violation logs.  
 
All of these mechanisms, if used correctly, will alert the organization of inappropriate 
actions. This all assumes, of course, that someone is keeping an eye out for exceptions and 
violations. All of the security policies and standards, the intrusion detection software, the 
violation logs, and the access controls will mean absolutely nothing if the organization is not 
committed to applying them properly and maintaining them adequately. 
 
General controls over a data center are relevant for all applications. The general control 
categories include system maintenance, implementation of new systems (including 
development), computer operations, system software (including security and 
telecommunications software), and data files. 
 



:


intern control in the data center
in most instanc computerrel crime ar veri difficult to detect an intrud mai be
abl to gain unauthor access to a network or comput system perpetr whatev
crimin activ wa plan and retreat without anyon be awar of the intrus much
less the crimin activ that ha taken place so how doe an organ becom awar
that it inform resourc have been compromis by someon either insid or outsid
of the organ with crimin intent a few possibl includ
a strong set of polici and standard to defin for employe and manag what the
compani deem as unaccept or unauthor activ
strong physic secur to thwart those intent upon the theft of physic asset of the
organ
central system access control and data object protect
strong secur for the organ applic program
intrus detect hardwar and softwar for network and commun resourc
audit of system and violat log
all of these mechan if us correctli will alert the organ of inappropri
action thi all assum of cours that someon is keep an ey out for except and
violat all of the secur polici and standard the intrus detect softwar the
violat log and the access control will mean absolut noth if the organ is not
commit to appli them properli and maintain them adequ
gener control over a data center ar relev for all applic the gener control
categori includ system mainten implement of new system includ
develop comput oper system softwar includ secur and
telecommun softwar and data file
