2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Access and Telecommunication Controls


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Access and Telecommunication Controls 
In the 1960s and 1970s, access controls meant ensuring that there was a lock on the 
computer room door. As online systems were implemented, the definition of access evolved 
to include logical access in addition to physical access. Logical access refers to any location 
where someone can sign on to the system. That sign-on access can be a direct connection or 
a dial-up. In today’s, online, real-time, and in terconnected world, it is easy to forget physical 
guards over computer equipment. Computer equipment must be physically secured. This 
should include network servers, telephone system computers, communications controllers, 
and personal computers with sensitive data. 
 
Access and telecommunications controls should achieve the following objectives: 
• Provide physical security over equipment, users, and information. 
• Protect critical data from loss, damage, or unauthorized disclosure. 
• Ensure network reliability by using appropriate hardware and software. 
• Prevent unauthorized access and use of the network. 
• Ensure system availability. 
• Meet user requirements. 
 



:


access and telecommun control
in the 1960 and 1970 access control meant ensur that there wa a lock on the
comput room door as onlin system were implement the definit of access evolv
to includ logic access in addit to physic access logic access refer to ani locat
where someon can sign on to the system that signon access can be a direct connect or
a dialup in todai onlin realtim and in terconnect world it is easi to forget physic
guard over comput equip comput equip must be physic secur thi
should includ network server telephon system comput commun control
and person comput with sensit data
access and telecommun control should achiev the follow object
provid physic secur over equip user and inform
protect critic data from loss damag or unauthor disclosur
ensur network reliabl by us appropri hardwar and softwar
prevent unauthor access and us of the network
ensur system avail
meet user requir
