2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security/Control Objectives


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Control Objectives 
Well-designed computer applications have built-in controls for all functions. The major 
control objective is completeness of input. 
  
Input completeness  control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer 
sequence check, and computer matching. Input accuracy controls ensure that data is initially 
recorded correctly and converted correctly to machine-readable form. Input accuracy control 
techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer matching, programmed 
edits, and prerecorded input. 
 
Update accuracy ensures that the correct master file account is updated correctly with the 
correct transaction. Update accuracy control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control 
totals, computer matching, and programmed checks. Update control completeness ensures that all 
data entered and accepted by the system updates the master file once and only once. Update 
control completeness techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer sequence 
checks, and computer matching. 
 
Authorization controls ensure that only valid transactions are processed, that all transactions 
processed are authorized by management, and that transactions represent events that actually 
occurred. Authorization techniques used are one-for-one checking and programmed checks. 
 
Maintenance controls provide that data is kept up-to-date or identify unusual data requiring 
further action. They also ensure that data stored on file is not changed except through the 
normal processing cycle. Maintenance control techniques are used for one-for-one checking, 
batch control totals, and programmed checks. 
 



:


control object
welldesign comput applic have builtin control for all function the major
control object is complet of input
input complet control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput
sequenc check and comput match input accuraci control ensur that data is initi
record correctli and convert correctli to machineread form input accuraci control
techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput match program
edit and prerecord input
updat accuraci ensur that the correct master file account is updat correctli with the
correct transact updat accuraci control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control
total comput match and program check updat control complet ensur that all
data enter and accept by the system updat the master file onc and onli onc updat
control complet techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput sequenc
check and comput match
author control ensur that onli valid transact ar process that all transact
process ar author by manag and that transact repres event that actual
occur author techniqu us ar oneforon check and program check
mainten control provid that data is kept uptod or identifi unusu data requir
further action thei also ensur that data store on file is not chang except through the
normal process cycl mainten control techniqu ar us for oneforon check
batch control total and program check
