2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Crime Laws/Mail and Wire Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Mail and Wire Fraud (Title 18, U. S. Code, Sections 1341 and 1343) 
As discussed above, a computer may be the tool used to commit traditional crimes, including 
mail and wire fraud. Due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statutes, prosecutors 
may use these traditional criminal statutes to prosecute computer fraud. In basic terms, the 
laws prohibit the use of mails or wires, including the Internet, in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property.  
 
Several cases have held that the federal mail and wire fraud statues apply to computer fraud. 
Furthermore, prosecutors may use these statutes in addition to or in lieu of cases that 
implicate trade secrets; counterfeit or illicit labels; counterfeit documentation or packaging; 
or counterfeit trademarks, service marks, or certification marks. However, courts disagree on 
whether the mail and wire fraud statutes reach criminal copyright infringement.  
 
Penalties under the mail and wire fraud statues include fines, imprisonment up to five years, 
or both. However, if the violation affects a financial institution, the violator may receive 
fines up to $1,000,000, imprisonment up to thirty years, or both.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1869 



:


mail and wire fraud titl 18 u s code section 1341 and 1343
as discuss abov a comput mai be the tool us to commit tradit crime includ
mail and wire fraud due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statut prosecutor
mai us these tradit crimin statut to prosecut comput fraud in basic term the
law prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti
sever case have held that the feder mail and wire fraud statu appli to comput fraud
furthermor prosecutor mai us these statut in addit to or in lieu of case that
implic trade secret counterfeit or illicit label counterfeit document or packag
or counterfeit trademark servic mark or certif mark howev court disagre on
whether the mail and wire fraud statut reach crimin copyright infring
penalti under the mail and wire fraud statu includ fine imprison up to five year
or both howev if the violat affect a financi institut the violat mai receiv
fine up to 1000000 imprison up to thirti year or both
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11869
