2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Building Financial Statements


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Building Financial Statements 
The one piece of information desired universally by consumers of intelligence is the financial 
statement. At times, the balance sheet becomes the Holy Grail, a magic key that opens all 
sorts of doors to understanding a business. Spies can, of course, steal balance sheets and 
other financial documents. But, often the theft is not worth the risk. Large publicly owned 
companies are required by law to publish their financial statements. This information is 
freely available on the SEC’s EDGAR database. Even large privately owned companies 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.813 
frequently leave enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figuring out their financial 
posture is not terribly difficult. More difficulty generally arises when the CI professional 
seeks to build a financial profile of private small- and medium-sized companies. The finances 
in these companies are usually held close to the vest. Getting in proximity to key financial 
documents may be risky given that a limited number of people in these companies have 
access. 
 
A much safer approach lies in estimating the balance sheet with research methods. Every 
good CI specialist knows how to perform this procedure. The technique forms a central tool 
in the intelligence professional’s arsenal. The process by which balance sheets are estimated 
affords an inside look at the open source process used by CI professionals. 
 
It is important to remember that the financial statements that the CI professional builds are 
nothing more than estimates of a target’s fi nancial status. Confirming those estimates by 
gathering further intelligence is an option, but the process begins as a refined, educated 
guess. While only a guess, a well-calculated estimate may provide all the information needed 
by the client, and this method involves a considerably lower degree of risk than outright 
theft of the sought-after information.  
 
The CI specialist must always be aware that financial statements tell only part of the story 
about a company. He knows to evaluate them in the light of other information such as the 
history of the business, the condition of its market, technological developments, and the 
condition of its suppliers. Quite frankly, estimating works best when done on manufacturing 
companies. The inputs and outputs of a manufacturing firm are easier to spot, track, and 
measure than with service companies. Service companies, however, can be compared to 
other similar businesses by size, location, and number of employees. If the financials of the 
similar company are known, then an educated inference can be made about the target’s 
financial statements. For the purposes of the discussion in this section, and in order to best 
illustrate the methods used by intelligence professionals, the hypothetical target will be a 
manufacturing company.  
 



:


build financi statement
the on piec of inform desir univers by consum of intellig is the financi
statement at time the balanc sheet becom the holi grail a magic kei that open all
sort of door to understand a busi spi can of cours steal balanc sheet and
other financi document but often the theft is not worth the risk larg publicli own
compani ar requir by law to publish their financi statement thi inform is
freeli avail on the sec edgar databas even larg privat own compani
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1813
frequent leav enough of a paper trail in the public sector that figur out their financi
postur is not terribl difficult more difficulti gener aris when the ci profession
seek to build a financi profil of privat small and mediums compani the financ
in these compani ar usual held close to the vest get in proxim to kei financi
document mai be riski given that a limit number of peopl in these compani have
access
a much safer approach li in estim the balanc sheet with research method everi
good ci specialist know how to perform thi procedur the techniqu form a central tool
in the intellig profession arsen the process by which balanc sheet ar estim
afford an insid look at the open sourc process us by ci profession
it is import to rememb that the financi statement that the ci profession build ar
noth more than estim of a target fi nancial statu confirm those estim by
gather further intellig is an option but the process begin as a refin educ
guess while onli a guess a wellcalcul estim mai provid all the inform need
by the client and thi method involv a consider lower degre of risk than outright
theft of the soughtaft inform
the ci specialist must alwai be awar that financi statement tell onli part of the stori
about a compani he know to evalu them in the light of other inform such as the
histori of the busi the condit of it market technolog develop and the
condit of it supplier quit frankli estim work best when done on manufactur
compani the input and output of a manufactur firm ar easier to spot track and
measur than with servic compani servic compani howev can be compar to
other similar busi by size locat and number of employe if the financi of the
similar compani ar known then an educ infer can be made about the target
financi statement for the purpos of the discuss in thi section and in order to best
illustr the method us by intellig profession the hypothet target will be a
manufactur compani
