2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Nontraditional Sources


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Nontraditional Sources 
A spy or intelligence analyst bolsters data developed from public records and estimated 
financial statements by accessing lesser-known sources. Historical archive centers like the 
Center for American History at the University of Texas at Austin have large collections of 
old telephone directories, industrial and corporate directories, and business reference works. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.816                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These materials enable a researcher to trace the history of a business or a person’s 
association with that business. They also serve to track the growth of a business over time. 
Changes in Yellow Pages listings, in telephone numbers, and in statistics in state 
manufacturing directories can be charted to show long-term trends for the business. These 
archives also document where a person served as an officer, as a key employee, or ran their 
own business. 
 
Thomson Gale, a publisher of many fine reference books, has two works of primary interest 
to CI specialists. Directories in Print has over 16,000 entries for every kind of directory 
imaginable, including business and industrial directories, professional and scientific rosters, 
foreign directories, and other lists and guides. Any good CI specialist knows that a good 
trade directory saves valuable research time. In addition, most directories generally run ads 
from suppliers to the industry, so the industry directory serves as an informal reference book 
for locating suppliers. These directories are also a strong way to do background research on 
an industry, and to learn the buzzwords and key concepts governing that business. After 
reviewing the directory, a spy will be able to talk like an insider. 
 
Thomson Gale also produces the Encyclopedia of Associations in regional, national, and 
international editions. From these works a CI specialist can locate experts and resources in 
almost any business field or manufacturing line. Contacting experts for interviews by 
telephone is a fast, inexpensive way to confirm estimates and research findings from open 
sources. The Encyclopedia  also lists annual meetings of organizations and their key officers. It 
serves as a source to identify experts, their trade shows, and related seminars. Savvy CI 
professionals will touch base with professionals prior to an annual meeting or seminar. They 
strike up a professional relationship in advance so when they meet at the convention, they 
are in a position to comfortably chat with targeted professionals and draw out key 
information. Virtually every text on competitive  intelligence mentions attending trade shows, 
but few mention doing the necessary homework before attending. Good spies do their 
homework on whom to contact by using Thomson Gale or similar sources as a starting 
point. 
 



:


nontradit sourc
a spy or intellig analyst bolster data develop from public record and estim
financi statement by access lesserknown sourc histor archiv center like the
center for american histori at the univers of texa at austin have larg collect of
old telephon directori industri and corpor directori and busi refer work
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1816 2011 fraud examin manual
these materi enabl a research to trace the histori of a busi or a person
associ with that busi thei also serv to track the growth of a busi over time
chang in yellow page list in telephon number and in statist in state
manufactur directori can be chart to show longterm trend for the busi these
archiv also document where a person serv as an offic as a kei employe or ran their
own busi
thomson gale a publish of mani fine refer book ha two work of primari interest
to ci specialist directori in print ha over 16000 entri for everi kind of directori
imagin includ busi and industri directori profession and scientif roster
foreign directori and other list and guid ani good ci specialist know that a good
trade directori save valuabl research time in addit most directori gener run ad
from supplier to the industri so the industri directori serv as an inform refer book
for locat supplier these directori ar also a strong wai to do background research on
an industri and to learn the buzzword and kei concept govern that busi after
review the directori a spy will be abl to talk like an insid
thomson gale also produc the encyclopedia of associ in region nation and
intern edit from these work a ci specialist can locat expert and resourc in
almost ani busi field or manufactur line contact expert for interview by
telephon is a fast inexpens wai to confirm estim and research find from open
sourc the encyclopedia also list annual meet of organ and their kei offic it
serv as a sourc to identifi expert their trade show and relat seminar savvi ci
profession will touch base with profession prior to an annual meet or seminar thei
strike up a profession relationship in advanc so when thei meet at the convent thei
ar in a posit to comfort chat with target profession and draw out kei
inform virtual everi text on competit intellig mention attend trade show
but few mention do the necessari homework befor attend good spi do their
homework on whom to contact by us thomson gale or similar sourc as a start
point
