2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/A Corporate Spy Uses Open Sources: What of It?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


A Corporate Spy Uses Open Sources: What of It? 
A corporate spy uses some or all of the following open sources of information: 
1. Public records (regulatory, civil, criminal) 
2. Annual reports 
3. Telephone directories (internal and external) 
4. Analyst reports 
5. News accounts 
6. Magazine articles 
7. Constructed balance sheets 
8. Reference books 
9. Biographical sources 
10. Visual sightings and surveillance 
  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.820                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
11. Electronic databases and CD-ROMs 
12. Internet/Web 
 
All of these materials blend together to develop actual, actionable intelligence. In the 
alternative, they act as a springboard for gaining additional data. The question is, if all this 
data is out there by default, what can a company do about it? 
 
Certainly a company can educate its employees to be careful about what they say in public, 
put into print, or place on the Internet. Security training may also teach them to recognize 
pretext telephone calls designed to obtain inside information. It may also be beneficial to 
train employees on how spies use open sources to gather competitive intelligence on a 
business. Employees can be taught not to divulge proprietary data and to think before they 
speak. 
 
The reality, however, is that companies must operate in an open society, not a police state. 
The free exchange of ideas and information will be absolutely essential to 21st century 
commerce. The first step in protecting sensitive corporate information is to realize that a 
security manager, a security investigator, or an internal auditor cannot protect everything. In 
the words of John Keegan, the noted military historian, “to defend everything is to  
defend nothing.” 
 
A security professional must identify the key pieces of intellectual property belonging to the 
company. Those items whose compromise could cause grave harm to the business require 
utmost protection. Knowing the tools and paths in the open source sector a spy could use to 
cut a swath to this critical data will be essential if the security professional is to effectively 
protect it. From a security perspective, an investigator should try to exploit the available 
open sources himself to see if an avenue of attack can be completed. If so, the security 
professional can institute countermeasures before a loss occurs. 
 
If an information loss does occur, a security investigator or auditor can attempt to 
reconstruct a trail back to a possible spy with a sound knowledge of open source techniques.  
 
 



:


a corpor spy us open sourc what of it
a corpor spy us some or all of the follow open sourc of inform
1 public record regulatori civil crimin
2 annual report
3 telephon directori intern and extern
4 analyst report
5 new account
6 magazin articl
7 construct balanc sheet
8 refer book
9 biograph sourc
10 visual sight and surveil
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1820 2011 fraud examin manual
11 electron databas and cdrom
12 internetweb
all of these materi blend togeth to develop actual action intellig in the
altern thei act as a springboard for gain addit data the question is if all thi
data is out there by default what can a compani do about it
certainli a compani can educ it employe to be care about what thei sai in public
put into print or place on the internet secur train mai also teach them to recogn
pretext telephon call design to obtain insid inform it mai also be benefici to
train employe on how spi us open sourc to gather competit intellig on a
busi employe can be taught not to divulg proprietari data and to think befor thei
speak
the realiti howev is that compani must oper in an open societi not a polic state
the free exchang of idea and inform will be absolut essenti to 21st centuri
commerc the first step in protect sensit corpor inform is to realiz that a
secur manag a secur investig or an intern auditor cannot protect everyth in
the word of john keegan the note militari historian to defend everyth is to
defend noth
a secur profession must identifi the kei piec of intellectu properti belong to the
compani those item whose compromis could caus grave harm to the busi requir
utmost protect know the tool and path in the open sourc sector a spy could us to
cut a swath to thi critic data will be essenti if the secur profession is to effect
protect it from a secur perspect an investig should try to exploit the avail
open sourc himself to see if an avenu of attack can be complet if so the secur
profession can institut countermeasur befor a loss occur
if an inform loss doe occur a secur investig or auditor can attempt to
reconstruct a trail back to a possibl spy with a sound knowledg of open sourc techniqu
