2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/How Information Is Lost/Guarding Information Stored in Electronic Format


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Guarding Information Stored in Electronic Format 
Electronic data presents security problems that do not exist with manual documents. A 
small, high-density 1.2 MB computer disk can hold the equivalent of more than two regular 
size novels; CDs, USB flash drives, and other electronic storage devices can hold even more. 
With a single CD, a spy can walk out of a building with thousands of sensitive files tucked 
into his shirt pocket. Furthermore, it is fairly quick and simple to copy even large files from a 
hard drive to a CD or thumb drive. Employees seeking to remove sensitive data can even e-
 mail it to an external address so that they never have to physically carry secret information 
out of the premises.  
 
Since, CDs, flash drives, and other electronic storage devices have extreme portability, 
organizations must take rigid measures to protect them and prevent unauthorized copying of 
sensitive files onto them. The following guidelines will help organizations maintain control 
over data stored on electronic media: 
• Write sensitive data files to portable disks.  Back them up with another disk. Lock up 
originals on-site and securely store backups off-site. Furthermore, secured storage areas 
should blend into their surroundings as much as possible in order to make the 
information thief’s job that much more difficult.  
• Label sensitive magnetic media.  This should include both an external label and an 
internal electronic label designating the file’s classification. (The Label command in the 
Properties Section of Windows can do this.) 
• Guard against accidental erasure. Files should be set so that accidental erasures 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.827 
cannot occur. This will also prohibit a technique used by some corporate spies whereby a 
sensitive disk is deleted, then the disk, which appears to be blank, is taken off-site. Once 
off-site, the targeted files are undeleted.  
• Employ password security on sensitive files.  Many word processors can place 
password protection on files. Combined with other security measures, this provides a 
fairly good perimeter of security for files. Software that encrypts entire files can also be 
purchased.  
• Have a consistent backup procedure for all files. Backup sensitive files onto disks 
designated and labeled for that purpose. 
• Do not leave disks containing sensitive files unattended or unsecured. In large 
offices, require authorized users of classified disks to sign them in and out from a 
designated librarian. 
• Scan outgoing disks to ensure they have no deleted but recoverable sensitive files. 
If a disk does contain such files, reformat the disk, and then write the non-sensitive files 
onto the disk. 
• Before disposing of disks, cut them up. For damaged disks containing highly 
sensitive files, it may be advisable to use a degausser on the disks first. A degausser 
removes all data from the disk so its contents cannot be retrieved, even by “undelete” 
programs.  
 
Organizations should also make sure that sensitive files are not kept on hard drives. In 
addition, employees should be trained to not leave computers unattended if they have 
sensitive information on them. Before employees go to lunch or on break, they should be 
required to place their computers in a secure state.  
 
To prevent spies from finding valuable information in the organization’s trash, sensitive 
computer printouts should be shredded and mixed with non-sensitive shredded documents 
before disposal. 
 
Access to sensitive information must be limited to a need-to-know basis. Organizations 
should maintain a system such as a supervised access log that enables security to track the 
information that each person has handled. If sensitive information is to be transmitted over 
a modem, the files should be encrypted, not just password-protected. Although employees 
might appreciate the convenience, they should not be allowed to dial into company 
computers that contain sensitive information from their homes. Any system containing 
sensitive information should be isolated.  
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.828                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


guard inform store in electron format
electron data present secur problem that do not exist with manual document a
small highdens 12 mb comput disk can hold the equival of more than two regular
size novel cd usb flash drive and other electron storag devic can hold even more
with a singl cd a spy can walk out of a build with thousand of sensit file tuck
into hi shirt pocket furthermor it is fairli quick and simpl to copi even larg file from a
hard drive to a cd or thumb drive employe seek to remov sensit data can even e
mail it to an extern address so that thei never have to physic carri secret inform
out of the premis
sinc cd flash drive and other electron storag devic have extrem portabl
organ must take rigid measur to protect them and prevent unauthor copi of
sensit file onto them the follow guidelin will help organ maintain control
over data store on electron media
write sensit data file to portabl disk back them up with anoth disk lock up
origin onsit and secur store backup offsit furthermor secur storag area
should blend into their surround as much as possibl in order to make the
inform thief job that much more difficult
label sensit magnet media thi should includ both an extern label and an
intern electron label design the file classif the label command in the
properti section of window can do thi
guard against accident erasur file should be set so that accident erasur
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1827
cannot occur thi will also prohibit a techniqu us by some corpor spi wherebi a
sensit disk is delet then the disk which appear to be blank is taken offsit onc
offsit the target file ar undelet
emploi password secur on sensit file mani word processor can place
password protect on file combin with other secur measur thi provid a
fairli good perimet of secur for file softwar that encrypt entir file can also be
purchas
have a consist backup procedur for all file backup sensit file onto disk
design and label for that purpos
do not leav disk contain sensit file unattend or unsecur in larg
offic requir author user of classifi disk to sign them in and out from a
design librarian
scan outgo disk to ensur thei have no delet but recover sensit file
if a disk doe contain such file reformat the disk and then write the nonsensit file
onto the disk
befor dispos of disk cut them up for damag disk contain highli
sensit file it mai be advis to us a degauss on the disk first a degauss
remov all data from the disk so it content cannot be retriev even by undelet
program
organ should also make sure that sensit file ar not kept on hard drive in
addit employe should be train to not leav comput unattend if thei have
sensit inform on them befor employe go to lunch or on break thei should be
requir to place their comput in a secur state
to prevent spi from find valuabl inform in the organ trash sensit
comput printout should be shred and mix with nonsensit shred document
befor dispos
access to sensit inform must be limit to a needtoknow basi organ
should maintain a system such as a supervis access log that enabl secur to track the
inform that each person ha handl if sensit inform is to be transmit over
a modem the file should be encrypt not just passwordprotect although employe
might appreci the conveni thei should not be allow to dial into compani
comput that contain sensit inform from their home ani system contain
sensit inform should be isol
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1828 2011 fraud examin manual
