2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Basic Principles of Spying/Methods for Safely Collecting Data


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Methods for Safely Collecting Data   
In order to reduce the likelihood of an intelligence campaign being compromised, a spy will 
generally provide the recruit with some training or instruction on how to safely collect 
information. For instance, when a spy targets sensitive documents, she generally does not 
steal those documents outright. It is more effective to copy the documents, if possible. The 
spy still gets the information she needs, and the victim does not know that its secrets have 
been compromised. If classified documents were to go missing, this could alert the victim to 
the presence of a spy and cause it to tighten its security controls.  
 
Most spies do not try to remove computer media with sensitive security labels from the site. 
Instead, they copy files from labeled media onto plain unmarked disks or small portable 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.831 
drives that will not attract attention from security personnel. Rather than carry sensitive 
information off the premises, they might opt to e-mail the files out to a neutral, relatively 
anonymous e-mail address. 
 
One of a spy’s main goals is to keep a low profile. There are a number of red flags that 
corporate security might look for if espionage is suspected, and an effective spy will try to 
avoid exhibiting any of these characteristics. For example, a person who consistently shows 
up at work early or stays late may make people suspicious, particularly if that individual has 
not, in the past, worked long hours. While it may seem like the best times to steal sensitive 
information are before or after hours, this activity might actually tip off the victim.  
 
In general, recruits are told not to stand out, and to avoid being labeled as a problem 
employee. If an investigation commences as a result of any security leaks, the recruit wants 
to be far down the list of potential suspects. Recruits are also instructed to keep their mouths 
shut. Obviously, they should not discuss their covert activities with anyone else. Finally, 
recruits are told to spend their extra income from spying gradually and in a low-key manner. 
The goal is to avoid attracting attention. 
 



:


method for safe collect data
in order to reduc the likelihood of an intellig campaign be compromis a spy will
gener provid the recruit with some train or instruct on how to safe collect
inform for instanc when a spy target sensit document she gener doe not
steal those document outright it is more effect to copi the document if possibl the
spy still get the inform she need and the victim doe not know that it secret have
been compromis if classifi document were to go miss thi could alert the victim to
the presenc of a spy and caus it to tighten it secur control
most spi do not try to remov comput media with sensit secur label from the site
instead thei copi file from label media onto plain unmark disk or small portabl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1831
drive that will not attract attent from secur personnel rather than carri sensit
inform off the premis thei might opt to email the file out to a neutral rel
anonym email address
on of a spy main goal is to keep a low profil there ar a number of red flag that
corpor secur might look for if espionag is suspect and an effect spy will try to
avoid exhibit ani of these characterist for exampl a person who consist show
up at work earli or stai late mai make peopl suspici particularli if that individu ha
not in the past work long hour while it mai seem like the best time to steal sensit
inform ar befor or after hour thi activ might actual tip off the victim
in gener recruit ar told not to stand out and to avoid be label as a problem
employe if an investig commenc as a result of ani secur leak the recruit want
to be far down the list of potenti suspect recruit ar also instruct to keep their mouth
shut obvious thei should not discuss their covert activ with anyon els final
recruit ar told to spend their extra incom from spy gradual and in a lowkei manner
the goal is to avoid attract attent
