2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Countermeasures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Countermeasures  
While security officers cannot turn their organizations into impenetrable fortresses, they can 
implement specific countermeasures to thwart a spy’s attempts at infiltrating their company: 
• Materials bearing proprietary data should not be stored in areas visible to the public. If 
no other option exists, the organization should only use unlettered, color-coded 
containers as opposed to labeling a particular file drawer “Confidential.” This will make 
it more difficult for spies to tell where sensitive information can be found.  
• Organizations should ask about their bank’s  confidentiality policy and make sure the 
bank doesn’t permit tellers to access information on major accounts without a manager’s 
permission. If the company has sensitive financial accounts, it should find a bank with 
computer systems that use mandatory access controls. Such controls prevent bank 
employees without proper level of privilege from accessing large accounts. Information 
on large commercial accounts should be maintained on a need-to-know basis. 
• Security should establish a procedure for tracking and locking up sensitive data.  
• Cleaning personnel should be properly bonded and identified, and their access to the 
facility should be controlled. 
• Vendors should have verified credentials and must be escorted by a company 
representative during their visit.  
• Any proprietary lists must be password protected and trapped. 
• Other general countermeasures include educating employees to properly store sensitive 
data and to question the credentials of anyone visiting the site. Employees should also be 
instructed as to what information they may disclose over the telephone. 
• Employees should sign nondisclosure agreements. In addition, the legal department 
should be consulted about integrating vendor and supplier nondisclosure agreements 
into standard contracts. 
 
 



:


countermeasur
while secur offic cannot turn their organ into impenetr fortress thei can
implement specif countermeasur to thwart a spy attempt at infiltr their compani
materi bear proprietari data should not be store in area visibl to the public if
no other option exist the organ should onli us unlett colorcod
contain as oppos to label a particular file drawer confidenti thi will make
it more difficult for spi to tell where sensit inform can be found
organ should ask about their bank confidenti polici and make sure the
bank doesnt permit teller to access inform on major account without a manag
permiss if the compani ha sensit financi account it should find a bank with
comput system that us mandatori access control such control prevent bank
employe without proper level of privileg from access larg account inform
on larg commerci account should be maintain on a needtoknow basi
secur should establish a procedur for track and lock up sensit data
clean personnel should be properli bond and identifi and their access to the
facil should be control
vendor should have verifi credenti and must be escort by a compani
repres dure their visit
ani proprietari list must be password protect and trap
other gener countermeasur includ educ employe to properli store sensit
data and to question the credenti of anyon visit the site employe should also be
instruct as to what inform thei mai disclos over the telephon
employe should sign nondisclosur agreement in addit the legal depart
should be consult about integr vendor and supplier nondisclosur agreement
into standard contract
