2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Warning Signs of Bugging


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Warning Signs of Bugging  
Covert eavesdropping may be difficult to detect, particularly because most people do not 
know what signs to look for. James M. Atki nson of the Granite Island Group, one of the 
leading technical surveillance countermeasures firms in the U.S., has compiled a list of 27 
warning signs that might indicate that an organization is the target of an electronic 
eavesdropping campaign.1 Those red flags are listed below:   
• Others seem to know your confidential business or trade secrets. This is the most 
common indicator of a bugging campaign.  
• Information discussed in secret meetings or contained in secret bids does not remain 
secret. Confidential meetings are among the most popular targets of corporate spies.  
• People seem to know about your organization’s activities when they should not.  
• Strange sounds or volume changes are detected on your phone lines. This is a common 
byproduct of wiretaps or activation of a similar listening device. 
• You notice unusual static, popping, or scra tching on phone lines. This is another 
common sign of a wiretap or bug. 
• You can hear sounds coming from your phone handset when it is hung up. This is 
typically caused by a device called a “hook switch bypass,” which turns a telephone 
receiver into an eavesdropping microphone and speaker and allows a spy to monitor 
conversations near the phone (usually within 20 feet).  
• Your phone rings and nobody is on the other end of the line, but you hear a very faint 
tone, or a high-pitched squeal and beep. This is an indicator of a slave device, or line 
extender being used on your phone line. This is also a key indicator of a harmonica bug 
or infinity transmitter being used. 
• You hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook (by using an external 
amplifier). 
• An office radio suddenly develops strange interference. This could be caused by 
eavesdropping devices that use frequencies within or just outside the FM radio band. 
These signals tend drift and will quiet FM radios  in the vicinity of the bug. To check for 
bugs, look for transmissions at the far ends of the FM radio band, and at any quiet area 
along the FM band. If the radio begins to squeal, slowly move it around the room until 
the sound becomes very high pitched. The radio should be set to the “mono” function 
rather than “stereo,” as this will increase its level of sensitivity.  
• A car radio suddenly starts “getting weird.” Keep in mind that the antenna used by a car 
                                                          
1 This list is provided courtesy of James M. Atkinson and The Granite Island Group, 127 Eastern Avenue, 
#291, Gloucester, MA 01930, (978) 546-3803. (www.tscm.com). e-mail:  jmatk@tscm.com 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.868                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
may be (and often is) exploited by an eavesdropper and that such usage might interfere 
with radio transmission. 
• An office television suddenly develops interference. Eavesdropping devices can tend to 
interfere with television reception.  
• Your office appears to have been burglarized, but nothing was taken. Someone could 
have entered the premises in order to plant a listening device. 
• Electrical wall plates (covering outlets, switches, smoke alarms, and lighting fixtures) 
appear to have been moved slightly. These are among the most popular locations for 
hiding listening devices, which requires that the plates be removed. Watch for slight 
variations in the color or appearance of the power outlets or light switches as these are 
often swamped out by an eavesdropper.  
• A dime-sized discoloration appears on an office wall or ceiling. This is a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed.  
• One of your vendors gives you an electronic device such as a desk radio, alarm clock, 
CD player, or small television. These gifts frequently contain secret eavesdropping 
devices.  
• A small bump or deformation has appeared on the baseboard by the floor. This is a 
strong indicator that someone may have concealed covert wiring or a microphone 
imbedded into the adhesive that holds the molding to the floor. 
• A smoke detector, clock, lamp or exit sign in your office or home looks slightly crooked, 
has a small hole in the surface, has a quasi reflective surface, or otherwise appears to 
have been tampered with. These items are also common places for concealing bugs.  
• Certain items just appear in your office without anyone knowing how they got there. 
Typical items to watch for and beware of are: clocks, exit signs, sprinkler heads, radios, 
picture frames, and lamps. They may contain listening equipment and could have been 
placed in your offices by a spy. 
• Drywall dust or debris is found on the floor next to a wall. This could be a sign that a 
pinhole microphone or video camera has been installed nearby.  
• Small pieces of ceiling tile or grit are found on the floor or on a desk. Also, a cracked, 
chipped or gouged ceiling tile, sagging ceiling tiles, or ceiling tiles not properly set into 
track may be observed. This indicates that a ceiling tile has been moved, possibly because 
someone has installed a technical surveillance device above your ceiling. 
• Phone company trucks and utilities workers seem to be spending a lot of time near your 
home or office. These workers could actually be corporate spies in disguise. 
• Telephone, cable, plumbing, or air conditioning repair people show up to work when no 
one called them. This is a very common method for an eavesdropper to plant a bug.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.869 
• Service or delivery trucks are often parked nearby with nobody in them. These vehicles 
may be listening posts for spies. In particular, look for vehicles that have ladders or pipe 
racks on the roof, have tinted windows, and are large enough to conceal a person in  
the back.  
• Your door locks suddenly do not “feel right,” they become “sticky,” or they fail 
altogether. This is evidence that the lock has been picked, manipulated, or bypassed by 
an intruder.  
• Furniture appears to have been moved slightly and no one knows why. Eavesdropping 
devices are commonly hidden behind or inside furniture.  
• Things seem to have been rummaged through, but nothing is missing. This could be a 
sign that someone has been looking through your papers, perhaps even copying them 
before returning them to your work area. The most common “rummaging” targets are 
the backs of desk drawers, the bottom of file cabinets, closets, and dresser drawers. 
• An eavesdropper sends you a copy of your private conversations. As simple as it seems 
this is the strongest indicator, and solid proof of eavesdropping. An eavesdropper will 
sometimes send a victim a copy of a private conversation they intercepted in an attempt 
at blackmail, or in an attempt to terrorize or just stalk the victim. This is commonly seen 
in civil lawsuits, criminal court cases, marital problems, shareholder disputes, custody 
battles, and other situations where one side has a position of weakness and is 
psychologically trying to undermine their opponent. 
 



:


warn sign of bug
covert eavesdrop mai be difficult to detect particularli becaus most peopl do not
know what sign to look for jame m atki nson of the granit island group on of the
lead technic surveil countermeasur firm in the us ha compil a list of 27
warn sign that might indic that an organ is the target of an electron
eavesdrop campaign1 those red flag ar list below
other seem to know your confidenti busi or trade secret thi is the most
common indic of a bug campaign
inform discuss in secret meet or contain in secret bid doe not remain
secret confidenti meet ar among the most popular target of corpor spi
peopl seem to know about your organ activ when thei should not
strang sound or volum chang ar detect on your phone line thi is a common
byproduct of wiretap or activ of a similar listen devic
you notic unusu static pop or scra tching on phone line thi is anoth
common sign of a wiretap or bug
you can hear sound come from your phone handset when it is hung up thi is
typic caus by a devic call a hook switch bypass which turn a telephon
receiv into an eavesdrop microphon and speaker and allow a spy to monitor
convers near the phone usual within 20 feet
your phone ring and nobodi is on the other end of the line but you hear a veri faint
tone or a highpitch squeal and beep thi is an indic of a slave devic or line
extend be us on your phone line thi is also a kei indic of a harmonica bug
or infin transmitt be us
you hear a tone on your line when your phone is off the hook by us an extern
amplifi
an offic radio suddenli develop strang interfer thi could be caus by
eavesdrop devic that us frequenc within or just outsid the fm radio band
these signal tend drift and will quiet fm radio in the vicin of the bug to check for
bug look for transmiss at the far end of the fm radio band and at ani quiet area
along the fm band if the radio begin to squeal slowli move it around the room until
the sound becom veri high pitch the radio should be set to the mono function
rather than stereo as thi will increas it level of sensit
a car radio suddenli start get weird keep in mind that the antenna us by a car
1 thi list is provid courtesi of jame m atkinson and the granit island group 127 eastern avenu
291 gloucest ma 01930 978 5463803 wwwtscmcom email jmatktscmcom
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1868 2011 fraud examin manual
mai be and often is exploit by an eavesdropp and that such usag might interfer
with radio transmiss
an offic televis suddenli develop interfer eavesdrop devic can tend to
interfer with televis recept
your offic appear to have been burglar but noth wa taken someon could
have enter the premis in order to plant a listen devic
electr wall plate cover outlet switch smoke alarm and light fixtur
appear to have been move slightli these ar among the most popular locat for
hide listen devic which requir that the plate be remov watch for slight
variat in the color or appear of the power outlet or light switch as these ar
often swamp out by an eavesdropp
a dimes discolor appear on an offic wall or ceil thi is a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal
on of your vendor give you an electron devic such as a desk radio alarm clock
cd player or small televis these gift frequent contain secret eavesdrop
devic
a small bump or deform ha appear on the baseboard by the floor thi is a
strong indic that someon mai have conceal covert wire or a microphon
imbed into the adhes that hold the mold to the floor
a smoke detector clock lamp or exit sign in your offic or home look slightli crook
ha a small hole in the surfac ha a quasi reflect surfac or otherwis appear to
have been tamper with these item ar also common place for conceal bug
certain item just appear in your offic without anyon know how thei got there
typic item to watch for and bewar of ar clock exit sign sprinkler head radio
pictur frame and lamp thei mai contain listen equip and could have been
place in your offic by a spy
drywal dust or debri is found on the floor next to a wall thi could be a sign that a
pinhol microphon or video camera ha been instal nearbi
small piec of ceil tile or grit ar found on the floor or on a desk also a crack
chip or goug ceil tile sag ceil tile or ceil tile not properli set into
track mai be observ thi indic that a ceil tile ha been move possibl becaus
someon ha instal a technic surveil devic abov your ceil
phone compani truck and util worker seem to be spend a lot of time near your
home or offic these worker could actual be corpor spi in disguis
telephon cabl plumb or air condit repair peopl show up to work when no
on call them thi is a veri common method for an eavesdropp to plant a bug
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1869
servic or deliveri truck ar often park nearbi with nobodi in them these vehicl
mai be listen post for spi in particular look for vehicl that have ladder or pipe
rack on the roof have tint window and ar larg enough to conceal a person in
the back
your door lock suddenli do not feel right thei becom sticki or thei fail
altogeth thi is evid that the lock ha been pick manipul or bypass by
an intrud
furnitur appear to have been move slightli and no on know why eavesdrop
devic ar commonli hidden behind or insid furnitur
thing seem to have been rummag through but noth is miss thi could be a
sign that someon ha been look through your paper perhap even copi them
befor return them to your work area the most common rummag target ar
the back of desk drawer the bottom of file cabinet closet and dresser drawer
an eavesdropp send you a copi of your privat convers as simpl as it seem
thi is the strongest indic and solid proof of eavesdrop an eavesdropp will
sometim send a victim a copi of a privat convers thei intercept in an attempt
at blackmail or in an attempt to terror or just stalk the victim thi is commonli seen
in civil lawsuit crimin court case marit problem sharehold disput custodi
battl and other situat where on side ha a posit of weak and is
psycholog try to undermin their oppon
