2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Digital Cameras


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Digital Cameras 
As digital cameras become smaller in both cost and size, they may become a more 
formidable tool in the corporate spy’s arsenal. Digital images are captured on a small disk 
whose contents can be loaded into a computer. The image can be enhanced and manipulated 
using various software programs, thereby offering excellent resolution. The disk carrying the 
stolen image can be carried off and on premises with little chance of detection. 

For any good spy, a good digital camera is the mainstay in his surveillance arsenal. Even if 
extensive aerial photographs are taken, observation of the target site at ground level is 
essential. From the ground view many features like signs, lettering on the side of vehicles, 
the configuration of buildings and streets, license plates, and other important details become 
visible. Photographs of key employees of the target can also be valuable information in many 
intelligence campaigns. 
 
To avoid attracting attention, the intelligence specialist generally uses telescopic or reflective 
lenses to zoom in on details from a safe distance. In building a visual file on a plant site, a 
spy will take ground level photographs from around the entire circumference of the targeted 
area. He will even photograph CRT and computer screens that are visible through windows.  
 
To aid in analyzing photographs at a later date, the specialist will catalogue all photographs 
as to: 
• Subject matter 
• Date/time of day 
• Direction of shot 
• Number in a sequence of shots 
• Important features in shot 
 
This data can be stored in a database like Microsoft Access ®. Photographs themselves can 
be incorporated into the database by scanning them into the computer from a flat glass 
scanner or by loading them from a digital camera. Photographic images, excerpts from 
videotape surveillance, aerial photographs, and relevant diagrams, document images, or 
drawings can be also integrated into one database for extensive analysis. Analytical 
investigative databases like i2 allow for the organization of visual data. A database generates 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.875 
various narrative reports, charts, diagrams, and chronologies. The opportunities for an 
information multiplier effect are tremendous. 
 



:


digit camera
as digit camera becom smaller in both cost and size thei mai becom a more
formid tool in the corpor spy arsen digit imag ar captur on a small disk
whose content can be load into a comput the imag can be enhanc and manipul
us variou softwar program therebi offer excel resolut the disk carri the
stolen imag can be carri off and on premis with littl chanc of detect
for ani good spy a good digit camera is the mainstai in hi surveil arsen even if
extens aerial photograph ar taken observ of the target site at ground level is
essenti from the ground view mani featur like sign letter on the side of vehicl
the configur of build and street licens plate and other import detail becom
visibl photograph of kei employe of the target can also be valuabl inform in mani
intellig campaign
to avoid attract attent the intellig specialist gener us telescop or reflect
lens to zoom in on detail from a safe distanc in build a visual file on a plant site a
spy will take ground level photograph from around the entir circumfer of the target
area he will even photograph crt and comput screen that ar visibl through window
to aid in analyz photograph at a later date the specialist will catalogu all photograph
as to
subject matter
datetim of dai
direct of shot
number in a sequenc of shot
import featur in shot
thi data can be store in a databas like microsoft access photograph themselv can
be incorpor into the databas by scan them into the comput from a flat glass
scanner or by load them from a digit camera photograph imag excerpt from
videotap surveil aerial photograph and relev diagram document imag or
draw can be also integr into on databas for extens analysi analyt
investig databas like i2 allow for the organ of visual data a databas gener
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1875
variou narr report chart diagram and chronolog the opportun for an
inform multipli effect ar tremend
