2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Cellular Telephones


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Cellular Telephones 
Anyone who conducts a sensitive or confidential conversation on a cellular telephone is 
either highly naive or plain foolish. These transmissions are transparent to the secret services 
of all governments. Any amateur with a receiver can also pick up cellular communications. 
Most corporate spies will, as a matter of course, scan cellular frequencies around a targeted 
plant. They will also focus in on cellular telephone calls by executives and key employees. By 
simple physical surveillance, a spy can observe an executive pull out his cellular telephone in 
the car, in a restaurant, or in the grocery store. This will alert the spy to begin monitoring the 
target’s cellular frequency. Employees should always keep in mind that someone could be 
listening to their conversations. Sensitive information should not be conveyed by cellular 
phone. As with other surveillance equipment, the tools necessary to monitor cellular 
telephone conversations are easy to come by. 
 



:


cellular telephon
anyon who conduct a sensit or confidenti convers on a cellular telephon is
either highli naiv or plain foolish these transmiss ar transpar to the secret servic
of all govern ani amateur with a receiv can also pick up cellular commun
most corpor spi will as a matter of cours scan cellular frequenc around a target
plant thei will also focu in on cellular telephon call by execut and kei employe by
simpl physic surveil a spy can observ an execut pull out hi cellular telephon in
the car in a restaur or in the groceri store thi will alert the spy to begin monitor the
target cellular frequenc employe should alwai keep in mind that someon could be
listen to their convers sensit inform should not be convei by cellular
phone as with other surveil equip the tool necessari to monitor cellular
telephon convers ar easi to come by
