2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI)/Employee Awareness


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Employee Awareness 
An effective program must educate employees about security awareness. Employees should 
understand that their professional growth and well-being depends on the success of the 
company. It should be made clear that the success of the company is directly tied to the 
protection of information and data. Employees should be taught how to respond to 
telephone information requests. A procedure should be set out whereby information 
requests are sent to public relations or some other department. 
 
Nondocumentary communications should also be protected. Employees need to know that 
they are accountable for what they say, whether it be over the phone or at a social gathering. 
Employees should never discuss confidential business information at airports, restaurants, or 
any place they could be overheard. They should also be instructed about using a laptop 
computer wherever there may be a chance it could be read in public by someone “shoulder 
surfing.” 
 
Regular reminders of the importance of information security should be published regularly 
in company newsletters, on bulletin boards, or in memos. 
 



:


employe awar
an effect program must educ employe about secur awar employe should
understand that their profession growth and wellb depend on the success of the
compani it should be made clear that the success of the compani is directli ti to the
protect of inform and data employe should be taught how to respond to
telephon inform request a procedur should be set out wherebi inform
request ar sent to public relat or some other depart
nondocumentari commun should also be protect employe need to know that
thei ar account for what thei sai whether it be over the phone or at a social gather
employe should never discuss confidenti busi inform at airport restaur or
ani place thei could be overheard thei should also be instruct about us a laptop
comput wherev there mai be a chanc it could be read in public by someon shoulder
surf
regular remind of the import of inform secur should be publish regularli
in compani newslett on bulletin board or in memo
