2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey 
If an organization has a reasonable suspicion that it has been bugged, it may be advisable to 
engage an expert to conduct a Technical Surveillance Countermeasures (TSCM) Survey. 
Commonly referred to as “debugging,” TSCM is designed to help the organization achieve 
two goals: (1) to detect the presence and lo cation of technical surveillance equipment, and 
(2) to identify existing and potential security weaknesses.  
 
TSCM professionals should never be contacted from the area where suspected bugging has 
taken place, as this could alert the spy to the fact that his operation has been discovered. 
Instead, it is recommended that organizations contact TSCM professionals from a secure 
phone, fax or computer that is located far away from the targeted area. Heavily used public 
telephones are probably the most secure method for making contact. Messages should not 
be sent from the home phones or computers of company employees, because they might 
also be under surveillance. In no event should an organization discuss suspicions of 
wiretapping or technical surveillance on a cellular phone.  
 
In choosing TSCM professionals, a company should make sure that the professionals are 
competent in electronics, and have extensive knowledge of design, engineering, and 
maintenance. They must also be trained in eavesdropping techniques, practiced in RF (radio 
frequency) allocation and propagation, and knowledgeable about all techniques of 
modulation, electrical wiring, and installation principles.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.885 
Before conducting an actual TSCM survey, experts start with a pre-inspection survey and 
vulnerability sweep of the targeted premises. The TSCM team usually requires a full set of 
facility blueprints as well as a visual inspection of the premises so that they can obtain a 
complete understanding of the information that spies might target, where the organization is 
vulnerable, and how spies might attempt to penetrate the information security system. This 
phase of the project can take several days, as the TSCM specialists test for weaknesses in the 
facility’s perimeter security, network and communications systems, alarm systems, video 
surveillance systems, and other security components.  
 
Once a vulnerability analysis has been completed and the organization’s risks have been 
assessed, the TSCM search can proceed. A TSCM survey or sweep is a comprehensive 
examination of a facility, designed to make sure that the facility is free of any form of 
technical surveillance equipment. This includes electronic, visual, and physical examination 
of the site. Typically, the sweep begins with an RF examination, in which all radio 
emanations are analyzed to determine their source. An electronically enhanced search will 
then be conducted to locate items or devices that were not detected from the RF search. A 
physical examination will be performed to locate clandestine devices such as recorders, 
microphones, and transmitters. The team will also examine the phones and the phone lines 
to detect bugs. TSCM searches are not only conducted on business premises, but may also 
include the vehicles, cellular phones, computer equipment, and residences of key employees.  
 
TSCM sweeps are sensitive operations that should be conducted with as much secrecy as 
possible. It is best to limit the number of persons within the organization that are notified of 
the operation, because it is always possible that there is a mole within the company. Once 
again, the company does not want to tip off the spy to the operation. TSCM operatives 
normally operate under a cover story to explain their presence at the facility. When possible, 
sweeps are scheduled after hours to limit the number of personnel who encounter the team. 
As with other contractors, TSCM experts shou ld be accompanied at all times during  
their sweep.  
 
Although TSCM surveys can be expensive, if a company believes that it is the victim of 
corporate espionage, it may be the only way to help track down the source of the leak  
of information. 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.886                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


technic surveil countermeasur tscm survei
if an organ ha a reason suspicion that it ha been bug it mai be advis to
engag an expert to conduct a technic surveil countermeasur tscm survei
commonli refer to as debug tscm is design to help the organ achiev
two goal 1 to detect the presenc and lo cation of technic surveil equip and
2 to identifi exist and potenti secur weak
tscm profession should never be contact from the area where suspect bug ha
taken place as thi could alert the spy to the fact that hi oper ha been discov
instead it is recommend that organ contact tscm profession from a secur
phone fax or comput that is locat far awai from the target area heavili us public
telephon ar probabl the most secur method for make contact messag should not
be sent from the home phone or comput of compani employe becaus thei might
also be under surveil in no event should an organ discuss suspicion of
wiretap or technic surveil on a cellular phone
in choos tscm profession a compani should make sure that the profession ar
compet in electron and have extens knowledg of design engin and
mainten thei must also be train in eavesdrop techniqu practic in rf radio
frequenc alloc and propag and knowledg about all techniqu of
modul electr wire and instal principl
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1885
befor conduct an actual tscm survei expert start with a preinspect survei and
vulner sweep of the target premis the tscm team usual requir a full set of
facil blueprint as well as a visual inspect of the premis so that thei can obtain a
complet understand of the inform that spi might target where the organ is
vulner and how spi might attempt to penetr the inform secur system thi
phase of the project can take sever dai as the tscm specialist test for weak in the
facil perimet secur network and commun system alarm system video
surveil system and other secur compon
onc a vulner analysi ha been complet and the organ risk have been
assess the tscm search can proce a tscm survei or sweep is a comprehens
examin of a facil design to make sure that the facil is free of ani form of
technic surveil equip thi includ electron visual and physic examin
of the site typic the sweep begin with an rf examin in which all radio
eman ar analyz to determin their sourc an electron enhanc search will
then be conduct to locat item or devic that were not detect from the rf search a
physic examin will be perform to locat clandestin devic such as record
microphon and transmitt the team will also examin the phone and the phone line
to detect bug tscm search ar not onli conduct on busi premis but mai also
includ the vehicl cellular phone comput equip and resid of kei employe
tscm sweep ar sensit oper that should be conduct with as much secreci as
possibl it is best to limit the number of person within the organ that ar notifi of
the oper becaus it is alwai possibl that there is a mole within the compani onc
again the compani doe not want to tip off the spy to the oper tscm oper
normal oper under a cover stori to explain their presenc at the facil when possibl
sweep ar schedul after hour to limit the number of personnel who encount the team
as with other contractor tscm expert shou ld be accompani at all time dure
their sweep
although tscm survei can be expens if a compani believ that it is the victim of
corpor espionag it mai be the onli wai to help track down the sourc of the leak
of inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1886 2011 fraud examin manual
