2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Protecting the Trade Secrets of Others


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Protecting the Trade Secrets of Others 
In the rush to protect its trade secrets from competitors, many companies forget the other 
half of the equation?preventing their employees from appropriating the proprietary 
information of competitors. 
 
If a company hires an employee from a competitor, it should realize that it may be opening 
itself up to a lawsuit for theft of proprietary information. Such claims are expensive to 
defend, and the losses can be substantial even before the jury verdict. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.889 
EXAMPLE 
Diametrics Medical, Inc., a U.S.-based medical equipment provider, was forced to abort a 
$30 million initial public offering after PPG Indu stries, Inc. filed a lawsuit alleging theft of 
trade secrets and patent infringement. Diametrics denied the charges, but the accusations 
were enough to prevent the public  offering from going through. 
 
A company does not have to be actually aware that the employee is using proprietary 
information. There may be liability for willful blindness” that is, company executives had 
reason to suspect that an employee could be using confidential information, but did nothing 
to investigate or prevent it. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Novopharm, Inc. was found guilty by a court in Vancouver, British Columbia, of stealing 
trade secrets from its rival Apotex, Inc. Court documents state that a biochemist left 
Apotex and “secretly joined” Novopharm bringing with him valuable trade secrets. Under 
the verdict, Novopharm must pay damages of  more than $3.7 million. The judge found 
that the chief executive officer, Leslie Dan, “closed his eyes to what was going on around 
him.” Dan denied the judge’s characterization. 
 
Human resources personnel should ask potential employees whether they are subject to any 
agreements that bar them from competing with any current or former employer. If the 
employee is subject to any such agreement, a copy of the agreement should be forwarded to 
the legal department before any hiring decision is made. 
 
If companies seek to use confidential information from former employees of competitors, 
then it may run a greater risk of losing its information to competitors in the long run. As 
discussed above, the most important element of any confidential information protection 
program is the cooperation of the employees. If the employees of a company see that 
management has a policy of pumping new hires for knowledge about competitors, it is 
unlikely that the employees will take pride or interest in protecting the company’s trade 
secrets. 
 
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.890                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


protect the trade secret of other
in the rush to protect it trade secret from competitor mani compani forget the other
half of the equationprev their employe from appropri the proprietari
inform of competitor
if a compani hire an employe from a competitor it should realiz that it mai be open
itself up to a lawsuit for theft of proprietari inform such claim ar expens to
defend and the loss can be substanti even befor the juri verdict
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1889
exampl
diametr medic inc a usbas medic equip provid wa forc to abort a
30 million initi public offer after ppg indu stri inc file a lawsuit alleg theft of
trade secret and patent infring diametr deni the charg but the accus
were enough to prevent the public offer from go through
a compani doe not have to be actual awar that the employe is us proprietari
inform there mai be liabil for will blind that is compani execut had
reason to suspect that an employe could be us confidenti inform but did noth
to investig or prevent it
exampl
novopharm inc wa found guilti by a court in vancouv british columbia of steal
trade secret from it rival apotex inc court document state that a biochemist left
apotex and secretli join novopharm bring with him valuabl trade secret under
the verdict novopharm must pai damag of more than 37 million the judg found
that the chief execut offic lesli dan close hi ey to what wa go on around
him dan deni the judg character
human resourc personnel should ask potenti employe whether thei ar subject to ani
agreement that bar them from compet with ani current or former employ if the
employe is subject to ani such agreement a copi of the agreement should be forward to
the legal depart befor ani hire decis is made
if compani seek to us confidenti inform from former employe of competitor
then it mai run a greater risk of lose it inform to competitor in the long run as
discuss abov the most import element of ani confidenti inform protect
program is the cooper of the employe if the employe of a compani see that
manag ha a polici of pump new hire for knowledg about competitor it is
unlik that the employe will take pride or interest in protect the compani trade
secret
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1890 2011 fraud examin manual
