2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BANKRUPTCY FRAUD/Creditors’ Rights and Remedies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bankruptcy Fraud


:


Creditors’ Rights and Remedies 
Normally when businesses or individuals are not paid, they attempt to collect amounts owed 
to them. When normal collection efforts fail, they resort to legal action. But if, after a 
Bankruptcy Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1312                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
creditor files a legal action, the debtor files a petition for bankruptcy, the creditor can take 
the following steps:  
• Investigate the reasons why payment has not been made. 
? Check with other creditors to see if they have not been paid. 
? Check with credit bureaus for credit history. 
• File a motion for the appointment of a trustee; other creditors and the office of the UST 
might join in with the petitioning creditor. 
• To succeed, the moving party must demonstrate that fraud is suspected, and, therefore, a 
trustee should be appointed to oversee the operations of the debtor. 
• The creditor should have sufficient documentary and other evidence of fraudulent 
conduct, including declarations provided by knowledgeable witnesses. 
• A hearing is held where the judge hears evidence supporting and refuting the fraud 
allegations. Thereafter, the judge issues a ruling regarding the appointment of a trustee. 
• In some cases, the judge might appoint an examiner instead of a trustee because it is less 
intrusive. An examiner’s role is only to investigate and report back to the judge whether 
the allegations of fraud are supported by the independent examiner’s own evidence. 
• If the debtor does not file bankruptcy, the creditor might join other creditors and file an 
involuntary petition against the debtor. 
 



:


creditor right and remedi
normal when busi or individu ar not paid thei attempt to collect amount ow
to them when normal collect effort fail thei resort to legal action but if after a
bankruptci fraud financi transact
11312 2011 fraud examin manual
creditor file a legal action the debtor file a petit for bankruptci the creditor can take
the follow step
investig the reason why payment ha not been made
check with other creditor to see if thei have not been paid
check with credit bureau for credit histori
file a motion for the appoint of a truste other creditor and the offic of the ust
might join in with the petit creditor
to succe the move parti must demonstr that fraud is suspect and therefor a
truste should be appoint to overse the oper of the debtor
the creditor should have suffici documentari and other evid of fraudul
conduct includ declar provid by knowledg wit
a hear is held where the judg hear evid support and refut the fraud
alleg thereaft the judg issu a rule regard the appoint of a truste
in some case the judg might appoint an examin instead of a truste becaus it is less
intrus an examin role is onli to investig and report back to the judg whether
the alleg of fraud ar support by the independ examin own evid
if the debtor doe not file bankruptci the creditor might join other creditor and file an
involuntari petit against the debtor
