2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Laws Governing Access to Information/Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) was passed in 1999, and rules implementing the Act 
became final in 2001. GLB was originally enac ted to allow banks and other companies to 
offer previously forbidden services, such as insurance and securities brokerage services. 
Congress was worried that these “super banks” would share customers’ financial data with 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.408   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
affiliates and other companies to hawk their products. Therefore, Congress added a 
provision requiring “financial intuitions” to te ll customers about their privacy policies, to 
notify customers of private information they intend to share, and to give customers the 
chance to block such information sharing. 
 
To implement the law, Congress ordered regulators to define “financial institution” in the 
broadest possible terms. Thus, “financial institutions” include not just banks, but also 
insurance companies, accountants, tax preparation and real estate settlement services, and 
investment advisors. The text of the rule can be found at 16 C.F.R. Part 313. Additional 
information about the rule can be found at the Federal Trade Commission’s website: 
www.ftc.gov. 
 
GLB is important for fraud examiners because the privacy rules implemented as part of the 
Act have been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information, and under the 
FTC’s interpretation of the rule, credit header information cannot be sold except for the 
very limited purposes allowed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The agency reached this 
decision by concluding that such basic personal information, such as names and addresses, is 
financial information, and, therefore, must be protected under the GLB Act. Therefore, the 
GLB prevents credit bureaus from selling credit header information (including names, 
addresses, phone numbers, and Social Security numbers) to private investigators, direct 
marketers, or other information brokers. 
 
As a general rule, financial information can be obtained only by subpoena.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act also made it a criminal offense to engage in “pretexting.” 
Some individuals used pretexting as a means to gather financial information about a subject. 
Pretexters would contact a financial institution and pretend to be the customer or someone 
else authorized to obtain financial information and basically trick the financial institution 
into providing information about the subject. 
 
Section 6821 of Title 15 of the U.S. Code (added by GLB) makes it an offense to: 
• Use false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or documents to get customer information 
from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution;  
• Use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer information from a 
financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution; or 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.409 
• Ask another person to get someone else’s custom er information using false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements or documents or using forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen 
documents.  
 
Violators can, under certain circumstances, be fined and/or imprisoned up to 10 years. 
 
Pretexting is not always illegal, but it should be used with extreme caution. For example, if a 
fraud examiner is trying to locate a witness or a suspect, he might call the person’s relative 
and pretend to be an old high school friend who is looking for a phone number. This type of 
pretexting generally is not illegal. However, it is illegal to obtain certain types of information, 
such as financial records and phone records. 
 
Fraud examiners should never impersonate a member of law enforcement, and should never 
impersonate an actual person (particularly the individual being investigated). To do so may 
lead to charges of identity theft. In 2006, investigators hired by Hewlett-Packard were 
charged with identity theft, conspiracy, and wire fraud for acquiring the phone records of 
several members of their board of directors who were suspected of leaking confidential 
information. As a result, Congress passed the Telephone Records and Privacy Protection 
Act, which is codified at 18, U.S. Code, section 1039. This law makes it a federal crime to 
obtain confidential phone records without authorization, including posing as another 
individual.  
 
Before engaging in any type of pretexting activity, investigators should consult with an 
attorney to determine whether the information sought is protected by state or federal law as 
well as whether the planned impersonation method is legally acceptable. 
 



:


grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act glb wa pass in 1999 and rule implement the act
becam final in 2001 glb wa origin enac ted to allow bank and other compani to
offer previous forbidden servic such as insur and secur brokerag servic
congress wa worri that these super bank would share custom financi data with
sourc of inform investig
3408 2011 fraud examin manual
affili and other compani to hawk their product therefor congress ad a
provis requir financi intuit to te ll custom about their privaci polici to
notifi custom of privat inform thei intend to share and to give custom the
chanc to block such inform share
to implement the law congress order regul to defin financi institut in the
broadest possibl term thu financi institut includ not just bank but also
insur compani account tax prepar and real estat settlement servic and
invest advisor the text of the rule can be found at 16 cfr part 313 addit
inform about the rule can be found at the feder trade commiss websit
wwwftcgov
glb is import for fraud examin becaus the privaci rule implement as part of the
act have been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform and under the
ftc interpret of the rule credit header inform cannot be sold except for the
veri limit purpos allow under the fair credit report act the agenc reach thi
decis by conclud that such basic person inform such as name and address is
financi inform and therefor must be protect under the glb act therefor the
glb prevent credit bureau from sell credit header inform includ name
address phone number and social secur number to privat investig direct
market or other inform broker
as a gener rule financi inform can be obtain onli by subpoena
the grammleachblilei act also made it a crimin offens to engag in pretext
some individu us pretext as a mean to gather financi inform about a subject
pretext would contact a financi institut and pretend to be the custom or someon
els author to obtain financi inform and basic trick the financi institut
into provid inform about the subject
section 6821 of titl 15 of the us code ad by glb make it an offens to
us fals fictiti or fraudul statement or document to get custom inform
from a financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
us forg counterfeit lost or stolen document to get custom inform from a
financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut or
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3409
ask anoth person to get someon els custom er inform us fals fictiti or
fraudul statement or document or us forg counterfeit lost or stolen
document
violat can under certain circumst be fine andor imprison up to 10 year
pretext is not alwai illeg but it should be us with extrem caution for exampl if a
fraud examin is try to locat a wit or a suspect he might call the person rel
and pretend to be an old high school friend who is look for a phone number thi type of
pretext gener is not illeg howev it is illeg to obtain certain type of inform
such as financi record and phone record
fraud examin should never imperson a member of law enforc and should never
imperson an actual person particularli the individu be investig to do so mai
lead to charg of ident theft in 2006 investig hire by hewlettpackard were
charg with ident theft conspiraci and wire fraud for acquir the phone record of
sever member of their board of director who were suspect of leak confidenti
inform as a result congress pass the telephon record and privaci protect
act which is codifi at 18 us code section 1039 thi law make it a feder crime to
obtain confidenti phone record without author includ pose as anoth
individu
befor engag in ani type of pretext activ investig should consult with an
attornei to determin whether the inform sought is protect by state or feder law as
well as whether the plan imperson method is legal accept
