2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/State Government Records/Department of Motor Vehicles Records


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Department of Motor Vehicles Records 
The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) maintains information on drivers’ licenses, 
vehicle registrations, titling, car dealers, car salespeople, wrecking yards, tow companies, 
smog inspection facilities, and (in some states) auto repair businesses.  
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.426   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DMV records were once thought to  be good locator tools, but recent restrictions on the use 
of such data has reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Moreover, the update quality of 
individual state records supplied by state authorities may not be adequate to locating people 
in a transient, fast-paced society. Still, searches such as Driver Identification can be useful on 
a spot basis. 
 
Vehicle ownership information will identify ve hicles registered to a specific person or 
business. These records include trailers, motor homes, or motor vessels. Information on 
disability placards may also be available. Current ownership of a particular vehicle can be 
obtained through the use of a plate number or a vehicle identification number (VIN). 
Information returned will include plate number, VIN, expiration date, make, model, model 
year, registered owner’s name/address, and legal owner’s name/address.  
 
In 1999, Congress made significant changes to the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
(18, U.S.C., § 2721). The amended law bars sta tes from releasing drivers’ Social Security 
numbers, photographs, or certain other information unless they obtain “the express 
consent” of each person in advance. Before the 1999 amendments, drivers could “opt out” 
and ask that their information not be released. Under the new law, however, drivers are 
under an “opt in” system that requires their express authorization of the release of 
information. Although the law was challenged, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 
constitutionality of the new amendments in January 2000. 
 
These amendments make it extremely difficult to obtain almost any up-to-date information 
from state motor vehicle departments. Such information can only be obtained if the driver 
has expressly consented to its release. Therefore, companies may wish to consider having 
employees sign a consent form as early as the employment application stage because even 
though the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act does not prohibit the use of motor vehicle 
records for pre-employment screening, the state can only release the records with the 
driver’s consent.  
 



:


depart of motor vehicl record
the depart of motor vehicl dmv maintain inform on driver licens
vehicl registr titl car dealer car salespeopl wreck yard tow compani
smog inspect facil and in some state auto repair busi
sourc of inform investig
3426 2011 fraud examin manual
dmv record were onc thought to be good locat tool but recent restrict on the us
of such data ha reduc the effect of such search moreov the updat qualiti of
individu state record suppli by state author mai not be adequ to locat peopl
in a transient fastpac societi still search such as driver identif can be us on
a spot basi
vehicl ownership inform will identifi ve hicl regist to a specif person or
busi these record includ trailer motor home or motor vessel inform on
disabl placard mai also be avail current ownership of a particular vehicl can be
obtain through the us of a plate number or a vehicl identif number vin
inform return will includ plate number vin expir date make model model
year regist owner nameaddress and legal owner nameaddress
in 1999 congress made signific chang to the driver privaci protect act of 1994
18 usc 2721 the amend law bar sta te from releas driver social secur
number photograph or certain other inform unless thei obtain the express
consent of each person in advanc befor the 1999 amend driver could opt out
and ask that their inform not be releas under the new law howev driver ar
under an opt in system that requir their express author of the releas of
inform although the law wa challeng the us suprem court upheld the
constitution of the new amend in januari 2000
these amend make it extrem difficult to obtain almost ani uptod inform
from state motor vehicl depart such inform can onli be obtain if the driver
ha expressli consent to it releas therefor compani mai wish to consid have
employe sign a consent form as earli as the employ applic stage becaus even
though the driver privaci protect act doe not prohibit the us of motor vehicl
record for preemploy screen the state can onli releas the record with the
driver consent
