2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Federal Government Records/Department of Homeland Security


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Department of Homeland Security 
Under the Border and Transportation Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security, 
the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Service retains data on businesses that are involved 
in imports and exports, including lists and records of importers, exporters, custom house 
brokers, and truckers. The Office of Investigations looks into alleged violations of import 
and export practices. The Customs and Border Protection Service is also involved in the 
National Narcotics Border Interdiction System, and special agents from the Office of 
Investigations have been participating in the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task 
Force. Customs might provide information relative to businesses that violate the statutes  
it enforces. 
 
The U.S. Secret Service maintains records on forgers, counterfeiters, and businesses that 
have contacted the Service concerning forged or counterfeit obligations of the United States, 
such as Treasury notes. In addition, the Treasurer of the United States can provide copies of 
canceled checks paid by the U.S. Treasury. The Secret Service also investigates counterfeiting 
and other financial crimes, including financial institution fraud; identity theft; computer 
fraud; and computer-based attacks on our nation’s financial, banking, and 
telecommunications infrastructure.  
 



:


depart of homeland secur
under the border and transport director of the depart of homeland secur
the us custom and border protect servic retain data on busi that ar involv
in import and export includ list and record of import export custom hous
broker and trucker the offic of investig look into alleg violat of import
and export practic the custom and border protect servic is also involv in the
nation narcot border interdict system and special agent from the offic of
investig have been particip in the organ crime drug enforc task
forc custom might provid inform rel to busi that violat the statut
it enforc
the us secret servic maintain record on forger counterfeit and busi that
have contact the servic concern forg or counterfeit oblig of the unit state
such as treasuri note in addit the treasur of the unit state can provid copi of
cancel check paid by the us treasuri the secret servic also investig counterfeit
and other financi crime includ financi institut fraud ident theft comput
fraud and computerbas attack on our nation financi bank and
telecommun infrastructur
