2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Federal Government Records/National Archives and Records Administration


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


National Archives and Records Administration 
The National Archives and Records Administration operates federal records centers 
throughout the country, including the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis, MO, 
and the Federal Register and the National Archives Building in Washington, D.C. It also is 
responsible for regional archives and the presidential libraries. The National Personnel 
Records Center in St. Louis stores the personnel records of former members of the armed 
forces and former federal civilian employees. Procedures for investigative inquiries into these 
records are available from the Center. For information, call +1 (314) 801-0800. 
 
The Federal Register is the medium for notifying the public of official agency actions; all 
federal regulations must be published in it. The Office of the Federal Register provides a 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.443 
periodic workshop on the use of the Federal Register as an information source. A handbook 
on the uses of the Federal Register  is also available. For information, call +1 (202) 741-6000. 
 



:


nation archiv and record administr
the nation archiv and record administr oper feder record center
throughout the countri includ the nation personnel record center in st loui mo
and the feder regist and the nation archiv build in washington dc it also is
respons for region archiv and the presidenti librari the nation personnel
record center in st loui store the personnel record of former member of the arm
forc and former feder civilian employe procedur for investig inquiri into these
record ar avail from the center for inform call 1 314 8010800
the feder regist is the medium for notifi the public of offici agenc action all
feder regul must be publish in it the offic of the feder regist provid a
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3443
period workshop on the us of the feder regist as an inform sourc a handbook
on the us of the feder regist is also avail for inform call 1 202 7416000
