2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Directories/Foreign Representatives in the U.S. Yellow Book


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Foreign Representatives in the U.S. Yellow Book 
This directory has names and titles of more than 19,000 international business and 
governmental leaders and sections on corporations, financial institutions, foreign nations, 
intergovernmental organizations, foreign press, and law firms. It includes officials’ titles, 
addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. This yellow book is broken down into  
six sections: 
• Corporations: Lists more than 1,000 leading foreign-based corporations with more than 
2,000 U.S. offices and subsidiaries. 
• Financial institutions: Lists more than 230 leading foreign-based financial institutions 
and more than 600 U.S. representative offices. 
• Foreign nations: Lists embassies and consulates in 191 countries with permanent 
missions to the United Nations. 
• Intergovernmental organizations: Lists the U.S. offices in entities such as the United 
Nations, European Union, and the World Bank Group. 
• Foreign press: Lists more than 210 international media outlets with bureaus in the U.S. 
• Law firms: Lists foreign law firms with a U.S. presence. 
 



:


foreign repres in the us yellow book
thi directori ha name and titl of more than 19000 intern busi and
government leader and section on corpor financi institut foreign nation
intergovernment organ foreign press and law firm it includ offici titl
address and telephon and fax number thi yellow book is broken down into
six section
corpor list more than 1000 lead foreignbas corpor with more than
2000 us offic and subsidiari
financi institut list more than 230 lead foreignbas financi institut
and more than 600 us repres offic
foreign nation list embassi and consul in 191 countri with perman
mission to the unit nation
intergovernment organ list the us offic in entiti such as the unit
nation european union and the world bank group
foreign press list more than 210 intern media outlet with bureau in the us
law firm list foreign law firm with a us presenc
