2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases/Interagency Border Inspection System


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Interagency Border Inspection System 
The Interagency Border Inspection System (IBIS) was initiated in 1989 by U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection to improve border enforcement and to facilitate inspection of individuals 
applying for admission to the United States at ports of entry and pre-inspection facilities. 
IBIS is considered a presidential priority and receives White House guidance regarding 
policy, coordination, and control. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, law enforcement, 
and regulatory personnel from 20 other federal agencies or bureaus use IBIS. Some of these 
agencies are the Federal Bureau of Investigation; Interpol; the Drug Enforcement 
Administration; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; the Internal 
Revenue Service; the Coast Guard; the Federal Aviation Administration; and the Secret 
Service. Information from IBIS is also shared with the Department of State for use by 
consular offices at U.S. embassies and consulates. IBIS strives to provide travelers with 
expeditious clearance at ports of entry while allowing border enforcement agencies to focus 
their limited resources on potentially non-compliant travelers. IBIS provides the law 
enforcement community with access to computer-based enforcement files on suspect 
individuals, businesses, vehicles, aircraft, and vessels. It also provides access to National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) records on wanted persons; stolen vehicles, vessels, or 
firearms; license information; criminal histories; and previous federal inspections. IBIS  
users can also interface with all 50 states via the National Law Enforcement 
Telecommunications Systems.  
 



:


interag border inspect system
the interag border inspect system ibi wa initi in 1989 by us custom and
border protect to improv border enforc and to facilit inspect of individu
appli for admiss to the unit state at port of entri and preinspect facil
ibi is consid a presidenti prioriti and receiv white hous guidanc regard
polici coordin and control us custom and border protect law enforc
and regulatori personnel from 20 other feder agenc or bureau us ibi some of these
agenc ar the feder bureau of investig interpol the drug enforc
administr the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos the intern
revenu servic the coast guard the feder aviat administr and the secret
servic inform from ibi is also share with the depart of state for us by
consular offic at us embassi and consul ibi strive to provid travel with
expediti clearanc at port of entri while allow border enforc agenc to focu
their limit resourc on potenti noncompli travel ibi provid the law
enforc commun with access to computerbas enforc file on suspect
individu busi vehicl aircraft and vessel it also provid access to nation
crime inform center ncic record on want person stolen vehicl vessel or
firearm licens inform crimin histori and previou feder inspect ibi
user can also interfac with all 50 state via the nation law enforc
telecommun system
