2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet/eBay


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


eBay 
The online auction website eBay.com can be a valuable resource for fraud examiners. It 
maintains lengthy, detailed logs for each transaction, but this high-level information should 
be obtained with a subpoena. To conduct a more general search using a person’s name or e-mail 
address on eBay: 
• Go to “Advanced Search” in the upper-right corner of eBay’s home page. 
• Choose “Find a Member” from the left column. 
• Type in the first half of the person’s personal e-mail address (e.g., for 
crazybird@gmail.com, type “crazybird”). 
 
After finding a match, the examiner should visit the user’s eBay profile and read everything 
available on the page. An examiner can gain insight into a fraud examination by examining 
any items the subject bought or sold and by reviewing any comments the subject has made.  
 
Once the examiner has read the user’s comments, he should click the user’s “Feedback 
Profile.” Along the right side of the page will be a few selectable items under “Member 
Quick Links”; the investigator should select “View ID History” to see if the member has 
changed his ID over the past ten years. In addition, the examiner can make the suspect one 
of his “Favorite Sellers,” to receive alerts when the subject places new items for sale on 
eBay. 
 



:


ebai
the onlin auction websit ebaycom can be a valuabl resourc for fraud examin it
maintain lengthi detail log for each transact but thi highlevel inform should
be obtain with a subpoena to conduct a more gener search us a person name or email
address on ebai
go to advanc search in the upperright corner of ebai home page
choos find a member from the left column
type in the first half of the person person email address eg for
crazybirdgmailcom type crazybird
after find a match the examin should visit the user ebai profil and read everyth
avail on the page an examin can gain insight into a fraud examin by examin
ani item the subject bought or sold and by review ani comment the subject ha made
onc the examin ha read the user comment he should click the user feedback
profil along the right side of the page will be a few select item under member
quick link the investig should select view id histori to see if the member ha
chang hi id over the past ten year in addit the examin can make the suspect on
of hi favorit seller to receiv alert when the subject place new item for sale on
ebai
