2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet/Social-Networking Websites


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Social-Networking Websites 
Social-networking sites can be searched like traditional websites. Although a lot of the 
information available on social-networking sites can be found using traditional search 
engines, there is an ever-growing number of resources that an examiner can use to search 
these sites. For example, each social network has a search engine for locating members by 
name, phone number, or e-mail address. In general, users can search for members without 
logging in (e.g., MySpace’s default settings allow non-members to view members’ 
information) and searches can be done anonymously.  
 
If, however, a member’s profile is private, the researcher will only see a snapshot of the 
member’s information. For example, to view a member’s profile in Facebook or LinkedIn, 
the researcher must connect with the other member. If an examiner wants to view a private 
profile, he should create a compelling, attractive, and simple profile for himself and ask to be 
invited into the subject’s network. It is not necessary to create a false identity, and examiners 
should not use someone else’s identity. But if the examiner is interesting enough, good 
looking enough, or just savvy enough, he will probably be accepted into the network.  
 
An entirely separate category of search engines has been designed specifically to find 
information within social networks. These search engines use social networks to order, 
prioritize, or refine search results. Some popular social-networking search engines include 
Spokeo, Yoname, Technorati, Icerocket, and FriendFeed. This section discusses these search 
engines along with how to search photo-sharing sites. 
 



:


socialnetwork websit
socialnetwork site can be search like tradit websit although a lot of the
inform avail on socialnetwork site can be found us tradit search
engin there is an evergrow number of resourc that an examin can us to search
these site for exampl each social network ha a search engin for locat member by
name phone number or email address in gener user can search for member without
log in eg myspac default set allow nonmemb to view member
inform and search can be done anonym
if howev a member profil is privat the research will onli see a snapshot of the
member inform for exampl to view a member profil in facebook or linkedin
the research must connect with the other member if an examin want to view a privat
profil he should creat a compel attract and simpl profil for himself and ask to be
invit into the subject network it is not necessari to creat a fals ident and examin
should not us someon els ident but if the examin is interest enough good
look enough or just savvi enough he will probabl be accept into the network
an entir separ categori of search engin ha been design specif to find
inform within social network these search engin us social network to order
priorit or refin search result some popular socialnetwork search engin includ
spokeo yonam technorati icerocket and friendfe thi section discuss these search
engin along with how to search photoshar site
