2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Finding Legal Records/ON-SITE COURT SEARCHES


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


ON-SITE COURT SEARCHES  
On-site court records searches  are performed by individuals who travel to county and municipal 
courthouses to search for records that match the search criteria that have been provided to 
them.  
 
These searches are directed by court, by county, or, as is the case with federal records, by the 
district court for the particular area. Accordingly, the examiner must carefully consider the 
potential location of court records. Such considerations should take into account the 
locations of the suspect’s current and past reside nces and his current and past businesses or 
employers. The results will include any litigation in which the individual was involved, 
including civil actions, criminal actions, divorces, and judgments. However, it will not return 
information concerning litigation that has been sealed by the court or information 
concerning juvenile offenders.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The coverage for these searches varies according to the service used. Additionally, each court 
has varying rules regarding how the search is conducted, the times when searches may be 
conducted, the repository location, and the search methods. If the subscriber is interested in 
a particular type of record, such as a divorce record, it may be necessary to call the 
company’s customer-support unit to adjust the search query. Types of records available 
include: 
• Federal civil court records, including bankruptcy records, are available for all types of 
civil litigation conducted in federal court. 
• Federal criminal court records are available for felony charges. 
• State civil court records are available based on a division of upper and lower court 
records. The division is a function of the differences within each state concerning the 
amounts in controversy. 
• State criminal court records can be obtained on a ten- or seven-year search basis for 
felonies, misdemeanors, or a combination of both. 
 
INDEX/BROAD COVERAGE SEARCHES  
These searches are useful when an examiner needs a search strategy broader than the by 
court/by county method used with on-site court record searches or that makes use of an 
index of basic information in court records. 
• Searches of defendant suits are available in all states, but provide coverage limited to 
specific counties and courts. When searching a specific state’s database, the examiner 
should review the help menu to determine the scope of the search abilities. 
• Searches of statewide criminal convictions are available in some jurisdictions. Review the 
help menu for special release requirements, the number of years available, if the record is 
for convictions only, and if the search encompasses both felonies and misdemeanors. 
• Searches of marriage/divorce indexes are available in some states. 
 



:


onsit court search
onsit court record search ar perform by individu who travel to counti and municip
courthous to search for record that match the search criteria that have been provid to
them
these search ar direct by court by counti or as is the case with feder record by the
district court for the particular area accordingli the examin must carefulli consid the
potenti locat of court record such consider should take into account the
locat of the suspect current and past resid nce and hi current and past busi or
employ the result will includ ani litig in which the individu wa involv
includ civil action crimin action divorc and judgment howev it will not return
inform concern litig that ha been seal by the court or inform
concern juvenil offend
access inform onlin investig
3522 2011 fraud examin manual
the coverag for these search vari accord to the servic us addition each court
ha vari rule regard how the search is conduct the time when search mai be
conduct the repositori locat and the search method if the subscrib is interest in
a particular type of record such as a divorc record it mai be necessari to call the
compani customersupport unit to adjust the search queri type of record avail
includ
feder civil court record includ bankruptci record ar avail for all type of
civil litig conduct in feder court
feder crimin court record ar avail for feloni charg
state civil court record ar avail base on a divis of upper and lower court
record the divis is a function of the differ within each state concern the
amount in controversi
state crimin court record can be obtain on a ten or sevenyear search basi for
feloni misdemeanor or a combin of both
indexbroad coverag search
these search ar us when an examin need a search strategi broader than the by
courtbi counti method us with onsit court record search or that make us of an
index of basic inform in court record
search of defend suit ar avail in all state but provid coverag limit to
specif counti and court when search a specif state databas the examin
should review the help menu to determin the scope of the search abil
search of statewid crimin convict ar avail in some jurisdict review the
help menu for special releas requir the number of year avail if the record is
for convict onli and if the search encompass both feloni and misdemeanor
search of marriagedivorc index ar avail in some state
