2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Experian


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Experian 
Experian is one of the major providers of consumer credit information, and it provides a 
variety of other public information. Experian provides services on consumer and business 
credit, direct marketing, and real estate information services. Experian maintains credit 
information on more than 210 million U.S. consumers and more than 18 million U.S. 
businesses. Its National Consumer Database is updated 65 times per year with information 
on more than 110 million U.S. households. The National Business Database is updated 
monthly, has facts on more than 18 million companies in all industries, and has more than 
200 million cross-industry application records to help detect inconsistencies in incoming 
applications.  
 
Some of the services provided by Experian include: 
• Business Snapshot Reports that summarize credit histories, including payment patterns 
and legal filings, of small businesses or contractors. 
• Precise ID with Knowledge IQ consist of  scoring, analytics, and knowledge-based 
authentication, and it provides real-time and online validation and verification and fraud 
assessment of names, addresses, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, drivers’ licenses, 
and telephone numbers. 
 



:


experian
experian is on of the major provid of consum credit inform and it provid a
varieti of other public inform experian provid servic on consum and busi
credit direct market and real estat inform servic experian maintain credit
inform on more than 210 million us consum and more than 18 million us
busi it nation consum databas is updat 65 time per year with inform
on more than 110 million us household the nation busi databas is updat
monthli ha fact on more than 18 million compani in all industri and ha more than
200 million crossindustri applic record to help detect inconsist in incom
applic
some of the servic provid by experian includ
busi snapshot report that summar credit histori includ payment pattern
and legal file of small busi or contractor
precis id with knowledg iq consist of score analyt and knowledgebas
authent and it provid realtim and onlin valid and verif and fraud
assess of name address social secur number date of birth driver licens
and telephon number
