2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Special Rules Concerning Some Types of Circumstantial Evidence/Opinion Testimony


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Opinion Testimony 
During trial, most evidence is introduced through the testimony of witnesses. Evidence on 
which the jury can make factual determinations must be introduced in the form of admissible 
testimony or documentary evidence by law or fact (i.e., non-expert) witnesses.  
 
The rules of evidence, however, limit the testimony of lay witnesses. Lay witnesses are only 
allowed to testify about what they have actually experienced firsthand and their factual 
observations (FRE 701). In general, witnesses provide a report on what they know and must 
keep their opinions and conclusions to themselves.  
 
Despite the general rule, there are ways to get a non-expert witness’s opinion into the record. 
A lay witnesses may give opinions if the statement is “rationally based” on their own 
perceptions, and if the opinion is helpful to a clear understanding of their testimony or the 
determination of a fact.   
 
Opinions are admissible if they pass a three-part test:  
• The witness must have direct personal knowledge of the facts to which the opinion 
pertains.  
• The opinion must be of the common, everyday sort (i.e., does not involve specialized 
knowledge or tests). 
• The opinion is not part of a legal judgment, reserved for the jury or judge to decide. 
 
Opinions from ordinary witnesses must be based on personal experience and have some 
bearing on the facts (as opposed to the judgment) of the case. This distinction is further refined 
in situations involving hearsay and personal judgment (discussed below).  
 
In contrast to lay witnesses, expert witnesses are exempt from the opinion rule because 
experts are hired to render a professional opinion. They possess education, training, skill, or 
experience in drawing conclusions from certain types of data or information that lay 
witnesses do not possess. Expert testimony, however, may be excluded if it embraces a legal 
conclusion. Therefore, expert opinions addressing guilt or innocence will likely be excluded in 
criminal cases.  
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.707 



:


opinion testimoni
dure trial most evid is introduc through the testimoni of wit evid on
which the juri can make factual determin must be introduc in the form of admiss
testimoni or documentari evid by law or fact ie nonexpert wit
the rule of evid howev limit the testimoni of lai wit lai wit ar onli
allow to testifi about what thei have actual experienc firsthand and their factual
observ fre 701 in gener wit provid a report on what thei know and must
keep their opinion and conclus to themselv
despit the gener rule there ar wai to get a nonexpert witnesss opinion into the record
a lai wit mai give opinion if the statement is ration base on their own
percept and if the opinion is help to a clear understand of their testimoni or the
determin of a fact
opinion ar admiss if thei pass a threepart test
the wit must have direct person knowledg of the fact to which the opinion
pertain
the opinion must be of the common everydai sort ie doe not involv special
knowledg or test
the opinion is not part of a legal judgment reserv for the juri or judg to decid
opinion from ordinari wit must be base on person experi and have some
bear on the fact as oppos to the judgment of the case thi distinct is further refin
in situat involv hearsai and person judgment discuss below
in contrast to lai wit expert wit ar exempt from the opinion rule becaus
expert ar hire to render a profession opinion thei possess educ train skill or
experi in draw conclus from certain type of data or inform that lai
wit do not possess expert testimoni howev mai be exclud if it embrac a legal
conclus therefor expert opinion address guilt or innoc will like be exclud in
crimin case
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2707
