2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Exhibits/Website Data


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Website Data 
A growing number of people are using social networking sites like LinkedIn, Facebook, 
MySpace, and Twitter, and, as a result, the legal use of information obtained from social 
media sites has increased. Many users don’t give much thought to what they post online. And 
because most of the information that gets posted online becomes a permanent record 
somewhere, investigators, attorneys, and employers are increasingly mining these sites for 
information, photos, and videos that can become evidence in civil and criminal litigation. 
 
As with all evidence, the proponent of social media evidence must be prepared to establish 
that the evidence is authentic. The standard for authenticating evidence from social media 
sites is no different than for any other types of evidence. That is, there must be sufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the evidence is what the proponent claims.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.713 
In some courts, authenticity can be established by the testimony of a witness. Like any other 
demonstrative exhibit, parties can authenticate a website with the testimony of a witness who 
verifies that the exhibit at issue accurately reflects what he observed after logging on to the 
site and reviewing what was there.  
 
Alternately, the proponent may be able authenticate a website by providing testimony from 
the webmaster or someone with personal knowlege to show that the data was posted by the 
person to whom the information is attributed. For example, if website data is attributated to 
the website owner, the webmaster can testify that a particular file or content was entered on a 
site at a specific time. This is similar to authenticating writings by showing that the item was 
written by the person to whom it is attributed. But because Facebook, MySpace, and Twitter-type
evidence typically comes from third parties, who sometimes uses pseudonyms, 
attributing this type of evidence to a certain person can be challenging.  
 
Finally, some website data may be self-authenticated. To review, self-authenticating evidence 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. The types of 
website evidence that may fall under this category include government material that appears 
on official government websites or business-related material that appears on an organization’s 
website. 
 



:


websit data
a grow number of peopl ar us social network site like linkedin facebook
myspac and twitter and as a result the legal us of inform obtain from social
media site ha increas mani user dont give much thought to what thei post onlin and
becaus most of the inform that get post onlin becom a perman record
somewher investig attornei and employ ar increasingli mine these site for
inform photo and video that can becom evid in civil and crimin litig
as with all evid the propon of social media evid must be prepar to establish
that the evid is authent the standard for authent evid from social media
site is no differ than for ani other type of evid that is there must be suffici
evid to support a find that the evid is what the propon claim
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2713
in some court authent can be establish by the testimoni of a wit like ani other
demonstr exhibit parti can authent a websit with the testimoni of a wit who
verifi that the exhibit at issu accur reflect what he observ after log on to the
site and review what wa there
altern the propon mai be abl authent a websit by provid testimoni from
the webmast or someon with person knowleg to show that the data wa post by the
person to whom the inform is attribut for exampl if websit data is attribut to
the websit owner the webmast can testifi that a particular file or content wa enter on a
site at a specif time thi is similar to authent write by show that the item wa
written by the person to whom it is attribut but becaus facebook myspac and twittertyp
evid typic come from third parti who sometim us pseudonym
attribut thi type of evid to a certain person can be challeng
final some websit data mai be selfauthent to review selfauthent evid
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent the type of
websit evid that mai fall under thi categori includ govern materi that appear
on offici govern websit or businessrel materi that appear on an organ
websit
