2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Hearsay/Admissions by an Adverse Party


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Admissions by an Adverse Party 
Generally, the statement of an adverse party is not hearsay. Such statements are called 
“admissions” and can be very powerful evidence. More specifically, an admission is an out-of-court 
statement or conduct by a party to the lawsuit that tends to support the other side’s 
position or diminish the declarant’s own position. Thus, anything spoken or written by a 
party to a lawsuit can be entered into the record, provided that the statement can be  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.719 
corroborated and is relevant. Each side can use its adversary’s out-of-court statements as 
evidence.  
 
For example, during your investigation of the case prior to trial, you interviewed the 
defendant. During the interview, he tells you that he falsified the invoices. Later he denies 
making the statement. If you take the stand and tell the jury that the defendant told you he 
falsified invoices, technically that statement is hearsay. However, since it is an admission, it 
will be admitted under this exception to the rule.  
 
An admission is not necessarily an outright confession. A witness may testify that a bank 
officer told her, “I have ways of getting loans approved that no one else knows about.” The 
statement alone does not prove loan fraud against the officer, but it does establish, by his 
own admission, his stated intent to subvert the security controls of the institution. 
 
In cases involving corporations, large groups, or government agencies, any statement made by 
a member of the organization is potentially an admission. The person who made the 
statement has to be directly authorized to speak for the organization or perform a job related 
to the issue under discussion. For example, an agent employed by Jefferson Realtors who 
says, “You’ve been defrauded here” to an aggrieved client has made an admission on behalf 
of the company. A janitor at Jefferson Realtors, however, cannot make the same admission 
because janitorial duties are not related to the formation of contracts, and chances are the 
janitor is not authorized to make corporate declarations. Since an agent makes contracts on 
the company’s behalf, the statement is an admission even if the agent is not the official 
spokesperson for Jefferson’s legal affairs.  
 



:


admiss by an advers parti
gener the statement of an advers parti is not hearsai such statement ar call
admiss and can be veri power evid more specif an admiss is an outofcourt
statement or conduct by a parti to the lawsuit that tend to support the other side
posit or diminish the declar own posit thu anyth spoken or written by a
parti to a lawsuit can be enter into the record provid that the statement can be
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2719
corrobor and is relev each side can us it adversari outofcourt statement as
evid
for exampl dure your investig of the case prior to trial you interview the
defend dure the interview he tell you that he falsifi the invoic later he deni
make the statement if you take the stand and tell the juri that the defend told you he
falsifi invoic technic that statement is hearsai howev sinc it is an admiss it
will be admit under thi except to the rule
an admiss is not necessarili an outright confess a wit mai testifi that a bank
offic told her i have wai of get loan approv that no on els know about the
statement alon doe not prove loan fraud against the offic but it doe establish by hi
own admiss hi state intent to subvert the secur control of the institut
in case involv corpor larg group or govern agenc ani statement made by
a member of the organ is potenti an admiss the person who made the
statement ha to be directli author to speak for the organ or perform a job relat
to the issu under discuss for exampl an agent emploi by jefferson realtor who
sai youv been defraud here to an aggriev client ha made an admiss on behalf
of the compani a janitor at jefferson realtor howev cannot make the same admiss
becaus janitori duti ar not relat to the format of contract and chanc ar the
janitor is not author to make corpor declar sinc an agent make contract on
the compani behalf the statement is an admiss even if the agent is not the offici
spokesperson for jefferson legal affair
