2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Hearsay/Business and Government Records


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Business and Government Records 
We commonly think of invoices, receipts, and official documents as the final legal word, but 
like statements made outside of court, business and government records are hearsay; they are 
prepared outside the courtroom. A special exception for these materials, however, makes 
them admissible if they are provided with a legal foundation. The admissibility of such 
records rests on two criteria:  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.720  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Have they been prepared during “regularly conducted business activity”? 
• Are they verifiably trustworthy? 
 
Materials prepared specifically for trial are not admissible as business records. Anything that 
casts doubt on the veracity of these documents can bar them. In situations where the charge 
involves altered documents, the materials are admitted to prove the charge of alteration — not 
for their truth-value — so the hearsay rule does not apply.  
 
Computerized records have had no trouble being accepted as evidence. Generally, the hearsay 
exception for business records applies (i.e., they are admissible as long as the records have 
been compiled as a regular facet of doing business).  
 
However, it should be noted that a minority of courts follow a different approach when 
addressing hearsay within computerized records, which has recently garnered much acclaim. 
These courts distinguish between computer-stored records and computer-generated records 
and hold that ESI containing only computer-generated records (such as log-in records from 
ISPs, telephone records, and ATM receipts) untouched by human hands do not contain 
hearsay. In such cases, there is no need to establish that a hearsay exception applies. 
Alternatively, computer-stored records are created or maintained by a human and therefore 
are deemed hearsay. Thus, they must meet a hearsay exception to be admitted. 
 



:


busi and govern record
we commonli think of invoic receipt and offici document as the final legal word but
like statement made outsid of court busi and govern record ar hearsai thei ar
prepar outsid the courtroom a special except for these materi howev make
them admiss if thei ar provid with a legal foundat the admiss of such
record rest on two criteria
basic principl of evid law
2720 2011 fraud examin manual
have thei been prepar dure regularli conduct busi activ
ar thei verifi trustworthi
materi prepar specif for trial ar not admiss as busi record anyth that
cast doubt on the verac of these document can bar them in situat where the charg
involv alter document the materi ar admit to prove the charg of alter not
for their truthvalu so the hearsai rule doe not appli
computer record have had no troubl be accept as evid gener the hearsai
except for busi record appli ie thei ar admiss as long as the record have
been compil as a regular facet of do busi
howev it should be note that a minor of court follow a differ approach when
address hearsai within computer record which ha recent garner much acclaim
these court distinguish between computerstor record and computergener record
and hold that esi contain onli computergener record such as login record from
isp telephon record and atm receipt untouch by human hand do not contain
hearsai in such case there is no need to establish that a hearsai except appli
altern computerstor record ar creat or maintain by a human and therefor
ar deem hearsai thu thei must meet a hearsai except to be admit
