2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE/Privileges/Attorney-Client Privilege


:


Law


:


Evidence


:


Attorney-Client Privilege 
The attorney-client privilege precludes disclosure of communications between an attorney 
and client, but only if the following conditions are met: 
• The client retained the attorney 
• To provide legal advice 
• And thereafter communicated with the attorney on a confidential basis, and 
• The privilege has not been waived 
 
The attorney-client privilege applies to individuals as well as corporations or other business 
entities. In the context of an investigation of a company, communications generally will be 
protected under the attorney-client privilege if the following elements are present: 
• The communications were made by corporate employees to counsel. 
• The communications were made at the direction of corporate superiors in order for the 
company to obtain legal advice from counsel. 
• The employees were aware that the communications were being made in order for the 
company to obtain legal advice. 
• The information needed was not available from upper management. 
• The communications concerned matters within the scope of the employees’ corporate 
duties. 
  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.726  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The communications were confidential when made and were kept confidential by the 
company. 
 
A general counsel’s participation in an investigation conducted by management does not 
automatically create an attorney-client privilege. The key element is that the attorney (whether 
in-house counsel or outside counsel) is conducting the investigation for the purpose of 
providing legal advice to the company. The privilege generally extends to information 
gathered by investigators if the investigator is acting at the direction of the attorney. 
 
The attorney-client privilege prevents disclosure of the communications—the letters, memos, 
or contents of telephone calls—b etween the attorney and client, not of the underlying facts 
or documentary evidence in the case. A client may not refuse to produce documents or other 
relevant evidence merely because such evidence was previously given to the attorney. 
 
Similarly, the attorney-client privilege does not prevent disclosure of communications that 
relate to business rather than legal advice. Corporate counsel is often consulted to give advice 
on matters related to business conduct rather than legal issues. Such communications would 
be discoverable. 
 
Finally, the attorney-client privilege may not be asserted if the communication involved the 
attempted or actual commission of a present crime or fraud. The attorney does not have to be 
a participant in the fraud for the waiver to apply. 
 



:


attorneycli privileg
the attorneycli privileg preclud disclosur of commun between an attornei
and client but onli if the follow condit ar met
the client retain the attornei
to provid legal advic
and thereaft commun with the attornei on a confidenti basi and
the privileg ha not been waiv
the attorneycli privileg appli to individu as well as corpor or other busi
entiti in the context of an investig of a compani commun gener will be
protect under the attorneycli privileg if the follow element ar present
the commun were made by corpor employe to counsel
the commun were made at the direct of corpor superior in order for the
compani to obtain legal advic from counsel
the employe were awar that the commun were be made in order for the
compani to obtain legal advic
the inform need wa not avail from upper manag
the commun concern matter within the scope of the employe corpor
duti
basic principl of evid law
2726 2011 fraud examin manual
the commun were confidenti when made and were kept confidenti by the
compani
a gener counsel particip in an investig conduct by manag doe not
automat creat an attorneycli privileg the kei element is that the attornei whether
inhous counsel or outsid counsel is conduct the investig for the purpos of
provid legal advic to the compani the privileg gener extend to inform
gather by investig if the investig is act at the direct of the attornei
the attorneycli privileg prevent disclosur of the communicationsth letter memo
or content of telephon callsb etween the attornei and client not of the underli fact
or documentari evid in the case a client mai not refus to produc document or other
relev evid mere becaus such evid wa previous given to the attornei
similarli the attorneycli privileg doe not prevent disclosur of commun that
relat to busi rather than legal advic corpor counsel is often consult to give advic
on matter relat to busi conduct rather than legal issu such commun would
be discover
final the attorneycli privileg mai not be assert if the commun involv the
attempt or actual commiss of a present crime or fraud the attornei doe not have to be
a particip in the fraud for the waiver to appli
