2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance/Night Surveillance Equipment


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Night Surveillance Equipment 
Basically, there are two types of night viewing devices: active  and passive. The active type puts 
out its own light source, an infrared beam, which is visible to the user through the infrared 
scope that is part of the unit. The advantage of the active type of night viewing device is that 
the user can see in total darkness. Disadvantages include limited range and the fact that the 
infrared beam is visible to anyone looking through an infrared scope or through a passive 
night viewing device. 
 
The passive type of night viewing device electronically amplifies whatever existing light is in 
the environment, such as moonlight or sky glow. This is why such units sometimes are 
referred to as “starlight scopes.” Night viewing  devices have been in use since 1969. Their 
primary purpose is to allow the observation of events occurring more than one block away at 
night. Night viewing devices, with adapters, can be attached to the front of cameras to 
obtain evidence that will stand up in court. Television videotapes, movies, and still photos 
can all be obtained using night viewing devices. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


night surveil equip
basic there ar two type of night view devic activ and passiv the activ type put
out it own light sourc an infrar beam which is visibl to the user through the infrar
scope that is part of the unit the advantag of the activ type of night view devic is that
the user can see in total dark disadvantag includ limit rang and the fact that the
infrar beam is visibl to anyon look through an infrar scope or through a passiv
night view devic
the passiv type of night view devic electron amplifi whatev exist light is in
the environ such as moonlight or sky glow thi is why such unit sometim ar
refer to as starlight scope night view devic have been in us sinc 1969 their
primari purpos is to allow the observ of event occur more than on block awai at
night night view devic with adapt can be attach to the front of camera to
obtain evid that will stand up in court televis videotap movi and still photo
can all be obtain us night view devic
covert examin investig
3312 2011 fraud examin manual
