2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants/Promises of Confidentiality


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Promises of Confidentiality 
Fraud examiners are not in a position to offer unqualified confidentiality. Therefore, any 
promises made to an informant or source should be qualified. In the case of an examiner 
who is employed by a governmental agency, there might be an absolute duty not to hold 
sources and informants in confidence. In many law enforcement agencies, an investigator 
might not have informants or sources who are unknown to the agency. Governmental 
agencies also regularly share information on criminal investigations with prosecutors, 
including the identity of the source of information. The same regulations and considerations 
could govern business entities.  
 
EXAMPLE 
During the examination of Collins, you contact Roger McGuire, a coworker of Collins’s. 
McGuire will talk to you only in confidence. You know Bailey’s polici es are to prosecute all 
criminal offenses. McGuire seems to be the key to making a case against Collins. You believe 
you can independently verify the allegations McGuire furnishes, but you will not be certain until 
you talk to him. It might be necessary to call  McGuire to testify against Collins in order to 
make the case. 
 
WRONG 
 “Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell  anyone about your talking to me.” 
 
  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.319 
RIGHT 
“Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell Ms. Collins about your talking to me.” 
 
The second is a conditional promise; the examiner will not directly tell Collins, but that 
doesn’t mean someone else won’t. At some point, informants and sources often become 
witnesses. Under no circumstances should an examiner promise a source or informant that 
his identity will not become known. 
 
 



:


promis of confidenti
fraud examin ar not in a posit to offer unqualifi confidenti therefor ani
promis made to an inform or sourc should be qualifi in the case of an examin
who is emploi by a government agenc there might be an absolut duti not to hold
sourc and inform in confid in mani law enforc agenc an investig
might not have inform or sourc who ar unknown to the agenc government
agenc also regularli share inform on crimin investig with prosecutor
includ the ident of the sourc of inform the same regul and consider
could govern busi entiti
exampl
dure the examin of collin you contact roger mcguir a cowork of collinss
mcguir will talk to you onli in confid you know bailei polici es ar to prosecut all
crimin offens mcguir seem to be the kei to make a case against collin you believ
you can independ verifi the alleg mcguir furnish but you will not be certain until
you talk to him it might be necessari to call mcguir to testifi against collin in order to
make the case
wrong
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell anyon about your talk to me
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3319
right
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell ms collin about your talk to me
the second is a condit promis the examin will not directli tell collin but that
doesnt mean someon els wont at some point inform and sourc often becom
wit under no circumst should an examin promis a sourc or inform that
hi ident will not becom known
