2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM 
 
The criminal justice system involves people and agencies that apprehend and adjudicate 
presumed law-breakers and sanction those who either plead guilty or are convicted of 
violating the law. With white-collar crime, nolo  pleas (nolo contendere : I do not choose to 
dispute the allegations) are also common. Almost invariably, such pleas can reasonably be 
regarded as evidence of criminal guilt. They are generally resorted to in an attempt by the 
defendant to avoid the stigma of a criminal label and to undercut the strength of a possible 
civil suit.  
 
The use of the word system in regard to criminal justice can be misleading since it implies that 
there exists an integrated network of cooperating organizations dedicated to a common 
overarching goal. In actual fact, this is far from true. The jurisdictional morass that marks the 
administration of criminal justice demonstrates that it is far from being a coherent system. 
The police typically are under local control. In most cities, they come under the jurisdiction 
of the mayor or the city manager, though, on rare occasions (such as in St. Louis), law 
enforcement falls under state jurisdiction. The trial courts generally are operated by the 
counties, which also employ prosecutors. The counties—there are slightly more than 3,000 
of them in the United States—also are responsible for the running of the jails, which house 
people awaiting trial that cannot raise or are not allowed bail, and those who are confined on 
misdemeanor charges. In addition, county personnel, in the form of sheriff’s forces, are 
largely responsible for law enforcement in nonurban areas. In some cities, they serve as the 
local police under contractual arrangements. The state runs the appellate courts and the 
prisons where the more serious offenders are housed. In addition, private companies, such 
as the Corrections Corporation of America, have recently begun to take over the operation 
of some holding facilities — both jails and prisons — as part of a profit-making program that 
is legitimized by claims of greater efficiency and lower costs. 
 
In 2008, over 7.3 million people were on probation, in jail or prison, or on parole at year 
end. Criminal justice agencies in the United States employ 2.4 million people. The system 
cost taxpayers more than $68 billion in 2006, and that expense has been rising astronomically 
in the wake of laws that mandate tougher penalties. Because of the fear of such penalties, 
there are fewer plea bargains and more trials. Longer sentences also have come with the 
three-strikes laws that have overtaxed existing penal facilities.  
  
Punishment and the Criminal Justice System Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Calculated on a per capita basis, the operation of the criminal justice system in the United 
States costs each taxpayer somewhat more than $200 a year, an amount very similar to what 
is paid for transportation and health care. 
 
Besides local, state, and county law enforcement, there exists a very extensive federal criminal 
justice presence. The federal government forces primarily deal with offenses that cross state 
lines, though when public opinion is aroused, the U.S. Congress has been known to pretend 
that a crime has interstate characteristics in order to bring it under the jurisdiction of agencies 
such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations, which has considerably greater resources than 
most local constabularies. Thus, for instance, kidnapping was made a federal offense after the 
notorious Lindbergh case on the fictitious basis that child-stealers presumptively would carry 
their victim across a state boundary. 
 
Most major prosecutions for white-collar offenses  are generated by federal agencies, in part 
because the majority of laws which proscribe white-collar crime are federal statutes and rules 
of federal regulatory agencies. Additionally, most state and local authorities are more than 
willing to yield jurisdiction to police and prosecutors who have larger personnel pools that 
specialize in complex white-collar crime cases. 
 
 



:


punish and the crimin justic system
the crimin justic system involv peopl and agenc that apprehend and adjud
presum lawbreak and sanction those who either plead guilti or ar convict of
violat the law with whitecollar crime nolo plea nolo contender i do not choos to
disput the alleg ar also common almost invari such plea can reason be
regard as evid of crimin guilt thei ar gener resort to in an attempt by the
defend to avoid the stigma of a crimin label and to undercut the strength of a possibl
civil suit
the us of the word system in regard to crimin justic can be mislead sinc it impli that
there exist an integr network of cooper organ dedic to a common
overarch goal in actual fact thi is far from true the jurisdict morass that mark the
administr of crimin justic demonstr that it is far from be a coher system
the polic typic ar under local control in most citi thei come under the jurisdict
of the mayor or the citi manag though on rare occas such as in st loui law
enforc fall under state jurisdict the trial court gener ar oper by the
counti which also emploi prosecutor the countiesther ar slightli more than 3000
of them in the unit statesalso ar respons for the run of the jail which hous
peopl await trial that cannot rais or ar not allow bail and those who ar confin on
misdemeanor charg in addit counti personnel in the form of sheriff forc ar
larg respons for law enforc in nonurban area in some citi thei serv as the
local polic under contractu arrang the state run the appel court and the
prison where the more seriou offend ar hous in addit privat compani such
as the correct corpor of america have recent begun to take over the oper
of some hold facil both jail and prison as part of a profitmak program that
is legitim by claim of greater effici and lower cost
in 2008 over 73 million peopl were on probat in jail or prison or on parol at year
end crimin justic agenc in the unit state emploi 24 million peopl the system
cost taxpay more than 68 billion in 2006 and that expens ha been rise astronom
in the wake of law that mandat tougher penalti becaus of the fear of such penalti
there ar fewer plea bargain and more trial longer sentenc also have come with the
threestrik law that have overtax exist penal facil
punish and the crimin justic system fraud prevent and deterr
4302 2011 fraud examin manual
calcul on a per capita basi the oper of the crimin justic system in the unit
state cost each taxpay somewhat more than 200 a year an amount veri similar to what
is paid for transport and health care
besid local state and counti law enforc there exist a veri extens feder crimin
justic presenc the feder govern forc primarili deal with offens that cross state
line though when public opinion is arous the us congress ha been known to pretend
that a crime ha interst characterist in order to bring it under the jurisdict of agenc
such as the feder bureau of investig which ha consider greater resourc than
most local constabulari thu for instanc kidnap wa made a feder offens after the
notori lindbergh case on the fictiti basi that childsteal presumpt would carri
their victim across a state boundari
most major prosecut for whitecollar offens ar gener by feder agenc in part
becaus the major of law which proscrib whitecollar crime ar feder statut and rule
of feder regulatori agenc addition most state and local author ar more than
will to yield jurisdict to polic and prosecutor who have larger personnel pool that
special in complex whitecollar crime case
