2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Sentencing Options/Probation


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Probation 
Many laypersons confuse probation  with parole. Parole refers to the status of an offender after he 
has been released from prison or jail and is placed under supervision in the community. 
                                                 
1Ibid., p. 222. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Probation typically is a sentence imposed prior to (and instead of) incarceration. Some judges, 
however, favor what is called “shock probation.” They insist that offenders serve a brief 
time—perhaps only a week—in a penal institution in order to get a taste of what can be in 
store for them if they do not adhere to the law and to the probation conditions that are 
imposed upon them.  
 
Probation laws vary from state to state, but the offender typically is placed under the control 
and guidance of a probation officer, who is to see to it that the conditions that are 
established are met. In practice, probation officers tend to be seriously overworked and 
usually provide only minimal supervision of their charges. Most of their contact with the 
probationer may be only by way of telephone calls to the person and the person’s employer. 
Besides, probation officers are expected both to counsel and to control their roster of 
probations—roles that often are incompatible. Few probationers, for instance, will frankly 
discuss personal problems with a probation officer when they are aware that he can use what 
he learns as a basis for sending them to prison. 
 
Most probation agencies are part of the state bu reaucracy, though in larger areas they may be 
operated by the county. About 30 states combine the administration of probation and parole 
in a single agency.  
 
After a person is convicted of a crime, the probation officer is charged with investigating his 
background in order to provide information that will be helpful to the judge in determining 
what punishment to impose. The judge almost invariably will follow the recommendation of 
the probation officer, though some judges, valuing their independence, insist on reports 
without any recommended disposition. Nonetheless, probation officers soon learn what 
matters influence particular judges. If they observe, for instance, that a judge will invariably be 
lenient with an offender who attends church regularly, they will highlight that element if it is 
their own judgment that the defendant deserves a break. They also can pinpoint items that 
they know will influence a given judge to impose a harsher sentence. 
 
Probation implies a contract between the offender and the criminal justice system. Most 
probation rules require that the offender adhere to some or all of the following conditions: 
• Maintain steady employment. 
• Make restitution to the victim for losses or damages. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Punishment and the Criminal Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.305  
• Cooperate with the probation officer. This involves, among other matters, showing up 
for appointments, notifying the officer of change of address, intention to marry, a new 
job, or similar developments. 
• Meet family responsibilities. 
• Obey all laws. Many jurisdictions will incar cerate a probationer as a violator if they 
believe that he has committed another offense. They revoke his probation status, and 
thereby avoid the difficulties of a court proceeding. The probationer can fight this 
disposition and request a hearing, but few are likely to do so successfully. 
 
Rules specifically tailored to the particular offender also might be imposed. Probationers can 
be ordered to report for urinalysis or other forms of drug testing on a regular basis, or they 
can be forbidden to drive or to go to places where alcoholic beverages are served. Until 
relatively recently, most jurisdictions forbade probationers from associating with people who 
had a criminal record. But these are often the only friends a probationer might have, and the 
rule has come to be regarded by many criminal justice personnel as unreasonable and 
unlikely to be obeyed. For probation officers, the rule often affords a basis to revoke the 
freedom of an offender when they believe that he is continuing to violate the law, but they 
are unable to prove this.  
 
Sentences of probation are for a fixed period of time, with the length generally determined 
by statute and in terms of the seriousness of the offense. Violent offenders often are not 
allowed by law to be put on probation.  
 
There have been a number of innovative probation tactics, including house arrests and 
electronic monitoring.2 Under electronic monitoring, the probationer wears equipment that 
allows the probation officer to establish his whereabouts at any time. House arrest usually 
involves confinement to the place where the person lives, typically with an exception made 
for working outside at a job. 
 
Opponents of electronic monitoring see it as a “Big Brother” tactic that reminds them of the 
totalitarian regime depicted by George Orwell in his novel 1984. They also find house arrest 
too similar to the kinds of tactics typically used in some foreign countries to deal with 
“political” criminals. 
                                                 
2See Richard A. Ball, C. Ronald Huff, and J. Robert Lilly, House Arrest and Correctional Policy: Doing Time at 
Home. (Newbury Park, CA:  Sage, 1988). 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Given overcrowding problems in prisons, the lower cost of keeping such people on the streets 
offers an attractive alternative; however, there is always the risk that the offender might 
commit a serious crime, thereby eliciting severe public criticism of the judicial and probation 
authorities. A desire to protect their reputation is a major consideration in decisions to impose 
a prison term on a person who arguably could do quite well in a controlled community setting. 
 
White-collar crime offenders are usually regarded as prime candidates for probation. They 
are highly unlikely to reoffend, usually have families to support, and generally express 
remorse and say that they will never again fall into errant habits. Of course, they typically 
make a fine appearance in court: well dressed, well spoken, courteous, and contrite.  
 
White-collar offenders tend to be older and, if imprisoned, might find the atmosphere 
intolerable, though there are a number of federal prisons—scornfully called “country clubs” 
by outsiders—where the population is largely ma de up of “tame” white-collar offenders.  
 
White-collar offenders also will receive lighter sentences if they cooperate with the 
authorities and bear witness against co-conspirators. In one study, it was found that more 
than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with a single offense compared to 
30 percent of uncooperative defendants. White-collar offenders also are more readily granted 
bail: just one person in eight spends any time incarcerated before trial, and for the generally 
high-status offenders, the figure is fewer than one in twenty. In a comparison group of 
“common criminals,” at least one-third spent time in jail before their trial. 3  
 
In early 2010, the SEC announced its initiative to encourage individual and company 
cooperation in investigations by offering Cooperation Agreements, Deferred Prosecution 
Agreements, and Non-Prosecution Agreements. See the updated SEC Enforcement Manual 
at http://www.sec.gov/divisions/enforce/enforcementmanual.pdf  for further details of the 
tools available to the SEC for encouraging cooperation. 
 



:


probat
mani layperson confus probat with parol parol refer to the statu of an offend after he
ha been releas from prison or jail and is place under supervis in the commun
1ibid p 222
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4304 2011 fraud examin manual
probat typic is a sentenc impos prior to and instead of incarcer some judg
howev favor what is call shock probat thei insist that offend serv a brief
timeperhap onli a weekin a penal institut in order to get a tast of what can be in
store for them if thei do not adher to the law and to the probat condit that ar
impos upon them
probat law vari from state to state but the offend typic is place under the control
and guidanc of a probat offic who is to see to it that the condit that ar
establish ar met in practic probat offic tend to be serious overwork and
usual provid onli minim supervis of their charg most of their contact with the
probation mai be onli by wai of telephon call to the person and the person employ
besid probat offic ar expect both to counsel and to control their roster of
probationsrol that often ar incompat few probation for instanc will frankli
discuss person problem with a probat offic when thei ar awar that he can us what
he learn as a basi for send them to prison
most probat agenc ar part of the state bu reaucraci though in larger area thei mai be
oper by the counti about 30 state combin the administr of probat and parol
in a singl agenc
after a person is convict of a crime the probat offic is charg with investig hi
background in order to provid inform that will be help to the judg in determin
what punish to impos the judg almost invari will follow the recommend of
the probat offic though some judg valu their independ insist on report
without ani recommend disposit nonetheless probat offic soon learn what
matter influenc particular judg if thei observ for instanc that a judg will invari be
lenient with an offend who attend church regularli thei will highlight that element if it is
their own judgment that the defend deserv a break thei also can pinpoint item that
thei know will influenc a given judg to impos a harsher sentenc
probat impli a contract between the offend and the crimin justic system most
probat rule requir that the offend adher to some or all of the follow condit
maintain steadi employ
make restitut to the victim for loss or damag
fraud prevent and deterr punish and the crimin justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 4305
cooper with the probat offic thi involv among other matter show up
for appoint notifi the offic of chang of address intent to marri a new
job or similar develop
meet famili respons
obei all law mani jurisdict will incar cerat a probation as a violat if thei
believ that he ha commit anoth offens thei revok hi probat statu and
therebi avoid the difficulti of a court proceed the probation can fight thi
disposit and request a hear but few ar like to do so successfulli
rule specif tailor to the particular offend also might be impos probation can
be order to report for urinalysi or other form of drug test on a regular basi or thei
can be forbidden to drive or to go to place where alcohol beverag ar serv until
rel recent most jurisdict forbad probation from associ with peopl who
had a crimin record but these ar often the onli friend a probation might have and the
rule ha come to be regard by mani crimin justic personnel as unreason and
unlik to be obei for probat offic the rule often afford a basi to revok the
freedom of an offend when thei believ that he is continu to violat the law but thei
ar unabl to prove thi
sentenc of probat ar for a fix period of time with the length gener determin
by statut and in term of the serious of the offens violent offend often ar not
allow by law to be put on probat
there have been a number of innov probat tactic includ hous arrest and
electron monitoring2 under electron monitor the probation wear equip that
allow the probat offic to establish hi whereabout at ani time hous arrest usual
involv confin to the place where the person live typic with an except made
for work outsid at a job
oppon of electron monitor see it as a big brother tactic that remind them of the
totalitarian regim depict by georg orwel in hi novel 1984 thei also find hous arrest
too similar to the kind of tactic typic us in some foreign countri to deal with
polit crimin
2see richard a ball c ronald huff and j robert lilli hous arrest and correct polici do time at
home newburi park ca sage 1988
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4306 2011 fraud examin manual
given overcrowd problem in prison the lower cost of keep such peopl on the street
offer an attract altern howev there is alwai the risk that the offend might
commit a seriou crime therebi elicit sever public critic of the judici and probat
author a desir to protect their reput is a major consider in decis to impos
a prison term on a person who arguabl could do quit well in a control commun set
whitecollar crime offend ar usual regard as prime candid for probat thei
ar highli unlik to reoffend usual have famili to support and gener express
remors and sai that thei will never again fall into errant habit of cours thei typic
make a fine appear in court well dress well spoken courteou and contrit
whitecollar offend tend to be older and if imprison might find the atmospher
intoler though there ar a number of feder prisonsscornfulli call countri club
by outsiderswher the popul is larg ma de up of tame whitecollar offend
whitecollar offend also will receiv lighter sentenc if thei cooper with the
author and bear wit against coconspir in on studi it wa found that more
than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with a singl offens compar to
30 percent of uncoop defend whitecollar offend also ar more readili grant
bail just on person in eight spend ani time incarcer befor trial and for the gener
highstatu offend the figur is fewer than on in twenti in a comparison group of
common crimin at least onethird spent time in jail befor their trial 3
in earli 2010 the sec announc it initi to encourag individu and compani
cooper in investig by offer cooper agreement defer prosecut
agreement and nonprosecut agreement see the updat sec enforc manual
at httpwwwsecgovdivisionsenforceenforcementmanualpdf for further detail of the
tool avail to the sec for encourag cooper
