2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/PUNISHMENT AND THE CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Corrections/Prisons


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Punishment


:


Prisons 
William Penn is widely credited with beginning the practice of imprisonment in the United 
States. In England in Penn’s time, capital puni shment was the usual response to most crime, 
with more than 250 designated offenses carrying that penalty. Some mitigation had been 
introduced by the practice of transportation, whereby selected offenders were dispatched to 
the American colonies and, after America gained its freedom from British rule, to Australia. 
 
Of the more than 1,800 prisons in the United States today, 372 are classified as maximum 
security, 480 as medium security, and 969 as minimum security. Since prison construction 
has not kept up with prison populations, overcrowding is a serious problem, and a large 
number of states are under federal court orders to reduce overcrowding and otherwise 
improve prison conditions. 
 
More than four-fifths of prison inmates have a record of prior criminal offenses. More than 
half are incarcerated for violent behavior, and nearly one in five committed the offense to 
obtain money for drugs. Almost nine out of ten jail inmates are adult males. Prior to 
incarceration, the median income of inmates was lower than $10,000 a year. 
                                                 
5For a thorough review of the U.S. Sentencing Commission’s Guidelines for organizational offenses see  
Henry J. Amoroso, “Organizational Ethos and Corporate Criminal Liability,” Campbell Law Review, 17  
(1995): 47–70. 
Punishment and the Criminal Justice Sy stem Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Today, the growth in prison populations has been particularly pronounced. In l985, there 
were 313 incarcerated people in the United States per every 100,000 people. That figure rose 
to 509 inmates per 100,000 persons in 2008. The growth largely was fueled by the 
imprisonment of drug offenders. At the end of June 2008, there were 2,310,984 people in 
federal and state prisons and local jails. This represents a rise of 0.8 percent from the end of 
2007, less than the average annual growth of 2.4 percent from 2000–2007.  
 
The total number of people in jail and prisons in the United States has tripled over the last 
several decades as politicians have pressed for tougher sentencing laws and have built more 
prisons to seek to assuage public fears about violent crime. 
 
Critics of prisons continue to argue that the rights of prisoners are too liberal. Prisoners have 
used the courts to seek to obtain greater privileges in regard to religion and speech, medical 
care, vocational and educational training, due process, and general living conditions.  
 
At the same time, prisons have become increasingly violent, particularly as ethnic and racial 
groups clash. Interethnic and racial clashes have led to suggestions that prisoners ought to be 
segregated along racial and ethnic lines to reduce outbreaks of violence.  
 
Federal prisons, which tend to be more richly funded, are regarded as superior to virtually all 
state institutions, and it is in them that most incarcerated white-collar offenders will do  
their time. 
 
There are five different security levels in order to confine offenders in an appropriate 
manner. They are: minimum security, low security, medium security, high security,  
and administrative. 
 



:


prison
william penn is wide credit with begin the practic of imprison in the unit
state in england in penn time capit puni shment wa the usual respons to most crime
with more than 250 design offens carri that penalti some mitig had been
introduc by the practic of transport wherebi select offend were dispatch to
the american coloni and after america gain it freedom from british rule to australia
of the more than 1800 prison in the unit state todai 372 ar classifi as maximum
secur 480 as medium secur and 969 as minimum secur sinc prison construct
ha not kept up with prison popul overcrowd is a seriou problem and a larg
number of state ar under feder court order to reduc overcrowd and otherwis
improv prison condit
more than fourfifth of prison inmat have a record of prior crimin offens more than
half ar incarcer for violent behavior and nearli on in five commit the offens to
obtain monei for drug almost nine out of ten jail inmat ar adult male prior to
incarcer the median incom of inmat wa lower than 10000 a year
5for a thorough review of the us sentenc commiss guidelin for organiz offens see
henri j amoroso organiz etho and corpor crimin liabil campbel law review 17
1995 4770
punish and the crimin justic sy stem fraud prevent and deterr
4312 2011 fraud examin manual
todai the growth in prison popul ha been particularli pronounc in l985 there
were 313 incarcer peopl in the unit state per everi 100000 peopl that figur rose
to 509 inmat per 100000 person in 2008 the growth larg wa fuel by the
imprison of drug offend at the end of june 2008 there were 2310984 peopl in
feder and state prison and local jail thi repres a rise of 08 percent from the end of
2007 less than the averag annual growth of 24 percent from 20002007
the total number of peopl in jail and prison in the unit state ha tripl over the last
sever decad as politician have press for tougher sentenc law and have built more
prison to seek to assuag public fear about violent crime
critic of prison continu to argu that the right of prison ar too liber prison have
us the court to seek to obtain greater privileg in regard to religion and speech medic
care vocat and educ train due process and gener live condit
at the same time prison have becom increasingli violent particularli as ethnic and racial
group clash interethn and racial clash have led to suggest that prison ought to be
segreg along racial and ethnic line to reduc outbreak of violenc
feder prison which tend to be more richli fund ar regard as superior to virtual all
state institut and it is in them that most incarcer whitecollar offend will do
their time
there ar five differ secur level in order to confin offend in an appropri
manner thei ar minimum secur low secur medium secur high secur
and administr
