2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD 
 
Occupational fraud is committed largely by individuals or small groups of individuals in 
connection with their occupation. It can include violations of law by businessmen, 
politicians, labor union leaders, lawyers, doctors, pharmacists, and employees who embezzle 
money from their employers or steal merchandise and tools.  
 
Gary Green, in honing the white-collar crime concept, uses the term occupational crime,  which 
he defines as “any act punishable by law which is committed through opportunity created in 
the course of an occupation which is legal.” Green further delineates occupational crime into 
four categories: 
• Crimes for the benefit of an employing organization (organizational occupational crime) 
• Crimes by officials through exercise of their state-based authority (state authority 
occupational crime) 
• Crimes by professionals in their capacity as professionals (professional  
occupational crime) 
• Crimes by individuals as individuals  
 
Some scholars debate whether individuals should be held responsible for crimes committed 
on behalf of their organizations. Although some direct benefit accrues to the perpetrator, far 
more benefit accrues to the organization. Regardless of whether the organization is held 
liable, the fraud is a direct result of some human action or interaction. In the words of Parisi, 
“If [an organization] is like a gun, then there must be someone comparable to a triggerman.” 
 
 
Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse 
 
Edwin H. Sutherland 
Relatively little research has been done on the subject of occupational fraud and abuse. 
Much of the current literature is based upon the early works of Edwin H. Sutherland. As 
previously discussed in the “Theories of Crime Causation” chapter, Sutherland believed 
that the learning of criminal behavior occurs with other persons in a process of 
communication. Therefore, he reasoned, criminality cannot occur without the assistance of 
other people. Sutherland further theorized that the learning of criminal activity usually 
occurred within intimate personal groups. This explains, in his view, how a dysfunctional 
parent is more likely to produce dysfunctional offspring. Sutherland believed that the 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.602   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
learning process involves two specific areas: the techniques to commit the crime, and the 
attitudes, drives, rationalizations, and motives of the criminal mind. One can see how 
Sutherland’s differential association theory fits with occupational offenders. Organizations 
that have dishonest employees will eventually infect a portion of honest ones. It also goes 
the other way: honest employees will eventually  have an influence on some of those who 
are dishonest.  
 
Donald R. Cressey 
During the 1940s at Indiana University, one of Sutherland’s brightest students was Don ald 
R. Cressey (1919–1987). While much of Suther land’s research concentrated on upper-world 
criminality, Cressey took his own studies in a different direction. Working on his Ph.D. in 
criminology, he decided his dissertation would focus on embezzlers. To serve as a basis for 
his research, Cressey interviewed about 200 people who had been incarcerated for 
embezzling funds.  
 
Cressey’s Hypothesis 
Cressey was intrigued by embezzlers, whom he called “trust violators.” He was especially 
interested in the circumstances that led them to be overcome by temptation. For that reason, 
he excluded from his research those employees who took their jobs for the purpose of 
stealing — a relatively minor number of offenders at that time. Upon completion of his 
interviews, he developed what still remains the classic model for the occupational offender. 
His research was published in Other People’s Money: A Study in the Social Psychology of 
Embezzlement. 
 
Cressey’s final hypothesis was:  
 
Trusted persons become trust violators when they conceive of themselves as having a 
financial problem which is non-shareable, are aware this problem can be secretly resolved by 
violation of the position of financial trust, and are able to apply to their own conduct in 
that situation verbalizations which enable them to adjust their conceptions of themselves as 
trusted persons with their conceptions of themselves as users of the entrusted funds or 
property. 1  
 
                                                 
1 Donald R. Cressey, Other People’s Money  (Montclair: Patterson Smith, 1973) p. 30. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.603  
Over the years, the hypothesis has become better known as the fraud triangle.  One leg of the 
triangle represents a perceived non-shareable financial need. The second leg represents perceived 
opportunity, and the final leg stands for rationalization. The role of the non-shareable  problem is 
important. According to Cressey, “When the trust violators were asked to explain why they 
refrained from violation of other positions of trust they might have held at previous times, 
or why they had not violated the subject position at an earlier time, those who had an 
opinion expressed the equivalent of one or more of the following quotations: (a) ‘There was 
no need for it like there was this time.’ (b) ‘The idea never entered my head.’ (c) ‘I thought it 
was dishonest then, but this time it did not seem dishonest at first.’” 2 
 
 
 
 
“In all cases of trust violation encountered, the violator considered that a financial problem 
which confronted him could not be shared with persons who, from a more objective point 
of view, probably could have aided in the solution of the problem.” 3 
 
Non-shareable Financial Problems 
That which is considered “non-shareable” is whol ly in the eyes of the potential occupational 
offender, Cressey said. “Thus a man could lose  considerable money at the race track daily 
but the loss, even if it construed a problem for the individual, might not constitute a non-
 shareable problem for him. Another man might define the problem as one which must be 
                                                 
2 Cressey, p. 33. 
3 Cressey, p. 34. 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
kept secret and private, that is, as one which is non-shareable. Similarly, a failing bank or 
business might be considered by one person as presenting problems which must be shared 
with business associates and members of the community, while another person might 
conceive these problems as non-shareable.” 4 
 
In addition to being non-shareable, the problem that drives the fraudster is described as 
“financial” because these are problems that can generally be solved by the theft of cash or 
other assets. A person with large gambling debts, for instance, would need cash to pay those 
debts. Cressey did note, however, that there are some non-financial problems that could be 
solved by misappropriating funds through a violation of trust. For example, a person who 
embezzles in order to get revenge on his employer for perceived “unfair” treatment uses 
financial means to solve what is essentially a non-financial problem.  
 
Through his research, Cressey also found that the non-shareable problems encountered by 
the people he interviewed arose from situations that could be divided into six basic 
categories: violation of ascribed obligations, problems resulting from personal failure, 
business reversals, physical isolation, status gaining, and employer-employee relations. All of 
these situations dealt in some way with status-seeking or status-maintaining activities by the 
subjects. In other words, the non-shareable problems threatened the status of the subjects, 
or threatened to prevent them from achieving a higher status than the one they occupied at 
the time of their violation. 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF SOLVING THE PROBLEM IN SECRET 
Since Cressey’s study was done in the early 1950s, the workforce was obviously different 
than today’s workforce. But the employee faced  with an immediate, non-shareable financial 
need hasn’t changed much over the years. That employee still must find a way to relieve the 
financial pressure that bears down upon him. Simply stealing money, however, is not 
enough; Cressey found it was crucial that the employee be able to resolve the financial 
problem in secret.  
 
As we have seen, the non-shareable financial problems identified by Cressey all dealt in some 
way with questions of status; the trust violators were afraid of losing the approval of those 
around them and so were unable to tell others about their financial problems. If they could 
not share the fact that they were under financial pressure, it follows that they would not be 
                                                 
4 Cressey, p. 35. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.605  
able to share the fact that they were resorting to illegal means to relieve that pressure. To do 
so would be to admit that the problems existed in the first place.  
 
The interesting thing to note is that it is not the embezzlement itself that creates the need for 
secrecy in the perpetrator’s mind; it is the circumstances that led to the embezzlement (a 
violation of ascribed obligation, a business reversal, etc.). Cressey said: 
 
“In all cases [in the study] there was a distinct feeling that, because of activity prior to the 
defalcation, the approval of groups important to the trusted person had been lost, or a 
distinct feeling that present gr oup approval would be lost if certain activity were revealed 
[the non-shareable financial problem], with the result that the trusted person was effectively 
isolated from persons who could assist him in solving problems arising from that activity.” 
 
Although the clear conception of a financial problem as non-shareable does not invariably 
result in trust violation, it do es establish in trusted persons a desire for a specific kind of 
solution to their problems. The results desired in the cases encountered were uniform: the 
solution or partial solution of the problem by the use of funds which can be obtained in an 
independent, relatively secret, safe, and sure method in keeping with the ‘rationalizations’ 
available to the person at the time. 5  (emphasis added)  
 
Perceived Opportunity 
According to the fraud triangle model, the presence of a non-shareable financial problem by 
itself will not lead an employee to commit fraud. The key to understanding Cressey’s theory 
is to remember that all three elements must be present for a trust violation to occur. The 
non-shareable financial problem creates the motive for the crime to be committed, but the 
employee must also perceive that he has an opportunity to commit the crime without being 
caught. This perceived opportunity  constitutes the second element. 
 
In Cressey’s view, there were two components of the perceived opportunity to commit a 
trust violation: general information and technical skill. General information  is simply the 
knowledge that the employee’s position of trust  could be violated. This knowledge might 
come from hearing of other embezzlements, from seeing dishonest behavior by other 
employees, or just from generally being aware of the fact that the employee is in a position 
where he could take advantage of his employer’s faith in him. Technical skill  refers to the 
                                                 
5 Cressey, p. 66–67. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.606   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
abilities needed to commit the violation. These are usually the same abilities that the 
employee needs to have to obtain and keep his position in the first place. Cressey noted that 
most embezzlers adhere to their occupational routines (and their job skills) in order to 
perpetrate their crimes.6 In essence, the perpetrator’s job will tend to define the type of 
fraud he will commit. “Accountants use checks which they have been entrusted to dispose 
of, sales clerks withhold receipts, bankers manipulate seldom-used accounts or withhold 
deposits, real estate men use deposits entrusted to them, and so on.” 7 
 
Obviously, the general information and technical skill that Cressey identified are not unique 
to occupational offenders; most if not all em ployees have these same characteristics. But 
because trusted persons possess this information and skill, when they face a non-shareable 
financial problem they see it as something that they have the power to correct. They apply 
their understanding of the possibility  for trust violation to the specific crises they are faced 
with. Cressey observed, “It is the next step whic h is significant to violation: the application 
of the general information to the specific situation, and conjointly, the perception of the fact 
that in addition to having general possibilities for violation, a specific position of trust can be 
used for the specific purpose of solving a non-shareable problem.” 8 
 
Rationalizations 
The third and final factor in the fraud triangle is the rationalization. Cressey pointed out that 
the rationalization is not an ex post facto means of justifying a theft that has already occurred. 
Significantly, the rationalization is a necessary component of the crime before  it takes place; in 
fact, it is a part of the motivation for the crime. Because the embezzler does not view 
himself as a criminal, he must justify his misdeeds before he ever commits them. The 
rationalization is necessary so that the perpetrator can make his illegal behavior intelligible to 
himself and maintain his concept of himself as a trusted person.9 
 
After the criminal act has taken place, the rationalization will often be abandoned. That is, of 
course, because of the nature of us all; the first time we do something contrary to our 
morals, it bothers us. As we repeat the act, it becomes easier. One hallmark of occupational 
fraud and abuse offenders is that once the line is crossed, the illegal acts become more or 
less continuous. So an occupational fraudster might begin stealing with the thought that “I’ll 
                                                 
6 Cressey, p. 84. 
7 Cressey, p. 84. 
8 Cressey, p. 85. 
9 Cressey, pp. 94–95. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.607  
pay the money back,” but after the initial theft is successful, he will usually continue to steal 
past the point at which there is any realistic possibility of repaying the stolen funds. 
 
Cressey found that the embezzlers he studied generally rationalized their crimes by viewing 
them as (1) essentially non-criminal, (2) justified, or (3) part of a general irresponsibility for 
which they were not completely accountable. He also found that the rationalizations used 
by trust violators tended to be linked to their positions and to the manner in which they 
committed their violations. He examined this by dividing the subjects of his study into three 
categories: independent businessmen, long-term violators, and absconders. He discovered 
that each group had its own types of rationalizations. 
 
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSMEN 
The independent businessmen in Cressey’s study were people who were in business for 
themselves and who converted “deposits” that had been entrusted to them. 11 Perpetrators in 
this category tended to use one of two common excuses: (1) they were “borrowing” the 
money they converted or (2) the funds entrusted to them were really theirs—you can’t steal 
from yourself. Cressey found the “borrowing” rationalization was the one most frequently 
used. These perpetrators also tended to espouse the idea that “everyone” in business 
misdirects deposits in some way, which therefore made their own misconduct less wrong 
than “stealing.” 12 Also, the independent businessmen almost universally felt their illegal 
actions were predicated by an “unusual situati on,” which Cressey concluded was in reality a 
non-shareable financial problem.  
 
LONG-TERM VIOLATORS 
Cressey defined long-term violators as individuals who converted their employer’s funds, or 
funds belonging to their employer’s clients, by taking relatively small amounts over a period 
of time.13 Similar to independent businessmen, the long-term violators generally preferred 
the “borrowing” rationalization. Other rationalizations of long-term violators were 
described, too, but they almost always were used in connection with the “borrowing” theme: 
(1) they were embezzling to keep their families from shame, disgrace, or poverty; (2) theirs 
was a case of “necessity”; their employers were cheating them financially; and (3) their 
employers were dishonest toward others and deserved to be fleeced. Some even pointed out 
                                                 
10 Cressey, p. 93. 
11 Cressey, p. 101–102. 
12 Cressey, p. 102. 
13 Cressey, p. 102. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.608   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that it was more difficult to return the funds than to steal them in the first place, and claimed 
that they did not pay back their “borrowings”  because they feared that would lead to 
detection of their thefts. A few in the study actually kept track of their thefts, but most only 
did so at first. Later, as the embezzlements escalated, it is assumed that the offender would 
rather not know the extent of his “borrowings.”  
 
All of the long-term violators in the study expressed a feeling that they would like to 
eventually “clean the slate” and repay their de bt. This feeling usually arose even before the 
perpetrators perceived that they might be caught. Cressey pointed out that at this point, 
whatever fear the perpetrators felt in relation to their crimes was related to losing their social 
status by the exposure of their non-shareable problem, not the exposure of the theft itself or 
the possibility of punishment or imprisonment. This is because their rationalizations still 
prevented them from perceiving their misconduct as criminal. “The trust violator cannot 
fear the treatment usually accorded to criminals until he comes to look upon himself as  
a criminal.” 14 
 
Eventually, most of the long-term violators finally realized they were “in too deep.” It is at 
this point that the embezzler faces a crisis. While maintaining the borrowing rationalization 
(or other rationalizations, for that matter), the trust violator is able to maintain his self-image 
as a law-abiding citizen; but when the level of theft escalates to a certain point, the 
perpetrator is confronted with the idea that he is behaving in a criminal manner. This is 
contrary to his personal values and the values of the social groups to which he belongs. This 
conflict creates a great deal of anxiety for the perpetrator. A number of offenders described 
themselves as extremely nervous and upset, tense, and unhappy.15 
 
Without the rationalization that they were borrowing, long-term offenders in the study 
found it difficult to reconcile converting money, while at the same time seeing themselves as 
honest and trustworthy. In this situation, they have two options: (1) they can readopt the 
attitudes of the (law-abiding) social group with which they identified before the thefts began, 
or (2) they can adopt the attitudes of the new category of persons (criminals) with whom 
they now identify.16 From his study, Cressey was able to cite examples of each type of 
behavior. Those who sought to readopt the attitudes of their law-abiding social groups “may 
report their behavior to the police or to their employer, quit taking funds or resolve to quit 
                                                 
14 Cressey, pp. 120–121. 
15 Cressey, p. 121. 
16 Cressey, p. 122.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.609  
taking funds, speculate or gamble wildly in order to regain the amounts taken, or “‘leave the 
field’ by absconding or committing suicide.” 17 On the other hand, those who adopt the 
attitudes of the group of criminals to which they now belong “may become reckless in their 
defalcations, taking larger amounts than formerly with less attempts to avoid detection and 
with no notion of repayment.” 18 
 
ABSCONDERS 
The third group of offenders Cressey discussed was absconders — people who take the money 
and run. Cressey found that the non-shareable problems for absconders usually resulted 
from physical isolation. He observed that these people, “usually are unmarried or separated 
from their spouses, live in hotels or rooming houses, have few primary group associations of 
any sort, and own little property. Only one of the absconders interviewed had held a higher 
status position of trust, such as an accountant, business executive, or bookkeeper.” 19 He also 
found that the absconders tended to have lower occupational and socio-economic status 
than the members of the other two categories.  
 
Because absconders tended to lack strong social ties, Cressey found that almost any financial 
problem could be defined as non-shareable for these persons, and also that rationalizations 
were easily adopted because the persons only had to sever a minimum of social ties when 
they absconded.20 The absconders rationalized their conduct by noting that their attempts to 
live honest lives had been futile (hence their low status). They also adopted an attitude of not 
caring what happened to them, and a belief that they could not help themselves because they 
were predisposed to criminal behavior. The latter two rationalizations, which were adopted 
by every absconder in Cressey’s study, allowed them to remove almost all personal 
accountability from their conduct.21 
 
In the 1950s, when this data was gathered by Cressey, embezzlers were considered persons 
of higher socioeconomic status who took funds over a limited period of time because of 
some personal problem such as drinking or gambling, while “thieves” were considered 
persons of lower status who took whatever funds were at hand. Cressey noted, “Since most 
absconders identify with the lower status group, they look upon themselves as belonging to a 
                                                 
17 Cressey, p. 121. 
18 Cressey, p. 122.  
19 Cressey, p. 128. 
20 Cressey, p. 129.  
21 Cressey, pp. 128–129. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.610   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
special class of thieves rather than trust violators. Just as long-term violators and 
independent businessmen do not at first consider the possibility of absconding with the 
funds, absconders do not consider the possibility of taking relatively small amounts of 
money over a period of time.” 22 
 
Conjuncture of Events 
Perhaps the most important conclusion to be drawn from the Cressey study was that it took 
all three elements — perceived non-shareable fi nancial problem, perceived opportunity, and 
the ability to rationalize — for the trust violation to occur.  
  
“The three events make up the conditions under which trust violation occurs and the term 
cause may be applied to their conjuncture since trust violation is dependent on that 
conjuncture. Whenever the conjunc ture of events occurs, trust violation results, and if the 
conjuncture does not take place there is no trust violation.” 23  
 
Conclusions 
Cressey’s classic fraud triangle helps explain the nature of many — but not all—occupational 
offenders. For example, although academicians have tested his model, it has still not fully 
found its way into practice in terms of developing fraud prevention programs. Our sense 
tells us that one model — even Cressey’s — will not fit all situations. Plus, the study is nearly 
half a century old. There has been considerable social change in the interim. And now, many 
anti-fraud professionals believe there is a new breed of occupational offender—one who 
simply lacks a conscience sufficient to overcome temptation.  
 
Dr. Steve Albrecht 
The Albrecht Study 
Another pioneering researcher in occupational fraud and abuse is Dr. Steve Albrecht of 
Brigham Young University. Albrecht and two of  his colleagues, Keith R. Howe and Marshall 
B. Romney, conducted an analysis of 212 frauds in the early 1980s under a grant from the 
Institute of Internal Auditors Research Foundation, leading to their book entitled Deterring 
Fraud: The Internal Auditor’s Perspective. The study’s methodology involved obtaining 
demographics and background information on the frauds through the use of extensive 
                                                 
22 Cressey, p. 133. 
23 Cressey, p. 139. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.611  
questionnaires. The participants in the survey were internal auditors of companies that had 
experienced frauds. 
 
Albrecht’s research included an examination of  comprehensive data sources to assemble a 
complete list of pressure, opportunity, and integrity variables, resulting in a set of 50 possible 
red flags or indicators of occupational fraud and abuse. These variables fell into two 
principle categories: perpetrator characteristics and organizational environment. The purpose 
of the study was to determine which of the red flags were most important to the commission 
(and therefore to the detection and prevention) of fraud. The red flags ranged from 
unusually high personal debts to belief that one’s  job is in jeopardy, from no separation of 
asset custodial procedures to not adequately checking a potential employee’s background. 24  
 
The researchers gave participants both sets of 25 motivating factors and asked which factors 
were present in the frauds they had dealt with. Participants were asked to rank these factors 
on a seven-point scale indicating the degree to which each factor existed in their specific 
frauds. The ten most highly ranked factors from the list of personal characteristics, based on 
this study, were:  
 
1. Living beyond their means 
2. An overwhelming desire for personal gain 
3. High personal debt 
4. A close association with customers 
5. Feeling pay was not commensurate with responsibility 
6. A wheeler-dealer attitude 
7. Strong challenge to beat the system 
8. Excessive gambling habits 
9. Undue family or peer pressure 
10. No recognition for job performance25 
 
These motivators are very similar to the non-shareable financial problems Cressey identified.  
 
The ten most highly ranked factors from the list dealing with organizational  
environment were:  
  
                                                 
24 While such red flags may be present in many occupational fraud cases, one must re-emphasize Albrecht’s caution that 
the perpetrators are hard to profile and fraud is difficult to predict. To underscore this point, Albrecht’s research does not 
address — and no current research has been done to determine — if nonoffenders have many of the same characteristics. If 
so, then the list may not be discriminating enough to be useful. In short, while one should be mindful of potential red flags, 
they should not receive undue attention absent other compelling circumstances. 
25 Albrecht, p. 32. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.612   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Placing too much trust in key employees 
2. Lack of proper procedures for authorization of transactions 
3. Inadequate disclosures of personal investments and incomes 
4. No separation of authorization of transactions from the custody of related assets 
5. Lack of independent checks on performance 
6. Inadequate attention to details 
7. No separation of custody of assets from the accounting for those assets 
8. No separation of duties between accounting functions 
9. Lack of clear lines of authority and responsibility 
10. Department that is not frequently reviewed by internal auditors26 
 
All of the factors on this list affect employees’ opportunity to commit fraud without being 
caught. Opportunity, as you will recall, was the second factor identified in Cressey’s fraud 
triangle. In many ways, the study by Albrecht, et al., supported Cressey’s model. Like 
Cressey’s study, the Albrecht study suggests there are three factors involved in occupational 
frauds: “. .. it appears that three elements must be present for a fraud to be committed: a 
situational pressure (non-shareable financial pressure), a perceived opportunity to commit 
and conceal the dishonest act (a way to secretly resolve the dishonest act or the lack of 
deterrence by management), and some way to rationalize (verbalize) the act as either being 
inconsistent with one’s personal level of integrity or justifiable.” 27 
 
The Fraud Scale 28  
To illustrate the concept, Albrecht developed the Fraud Scale, which included the 
components of situational pressures, perceived opportunities, and personal integrity. When 
situational pressures and perceived opportunities are high and personal integrity is low, 
occupational fraud is much more likely to occur than when the opposite is true.29 
 
 
                                                 
26 Albrecht, p. 39 
27 Albrecht, p. 5. 
28 Albrecht, et.al., p. 5. 
29 Albrecht, et.al., p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.613  
Albrecht describes situational pressures as “t he immediate problems individuals experience 
within their environments, the most overwhelming of which are probably high personal 
debts or financial losses.” 30 Opportunities to commit fraud, Albrecht says, may be created 
by individuals, or by deficient or missing internal controls. Personal integrity “refers to the 
personal code of ethical behavior each person adopts. While this factor appears to be a 
straightforward determination of whether the person is honest or dishonest, moral 
development research indicates that the issue is more complex.” 31 
 
In addition to its findings on motivating factors of occupational fraud, the Albrecht study 
also disclosed several interesting relationships between the perpetrators and the frauds they 
committed. For example, perpetrators of large frauds used the proceeds to purchase new 
homes and expensive automobiles, recreation property, expensive vacations, support 
extramarital relationships, and make speculative investments. Those committing small 
frauds did not.32 Perpetrators who were interested primarily in “beating the system” 
committed larger frauds. However, perpetrators who believed their pay was not adequate 
committed primarily small frauds. Lack of segregation of responsibilities, placing 
undeserved trust in key employees, imposing unrealistic goals, and operating on a crisis 
basis were all pressures or weaknesses associated with large frauds. College graduates were 
less likely to spend the proceeds of their loot to take extravagant vacations, purchase 
recreational property, support extramarital relationships, and buy expensive automobiles. 
Finally, those with lower salaries were more likely to have a prior criminal record.33 
 
Richard C. Hollinger 
The Hollinger-Clark Study 
In 1983, Richard C. Hollinger of Purdue University and John P. Clark of the University of 
Minnesota published federally funded research involving surveys of nearly 10,000 American 
workers. Their book, Theft by Employees, reached a different conclusion than Cressey. They 
concluded that employees steal primarily as a result of workplace conditions, and that the 
true costs of the problem are vastly understated: “In sum, when we take into consideration 
the incalculable social costs... the grand total paid for theft in the workplace is no doubt 
grossly underestimated by the available financial estimates.” 34 
                                                 
30 Albrecht, p. 5. 
31 Albrecht, p. 6. 
32 Albrecht, p. 42. 
33 Albrecht, p. xiv. 
34 Richard C. Hollinger and John P. Clark, Theft by Employees  (Lexington: Lexingtion Books, 1983), p. 6. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.614   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Hypotheses of Employee Theft 
In reviewing the literature on employee theft, Hollinger and Clark concluded that experts 
had developed five separate but interrelated sets of hypotheses of employee theft. The first 
is external economic pressures, such as the “non-shareable financial problem” that Cressey 
described. The second hypothesis was that contemporary employees, specifically young 
ones, are not as hardworking and honest as those in past generations. The third theory, 
advocated primarily by those with years of experience in the security and investigative 
industry, is that every employee can be tempted to steal from his employer. The theory 
basically assumes that people are greedy and dishonest by nature. The fourth theory was 
that job dissatisfaction is the primary cause of employee theft, and the fifth, that theft 
occurs because of the broadly shared formal and informal structure of organizations—that 
is, over time, the group norms, whether good or bad, become the standard of conduct. 
The sum of their research generally concluded that the fourth hypothesis was correct. 
 
EMPLOYEE DEVIANCE 
Employee theft is at one extreme of employee deviance, which can be defined as conduct 
detrimental to the organization and to the employee. At the other extreme is 
counterproductive employee behavior such as goldbricking and abuse of sick leave. 
Hollinger and Clark defined two basic categories of employee deviant behavior: (1) acts by 
employees against property, and (2) violations of the norms regulating acceptable levels of 
production. The former includes misuse and theft of company property such as cash or 
inventory. The latter involves acts of employee deviance that affect productivity. 
 
Hollinger and Clark developed a written questionnaire that was sent to employees in three 
different sectors: retail, hospital, and manufacturing. The employees were presented with 
lists of category 1 and category 2 offenses and were asked which offenses they had been 
involved in, and with what frequency. The researchers eventually received 9,175 valid 
employee questionnaires, representing about 54 percent of those sampled. Below are the 
results of the questionnaires. The first table represents category 1 offenses?acts against 
property.35 Hollinger and Clark found that approximately one-third of employees in each 
sector admitted to committing some form of property deviance.  
 
                                                 
35 Hollinger and Clark, p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.615  
 
The following is a summary of the Hollinger and Clark research with respect to production 
deviance. Not surprisingly, they found that this form of employee misconduct was two to 
three times more common than property violations.36 
 
                                                 
36 Hollinger and Clark, p. 42. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
JOB SATISFACTION AND DEVIANCE 
The research of Hollinger and Clark strongly suggests that employees who are dissatisfied 
with their jobs?across all age groups, but especially younger workers?are the most likely to 
seek redress through counterproductive or illegal behavior in order to right the perceived 
“inequity.” Other writers, notably anthropol ogist Gerald Mars and researcher David 
Altheide, have commented on this connection. Mars observed that among both hotel dining 
room employees and dock workers it was believed that pilferage was not theft, but was “seen 
as a morally justified addition to wages; indeed, as an entitlement due from exploiting 
employers.” 37 Altheide also documented that theft is often perceived by employees as a 
“way of getting back at the boss or supervisor.” 38 Jason Ditton documented a pattern in U.S. 
industries called “wages in kind,” in which employees “situated in structurally disadvantaged 
parts [of the organization] receive large segments of their wages invisibly.” 39 
 
                                                 
37 Hollinger and Clark, p. 77. 
38 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
39 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.617  
EMPLOYEE PERCEPTION OF CONTROL  
The researchers also examined the perception—not necessarily the reality—of employees 
believing they would be caught if they committed theft. “We find that perceived certainty of 
detection is inversely related to employee theft for respondents in all three industry 
sectors—that is, the stronger the perception that theft would be detected, the less the 
likelihood that the employee would engage in deviant behavior.” 40  
 
This finding is significant and consistent with other research. It suggests that increasing the 
perception of detection may be the best way to deter employee theft, while increasing the 
sanctions that are imposed on occupational fraudsters will have a limited effect. Recall that 
under Cressey’s model, embezzlers are motiva ted to commit illegal acts because they face 
some financial problem that they cannot share with others because it would threaten their 
status. It follows that the greatest threat to the perpetrator would be that he might be caught 
in the act of stealing because that would bring his non-shareable problem out into the open. 
The possibility of sanctions is only a secondary concern. The perpetrator engages in the 
illegal conduct only because he perceives there is an opportunity to fix his financial problem 
without getting caught.  Therefore, if an organization can increase in its employees’ minds the 
perception that illegal acts will be detected, it can significantly deter occupational fraud. Put 
simply, occupational fraudsters are not deterred by the threat of sanctions because they do 
not plan on getting caught. 
 
Control in the workplace, according to Hollinger and Clark, consists of both formal and 
informal social controls. Formal controls can be described as external pressures that are 
applied through both positive and negative sanctions; informal controls consist of the 
internalization by the employee of the group norms of the organization. These researchers, 
along with a host of others, have concluded that—as a general proposition—informal social 
controls provide the best deterrent. “These da ta clearly indicate that the loss of respect 
among one’s acquaintances was the single most effective variable in predicting future deviant 
involvement.” Furthermore, “... in general, the probability of suffering informal sanction is 
far more important than fear of formal sanctions in deterring deviant activity.” 41 Again, this 
supports the notion that the greatest deterrent to the fraudster is the idea that he will be 
caught, not the threat of punishment by his employer. 
 
                                                 
40 Hollinger and Clark, p. 117. 
41 Hollinger and Clark, p. 121. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
OTHER CONCLUSIONS 
Hollinger and Clark reached several other conclusions based on their work. First, they found 
that “substantially increasing the internal security presence does not seem to be appropriate, 
given the prevalence of the problem. In fact, doing so may make things worse.” Second, they 
concluded that the same kinds of employees who engage in other workplace deviance are 
also principally the ones who engage in employee theft. They found persuasive evidence that 
slow or sloppy workmanship, sick-leave abuses, long coffee breaks, alcohol and drug use at 
work, and coming in late and/or leaving early were more likely to be present in the 
employee-thief. 
 
Third, the researchers hypothesized that if efforts are made to reduce employee theft 
without reducing its underlying causes (e.g., employee dissatisfaction, lack of ethics), the 
result could create a “hydraulic effect.” That is, tightening controls over property deviance 
may create more detrimental acts affecting the productivity of the organization — if we push 
down employee theft, that action may push up goldbricking. Fourth, they asserted that 
increased management sensitivity to its employees will reduce all forms of workplace 
deviance. Fifth, they concluded special attention should be afforded young employees, as 
these are the ones statistically the most likely to steal. It must be pointed out, however, that 
although the incidence of theft is higher among younger employees, the losses associated 
with those thefts are typically lower than losses caused by more senior employees who have 
greater financial authority. 
 
Hollinger and Clark asserted that management must pay attention to four aspects of policy 
development: (1) a clear understanding regarding theft behavior, (2) continuous 
dissemination of positive information reflective of the company’s policies, (3) enforcement 
of sanctions, and (4) publicizing the sanctions. 
 
The researchers summed up their observations by saying, “perhaps the most important 
overall policy implication that can be drawn … is that theft and workplace deviance are in 
large part a reflection of how management at all levels of the organization is perceived by the 
employee. Specifically, if the employee is permitted to conclude that his contribution to the 
workplace is not appreciated or that the organization does not seem to care about the theft 
of its property, we expect to find greater involvement. In conclusion, a lowered prevalence 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.619  
of employee theft may be one valuable consequence of a management team that is 
responsive to the current perceptions and attitudes of its workforce.” 42 
 
2008-2009 Integrity Survey 
In January 2009, K PMG released its report on its 2008–2009 Integrity Survey. The results of 
the survey were based on responses from 5,065 U.S. employees, spanning all levels of job 
responsibility, 16 job functions, 13 industry sectors, and 4 thresholds of organizational size. 
According to the results of the survey, nearly three out of four employees (74 percent) 
reported that they have observed misconduct in the workplace in the prior 12-month period, 
with almost half of employees (46 percent) reporting that what they have observed was 
serious misconduct that could cause a “significant  loss of public trust if discovered.” KPMG 
conducted similar surveys in 2000 and 2005; in all three surveys, the reported levels of 
overall misconduct remained largely consistent, with 74 percent in 2005 and 76 percent in 
2000 reporting that they had observed misconduct in the prior year. Similarly, the three 
surveys have revealed consistent levels of serious misconduct, with 50 percent in 2005 and 
49 percent in 2000, characterizing the misconduct they observed as capable of causing a 
“significant loss of public trust if discovered.” Although the level of observed misconduct 
has remained constant, employees reported that the conditions that facilitate management’s 
ability to prevent, detect, and respond to fraud and misconduct within companies is 
improving. Employees who worked in companies with comprehensive ethics and 
compliance programs reported more favorable results across the board than did those who 
work in companies without such programs. For instance, employees who work in companies 
with such programs reported fewer observations of misconduct and higher levels of 
confidence in management’s commitment to integrity. 
 
2010 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse 
Occupational fraud and abuse is a widespre ad problem that affects practically every 
organization, regardless of size, location, or industry. In 1996, the ACFE released the first 
Report to the Nation on O cc upational Fraud and Abuse, which was intended to shed light on the 
immense and largely undefined costs that occupational fraud imposes on organizations. The 
stated goals of the first Report  were to:  
• Summarize the opinions of experts on the percentage and amount of organizational 
revenue lost to all forms of occupational fraud and abuse. 
• Examine the characteristics of the employees who commit occupational fraud and abuse. 
                                                 
42 Hollinger and Clark, p. 144. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.620   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Determine what kinds of organizations are victims of occupational fraud and abuse. 
• Categorize the ways in which serious fraud and abuse occurs. 
 
All of the enumerated goals of the first Report  fell under one larger and more all-
 encompassing mission: to better educate the public and anti-fraud professionals about the 
threat of occupational fraud. Since that time, with each subsequent edition of the Report to the 
Nation, that has remained our primary goal.  
 
We released updated editions of the Report  in even years between 2002and 2008. Like the 
first study, each subsequent edition has been based on detailed case information about 
specific frauds provided by the CFEs who investigated those cases. Each Report  has been 
structured along the same lines, focusing on the methods used by employees, managers, and 
executives to defraud their organizations; the losses caused by those frauds; and the 
characteristics of both the perpetrators and the victims of these crimes.  
 
The 2010 edition of our Report  is based on 1,843 actual cases of occupational fraud. For the 
first time ever, we have widened our study to include cases from countries outside the 
United States; thus, the study is now titled Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and Abuse. 
This expansion allows us to more fully explore the truly global nature of occupational fraud 
and provides an enhanced view into the severity and impact of these crimes. 
 
The following is an excerpt containing some of the more significant findings of our study. 
Copies of the entire Report to the Nations can be downloaded or viewed at no charge on the 
ACFE’s website, www.ACFE.com.  
 
Measuring the Cost of Occupational Fraud 
Measuring the cost of occupational fraud is an important, yet incredibly challenging, 
endeavor. Arguably, the true cost is incalculable. The inherently clandestine nature of fraud 
means that many cases will never be revealed, and, of those that are, the full amount of 
losses might not be uncovered, quantified, or reported. Consequently, any measurement of 
occupational fraud costs will be, at best, an estimate. Nonetheless, determining such an 
approximation is critical to illustrate the pandemic and destructive nature of white-collar 
crime.  
 
We asked each CFE who participated in our survey to provide his best estimate of the 
percentage of annual revenues that the typical organization loses to fraud in a given year. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.621  
The median response was that the average organization annually loses 5% of its revenues to 
fraud. Applying this percentage to the 2009 estimated Gross World Product of $58.07 
trillion would result in a projected total global fraud loss of more than $2.9 trillion. 
 
Note that this estimate is based solely on the opinions of 1,843 anti-fraud experts, rather 
than any specific data or factual observations; accordingly, it should not be interpreted as a 
literal representation of the worldwide cost of occupational fraud. However, because there is 
no way to precisely calculate the size of global fraud losses, the best estimate of anti-fraud 
professionals with a frontline view of the problem may be as reliable a measure as we are 
able to make. In any event, it is undeniable that the overall cost of occupational fraud is 
immense, certainly costing organizations hundreds of billions or trillions of dollars each year. 
 
Distribution of Dollar Losses  
Of the 1,843 cases of occupational fraud that comprised our study, 1,822 included the total 
dollar loss. The median loss for all schemes in the study was $160,000. As the following 
chart shows, almost one-fourth of all cases in the 2010 study involved losses of at least $1 
million. The distribution of dollar losses among cases in the 2010 study was similar to the 
distribution in our 2008 Report. In both studies, more than 60% of schemes caused the 
victim organization to suffer a loss of at least $100,000. 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.622   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
How Occupational Fraud Is Committed 
Previous ACFE research has identified three primary categories of occupational fraud used 
by individuals to defraud their employers. Asset misappropriations are those schemes in 
which the perpetrator steals or misuses an organization’s resources. These frauds include 
schemes such as skimming cash receipts, falsifying expense reports, and forging company 
checks. 
 
Corruption schemes involve the employee’s use of his influence in business transactions in a 
way that violates his duty to the employer for the purpose of obtaining a benefit for himself 
or someone else. Examples of corruption schemes include bribery, extortion, and a conflict 
of interest.  
 
Financial statement fraud schemes are those involving the intentional misstatement or 
omission of material information in the organization’s financial reports. Common methods 
of fraudulent financial statement manipulation include recording fictitious revenues, 
concealing liabilities or expenses, and artificially inflating reported assets.  
 
As indicated in the following charts, asset misappropriations are by far both the most 
frequent and the least costly form of occupational fraud. On the other end of the spectrum 
are cases involving financial statement fraud. These schemes were present in less than 5% of 
the cases reported to us, but caused a median loss of more than $4 million. Corruption 
schemes fell in the middle category in both respects, occurring in just under one-third of all 
cases involved in our study and causing a median loss of $250,000. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.623  
Occupational Frauds by Category—Frequency 43 
 
 
Occupational Frauds by Category—Median Loss  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
43 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because several cases involved multiple schemes from 
more than one category. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
SUB-CATEGORIES OF ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION 
With nearly 90% of occupational frauds involving some form of asset misappropriation, it is 
instructional to further delineate the methods used by employees to embezzle organizational 
assets. We divided asset misappropriation schemes into nine sub-categories, as illustrated in 
the table below. The first eight sub-categories represent schemes targeting cash; these frauds 
account for approximately 85% of all asset misappropriations. 
 
Two of the sub-schemes — skimming and cash larceny — involve pilfering incoming cash 
receipts, such as sales revenues and accounts receivable collections. The next five sub-categories — 
billing, expense reimbursement, check tampering, payroll, and fraudulent 
register disbursement schemes — involve fraudulent disbursements of cash. The eighth form 
of cash misappropriation targets cash the organization has on hand, such as petty cash funds 
or cash in a vault. The final sub-category of asset misappropriations covers the theft or 
misuse of non-cash assets, including inventory, supplies, fixed assets, investments, 
intellectual property, and proprietary information. The table below provides the frequency 
and median loss associated with each asset misappropriation sub-category. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.625  
The sum of percentages in this table exceeds 100% because several cases involved asset misappropriation schemes from more than one category. 
 
As previously mentioned, our 2010 data include fraud cases from countries throughout the 
world, while our 2008 data contain only U.S.-based cases. In the following charts, we isolated 
the U.S. cases from our current study to make a more direct comparison to our 2008 data. 
Interestingly, while financial statement fraud remained the least common and most costly 
form of fraud among U.S. cases, there was a much lower percentage of financial statement 
cases in this study (four percent) as compared to 2008 (ten percent). Additionally, the 
median losses for all three categories of fraud were notably smaller in 2010 than they were in 
2008. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.626   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Occupational Frauds by Category (U.S. Only)—Frequency 44  
 
 
Occupational Frauds by Category (U.S. Only)—Median Loss  
 
Duration of Fraud Schemes  
In addition to examining the monetary cost of the fraud cases reported to us, we analyzed 
the length of time these schemes lasted before being detected. The median duration—the 
time period from when the fraud first occurred to when it was discovered — for all cases in 
our study was 18 months. Not surprisingly, cases involving financial statement fraud—the 
most costly form of fraud—lasted the long est, with a median duration of 27 months. 
Fraudulent register disbursements, on the other hand, were not only the least costly form of 
fraud in our study, but also tended to be detected the soonest. 
                                                 
44The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% becausese veral cases involved schemes from more than 
one category. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.627  
Median Duration of Fraud Based on Scheme Type  
 
Detection of Fraud Schemes 
One of the principal goals of our research is to identify how past frauds were detected so 
that organizations can apply that knowledge to their future anti-fraud efforts. Tips were by 
far the most common detection method in our study, catching nearly three times as many 
frauds as any other form of detection. This is consistent with the findings in our prior 
reports. Tips have been far and away the most common means of detection in every study 
since 2002, when we began tracking the data.  
 
Management review and internal audit were the second and third most common forms of 
detection, uncovering 15% and 14% of frauds, re spectively. It is also noteworthy that 11% 
of frauds were detected through channels that lie completely outside of the traditional anti-
 fraud control structure: accident, police notificat ion, and confession. In other words, 11% of 
the time, the victim organization either had to stumble onto the fraud or be notified of it by 
a third party in order to detect it. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.628   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Initial Detection of Occupational Frauds 45 
 
SOURCE OF TIPS  
Not surprisingly, employees were the most common source of fraud tips. However, 
customers, vendors, competitors, and acquaintances (i.e., non-company sources) provided at 
least 34% of fraud tips, which suggests that fraud reporting policies and programs should be 
publicized not only to employees, but also to customers, vendors, and other external 
stakeholders. 
 
While tips have consistently been the most common way to detect fraud, the impact of tips 
is, if anything, understated by the fact that so many organizations fail to implement fraud 
reporting systems. Such systems enable employees to anonymously report fraud or 
misconduct by phone or through a web-based portal, otherwise known as hotlines. The 
ability to report fraud anonymously is key because employees often fear making reports due 
to the threat of retaliation from superiors or negative reactions from their peers. Also, most 
third-party hotline systems offer programs to raise awareness about how to report 
misconduct. Consequently, one would expect that the presence of a fraud hotline would 
enhance fraud detection efforts and foster more tips. 
 
                                                 
45 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in some cases respondents identified more than 
one detection method.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.629  
Percent of Tips by Source 46 
 
 
Geographic Location of Organizations 
As mentioned previously, for the first time in the history of our research on occupational 
fraud, we opened up our study to include fraud cases investigated by CFEs outside the 
United States. As a result, the cases discussed in this Report  represent frauds perpetrated in 
106 countries around the world. We received information on the location of 1,797 of the 
cases that were reported to us. Of these, 43% occurred outside the United States, providing 
us with a true insight into the global plague of occupational fraud.  
 
The chart below shows the number and median loss of the cases reported to us, broken 
down by region. For victim organizations with locations in more than one country, we asked 
survey participants to choose the location where the primary perpetrator was located. For 
example, a fraud perpetrated at a European arm of a Japanese company would be classified 
as occurring in Europe. Similarly, a case involving fraud perpetrated at the Canadian office 
of a South American company would be considered a fraud that occurred in Canada. The 
regional breakdowns on case data throughout this Report  should consequently be read within 
this framework. Additionally, due to the large number of U.S. cases reported, we separated 
North America into the United States and Canada, and grouped the remaining countries by 
continent.  
 
 
                                                 
46 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in some cases respondents identified more than 
the source of the initial tip. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Geographical Location of Victim Organizations  
 
Victims of Occupational Fraud 
As part of our survey, we asked each respondent to provide demographic information about 
the organization that was defrauded. We believe it is useful to measure the different ways in 
which occupational fraud impacts different types of organizations. Our hope is that this 
analysis may enable organizations to better identify where to strengthen or focus their anti-
 fraud efforts based on the experiences of other similar organizations. 
 
TYPES OF VICTIM ORGANIZATIONS  
More than 40% of victim organizations in our study were privately owned businesses, and 
nearly one-third were publicly traded companies, meaning that almost three-quarters of the 
victims represented in our study came from for-profit enterprises. Sixteen percent of the 
frauds reported to us occurred at government agencies. Not-for-profit organizations were 
the least represented category, with less than 10% of frauds taking place at these entities. 
 
Organization Type of Victim—Frequency  
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.631  
In addition to experiencing the most frauds, private and public companies were also victims 
to the costliest schemes in our study; the me dian loss for the cases at these businesses was 
$231,000 and $200,000, respectively. In cont rast, the losses experienced by government 
agencies and not-for-profit organizations were about half as much. Government agencies 
had a median loss of $100,000, while not-for-profits lost a median of $90,000.  
 
Organization Type of Victim —Median Loss  
 
SIZE OF VICTIM ORGANIZATIONS 
Continuing the trend observed in our prior studies, small organizations — those with fewer 
than 100 employees — suffered the greatest percentage of the frauds in our 2010 study, 
accounting for more than 30% of the victim organizations. However, the variation between 
size categories is relatively small, with 23% of victims having between 100 and 999 
employees, 26% having 1,000 to 9,999 employees, and 21% having more than 10,000 
employees. 
 
This relatively small disparity contrasts with our previous studies, in which small 
organizations were involved in a much higher percent of frauds than any other category. 
Additionally, our research has historically shown that smaller organizations suffer 
disproportionately large losses due to occupational fraud. Organizations with fewer than 100 
employees experienced the greatest median loss of all categories of victim organizations in 
our 2008 study. The same was true in our 2006 study. 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.632   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Size of Victim Organization — Frequency  
 
Size of Victim Organization — Median Loss  
 
INDUSTRIES OF VICTIM ORGANIZATIONS 
We looked at the industry classification of the organizations victimized by the fraud cases in 
our study. It is important to view this data as a representation of the companies that had 
CFEs investigate internal fraud cases within the last two years, rather than as an indication of 
which industries are more or less likely to be victimized by fraud. However, the following 
tables do draw attention to some differences in the frequency and cost associated with 
occupational frauds among different sectors. For example, the banking and financial services 
industry had the most cases, accounting for more than 16% of the frauds reported to us. The 
period of time covered by our survey — calendar years 2008 and 2009 — was filled with news 
stories of fraud in the banking sector, so this finding is not unexpected. In contrast, the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.633  
mining industry experienced the fewest frauds in our study, but those cases caused a median 
loss of $1 million—by far the largest of  any of the industries we examined.47  
 
Industry of Victim Organization—Sorted by Frequency  
 
 
  
                                                 
47 There was a small sample of only 12 cases in this industry, which may imp act the reliability of the 
media n loss data. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.634   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Industry of Victim Organization — Sorted by Median Loss  
 
VICTIM’S ANTI-FRAUD CONTROLS AT TIME OF FRAUD 
We asked survey participants which of several common anti-fraud controls were in place at 
the victim organization during the perpetration of the fraud. A distinction should be made 
between the following data and the prior discussion on fraud detection methods. The 
following analysis covers the mere presence of each control — not necessarily its role in 
detecting the fraud once it started. More than three-quarters of the victim organizations in 
our study had their financial statements audited by external auditors, while two-thirds had 
dedicated internal audit or fraud examination departments, and almost 60% had independent 
audits of their internal controls over financial reporting. Additionally, nearly 70% of the 
organizations had a formal code of conduct in place at the time of the fraud, though only 
39% extended that to include a formal anti-fraud policy. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.635  
As mentioned in our discussion on fraud detection method, tips are the number one means 
by which fraud is detected. However, less than half of the victim organizations in our study 
had a hotline in place at the time the fraud occurred. There is evidence that the presence of a 
hotline improves organizations’ ability to detect fraud and limit fraud losses, which should 
cause more organizations to implement fraud hotlines. 
 
Frequency of Anti-Fraud Measures 48  
 
 
ANTI-FRAUD CONTROLS IN SMALL BUSINESSES  
We have long hypothesized that many small companies are particularly susceptible to fraud, 
at least partially due to the limited resources they devote to anti-fraud controls. To test this 
theory, we compared the presence of anti-fraud controls at those companies with fewer than 
100 employees to the controls at companies with more than 100 employees. Our findings 
confirm what we suspected: The small companies in our study did indeed have fewer 
controls in place than the larger organizations — a factor that may contribute to the 
disproportionate impact of fraud on these companies. While discrepancies in levels of 
certain controls are somewhat expected given the associated costs or resources required to 
enact them, the gap between controls in small businesses as opposed to larger organizations 
is striking. For example, it would be expected that small businesses would have a lower rate 
of external audits and that fewer small companies would have a formal internal audit or 
                                                 
48The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because many victim  organizations had more than one 
anti-fraud control in place at the time of the fraud. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.636   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
fraud examination function. But even less expensive controls were often absent in small 
businesses. While 64% of large companies had so me sort of management review of controls, 
processes, accounts, or transactions, less than half as many small businesses had the same 
type of monitoring in place. Likewise, formal codes of conduct and anti-fraud policies cost 
very little to implement, but serve as an effective way to make a clear and explicit statement 
against fraudulent and unethical conduct within an organization. Yet only 41% and 16% of 
small businesses had these policies (respectively) in place when the fraud occurred —
numbers dwarfed by the 83% and 50 % rates of larger organizations. 
 
Perhaps most concerning is that only 15% of small businesses had a hotline in place, 
compared to 64% of larger organizations. As previously discussed, our research shows that 
hotlines are consistently the most effective fraud detection method. Further, the median loss 
for frauds at companies with hotlines was 59% smaller than the median loss for frauds at 
organizations without such a mechanism. Arguably, enacting hotlines would go a long way in 
helping small-business owners protect their assets from dishonest employees. 
 
Frequency of Anti-Fraud Controls by Size of Victim Organization  
 
 
EFFECTIVENESS OF CONTROLS  
We compared the median loss experienced by those organizations that had a particular anti-
 fraud control against the median loss for those organizations without that control at the time 
of the fraud. Hotlines were the control with the greatest associated reduction in median loss, 
reinforcing their value as an effective anti-fraud measure. Employee support programs, 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.637  
surprise audits, and fraud training for staff members at all levels were also associated with 
median loss reductions of more than 50%. In terestingly, financial statement audits—the 
most commonly implemented control—was among the controls with the smallest associated 
reduction in median loss.  
 
Median Loss Based on Presence of Anti-Fraud Controls  
 
 
The Perpetrators 
We asked respondents to provide information about the fraud perpetrators in their cases so 
we could better understand how occupational fraud levels and losses are related to 
demographic information such as age, job type, gender, education, and position of authority. 
In cases where there were multiple offenders, the responses relate to the principal 
perpetrator—the person identified by the CFE as the primary culprit in the case. The 
following is a summary of the data we received.  
 
PERPETRATOR’S POSITION 
We asked survey respondents whether the perpetrator was an employee, a manager, or an 
owner/executive. Below we see that the distribution of cases based on the perpetrator’s 
position was fairly similar to what we found in our 2008 study, although the 2010 
distribution was slightly more skewed toward employees and managers. Not surprisingly, 
there was a strong correlation between the perpetrator’s position of authority and the losses 
caused by fraud. The median loss in owner/executive frauds was more than three times the 
loss caused by managers, and more than nine times higher than losses in employee fraud 
cases.  
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.638   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Number of Perpetrators - Frequency  
 
 
PERPETRATOR’S GENDER 
Two-thirds of the frauds in our study were committed by males, which is a higher percentage 
than we encountered in 2008, but consistent with the overall trend noted in prior reports 
that most occupational frauds are committed by men. 
 
Perpetrator’s Gender  
 
 
THE PERPETRATOR’S AGE 
The distribution of perpetrators based on their age was similar to our 2008 study, but the 
2010 perpetrators tended to be slightly younger. Our past reports have generally shown the 
highest levels of fraud to occur in the 36–5 0 age range, but this year we found more than 
half of all cases were committed by individuals between the ages of 31 and 45. Generally 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.639  
speaking, median losses tended to rise with the age of the perpetrator, which is consistent 
with our prior research. The most notable difference between 2008 and 2010 is the losses 
caused by perpetrators older than 60. In each study, however, we were dealing with fewer 
than 40 cases in that category. Given the small sample size, we believe this is more likely to 
be an anomaly than an indication of any particular trend.  
 
Age of Perpetrator — Frequency  
 
 
Age of Perpetrator — Median Loss  
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.640   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
PERPETRATOR’S CRIMINAL AND EMPLOYMENT HISTORY 
Only 7% of the fraud perpetrators in our study had been previously convicted of a fraud-related 
offense, which was virtually identical to our finding in 2008. Eighty-six percent had 
never been charged with or convicted of a prior offense. The low rate of prior convictions 
suggests that criminal background checks may have some effect in preventing fraud, but the 
effect is probably limited. 
 
Perpetrator’s Criminal History — Frequency  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.641  
In addition to criminal history, past employment issues may indicate that an employee is 
more likely to engage in fraudulent conduct in the future. Of the respondents in our survey, 
791 were able to provide information about the perpetrator’s prior employment history. 
Among those cases, about 8% of perpetrators had been previously punished and 10% had 
been previously terminated for fraud-related conduct. 
 
Perpetrator’s Employment History — Frequency  
 
 
BEHAVIORAL RED FLAGS DISPLAYED BY PERPETRATORS 
While a fraud is ongoing, the perpetrator often displays certain behaviors or characteristics 
that might indicate he has a heightened risk of committing fraud. On their own, these 
behavioral red flags do not prove an individual is engaged in a fraud, but they should raise 
warning signals to the individual’s coworkers and managers, as well as the organization’s 
anti-fraud staff. When these red flags exist alongside other indicators of misconduct, this can 
be a strong clue that something is wrong. As discussed earlier in this report, occupational 
frauds often last for months or years before they are caught, so the ability to detect frauds as 
early as possible can have a big effect in limiting losses. 
 
We presented survey respondents with a list of common behavioral red flags and asked them 
to identify which of these warning signs had been displayed by the perpetrator prior to 
detection of the fraud. As shown in the following chart, the most common red flags 
displayed by perpetrators were living beyond financial means (43% of cases), experiencing 
financial difficulties (36%), excessive control i ssues with regard to their jobs (23%), and an 
unusually close association with vendors or customers (22%). This distribution is very similar 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.642   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
to what we found in our 2008 study. As we continue to track this data in future studies, we 
hope to be able to identify consistent relationships between behavioral warning signs and the 
occurrence of occupational fraud. Ideally, this data will help organizations build better fraud-detection 
programs that incorporate behavioral data, in addition to more standard anti-fraud 
controls. 
 
Behavioral Red Flags Present During Fraud Scheme — Sorted by Frequency 49  
 
We also broke down the distribution of red flags based on the type of fraud. Different forms 
of occupational fraud result from different factors and circumstances, which we would 
expect to show up in the fraudsters’ behavior. As the following chart illustrates, individuals 
who engaged in financial statement frauds were much more likely than other perpetrators to 
exhibit control issues or to be under excessive pressure to perform within their organization. 
Meanwhile, living beyond one’s means and experi encing financial difficulties were not as 
common among financial statement fraudsters as others. This makes sense, because while 
asset misappropriations and corruption schemes are almost always committed to enrich the 
fraudster, in many financial statement schemes, other factors—such as meeting earnings 
                                                 
49 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in many cases perpetrators displayed more than 
one behavioral red flag. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.643  
forecasts or hitting budget targets — may be as much of a motivator as personal financial 
gain. An unusually close association with a vendor or customer was noted as a red flag in 
45% of corruption cases, which is not surprising given that most corruption frauds involve 
bribery or some kind of illicit benefit. A “wheeler-dealer” attitude was also more common in 
corruption cases than in other forms of fraud, and 42% of all corruption perpetrators were 
identified as living beyond their means. Among those who misappropriated assets, living 
beyond one’s means and financial difficult ies were the two most common red flags. 
 
Behavioral Red Flags of Perpetrators Based on Scheme Type 50  
 
 
 
                                                 
50 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because in many cases perpetrators displayed more than 
one behavioral red flag. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.701  



:


occup fraud
occup fraud is commit larg by individu or small group of individu in
connect with their occup it can includ violat of law by businessmen
politician labor union leader lawyer doctor pharmacist and employe who embezzl
monei from their employ or steal merchandis and tool
gari green in hone the whitecollar crime concept us the term occup crime which
he defin as ani act punish by law which is commit through opportun creat in
the cours of an occup which is legal green further delin occup crime into
four categori
crime for the benefit of an emploi organ organiz occup crime
crime by offici through exercis of their statebas author state author
occup crime
crime by profession in their capac as profession profession
occup crime
crime by individu as individu
some scholar debat whether individu should be held respons for crime commit
on behalf of their organ although some direct benefit accru to the perpetr far
more benefit accru to the organ regardless of whether the organ is held
liabl the fraud is a direct result of some human action or interact in the word of parisi
if an organ is like a gun then there must be someon compar to a triggerman
research in occup fraud and abus
edwin h sutherland
rel littl research ha been done on the subject of occup fraud and abus
much of the current literatur is base upon the earli work of edwin h sutherland as
previous discuss in the theori of crime causat chapter sutherland believ
that the learn of crimin behavior occur with other person in a process of
commun therefor he reason crimin cannot occur without the assist of
other peopl sutherland further theoriz that the learn of crimin activ usual
occur within intim person group thi explain in hi view how a dysfunct
parent is more like to produc dysfunct offspr sutherland believ that the
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4602 2011 fraud examin manual
learn process involv two specif area the techniqu to commit the crime and the
attitud drive ration and motiv of the crimin mind on can see how
sutherland differenti associ theori fit with occup offend organ
that have dishonest employe will eventu infect a portion of honest on it also goe
the other wai honest employe will eventu have an influenc on some of those who
ar dishonest
donald r cressei
dure the 1940 at indiana univers on of sutherland brightest student wa don ald
r cressei 19191987 while much of suther land research concentr on upperworld
crimin cressei took hi own studi in a differ direct work on hi phd in
criminolog he decid hi dissert would focu on embezzl to serv as a basi for
hi research cressei interview about 200 peopl who had been incarcer for
embezzl fund
cressei hypothesi
cressei wa intrigu by embezzl whom he call trust violat he wa especi
interest in the circumst that led them to be overcom by temptat for that reason
he exclud from hi research those employe who took their job for the purpos of
steal a rel minor number of offend at that time upon complet of hi
interview he develop what still remain the classic model for the occup offend
hi research wa publish in other peopl monei a studi in the social psycholog of
embezzl
cressei final hypothesi wa
trust person becom trust violat when thei conceiv of themselv as have a
financi problem which is nonshar ar awar thi problem can be secretli resolv by
violat of the posit of financi trust and ar abl to appli to their own conduct in
that situat verbal which enabl them to adjust their concept of themselv as
trust person with their concept of themselv as user of the entrust fund or
properti 1
1 donald r cressei other peopl monei montclair patterson smith 1973 p 30
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4603
over the year the hypothesi ha becom better known as the fraud triangl on leg of the
triangl repres a perceiv nonshar financi need the second leg repres perceiv
opportun and the final leg stand for ration the role of the nonshar problem is
import accord to cressei when the trust violat were ask to explain why thei
refrain from violat of other posit of trust thei might have held at previou time
or why thei had not violat the subject posit at an earlier time those who had an
opinion express the equival of on or more of the follow quotat a there wa
no need for it like there wa thi time b the idea never enter my head c i thought it
wa dishonest then but thi time it did not seem dishonest at first 2
in all case of trust violat encount the violat consid that a financi problem
which confront him could not be share with person who from a more object point
of view probabl could have aid in the solut of the problem 3
nonshar financi problem
that which is consid nonshar is whol ly in the ey of the potenti occup
offend cressei said thu a man could lose consider monei at the race track daili
but the loss even if it constru a problem for the individu might not constitut a non
shareabl problem for him anoth man might defin the problem as on which must be
2 cressei p 33
3 cressei p 34
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4604 2011 fraud examin manual
kept secret and privat that is as on which is nonshar similarli a fail bank or
busi might be consid by on person as present problem which must be share
with busi associ and member of the commun while anoth person might
conceiv these problem as nonshar 4
in addit to be nonshar the problem that drive the fraudster is describ as
financi becaus these ar problem that can gener be solv by the theft of cash or
other asset a person with larg gambl debt for instanc would need cash to pai those
debt cressei did note howev that there ar some nonfinanci problem that could be
solv by misappropri fund through a violat of trust for exampl a person who
embezzl in order to get reveng on hi employ for perceiv unfair treatment us
financi mean to solv what is essenti a nonfinanci problem
through hi research cressei also found that the nonshar problem encount by
the peopl he interview aros from situat that could be divid into six basic
categori violat of ascrib oblig problem result from person failur
busi revers physic isol statu gain and employeremploye relat all of
these situat dealt in some wai with statusseek or statusmaintain activ by the
subject in other word the nonshar problem threaten the statu of the subject
or threaten to prevent them from achiev a higher statu than the on thei occupi at
the time of their violat
the import of solv the problem in secret
sinc cressei studi wa done in the earli 1950 the workforc wa obvious differ
than todai workforc but the employe face with an immedi nonshar financi
need hasnt chang much over the year that employe still must find a wai to reliev the
financi pressur that bear down upon him simpli steal monei howev is not
enough cressei found it wa crucial that the employe be abl to resolv the financi
problem in secret
as we have seen the nonshar financi problem identifi by cressei all dealt in some
wai with question of statu the trust violat were afraid of lose the approv of those
around them and so were unabl to tell other about their financi problem if thei could
not share the fact that thei were under financi pressur it follow that thei would not be
4 cressei p 35
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4605
abl to share the fact that thei were resort to illeg mean to reliev that pressur to do
so would be to admit that the problem exist in the first place
the interest thing to note is that it is not the embezzl itself that creat the need for
secreci in the perpetr mind it is the circumst that led to the embezzl a
violat of ascrib oblig a busi revers etc cressei said
in all case in the studi there wa a distinct feel that becaus of activ prior to the
defalc the approv of group import to the trust person had been lost or a
distinct feel that present gr oup approv would be lost if certain activ were reveal
the nonshar financi problem with the result that the trust person wa effect
isol from person who could assist him in solv problem aris from that activ
although the clear concept of a financi problem as nonshar doe not invari
result in trust violat it do es establish in trust person a desir for a specif kind of
solut to their problem the result desir in the case encount were uniform the
solut or partial solut of the problem by the us of fund which can be obtain in an
independ rel secret safe and sure method in keep with the ration
avail to the person at the time 5 emphasi ad
perceiv opportun
accord to the fraud triangl model the presenc of a nonshar financi problem by
itself will not lead an employe to commit fraud the kei to understand cressei theori
is to rememb that all three element must be present for a trust violat to occur the
nonshar financi problem creat the motiv for the crime to be commit but the
employe must also perceiv that he ha an opportun to commit the crime without be
caught thi perceiv opportun constitut the second element
in cressei view there were two compon of the perceiv opportun to commit a
trust violat gener inform and technic skill gener inform is simpli the
knowledg that the employe posit of trust could be violat thi knowledg might
come from hear of other embezzl from see dishonest behavior by other
employe or just from gener be awar of the fact that the employe is in a posit
where he could take advantag of hi employ faith in him technic skill refer to the
5 cressei p 6667
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4606 2011 fraud examin manual
abil need to commit the violat these ar usual the same abil that the
employe need to have to obtain and keep hi posit in the first place cressei note that
most embezzl adher to their occup routin and their job skill in order to
perpetr their crimes6 in essenc the perpetr job will tend to defin the type of
fraud he will commit account us check which thei have been entrust to dispos
of sale clerk withhold receipt banker manipul seldomus account or withhold
deposit real estat men us deposit entrust to them and so on 7
obvious the gener inform and technic skill that cressei identifi ar not uniqu
to occup offend most if not all em ploye have these same characterist but
becaus trust person possess thi inform and skill when thei face a nonshar
financi problem thei see it as someth that thei have the power to correct thei appli
their understand of the possibl for trust violat to the specif crise thei ar face
with cressei observ it is the next step whic h is signific to violat the applic
of the gener inform to the specif situat and conjointli the percept of the fact
that in addit to have gener possibl for violat a specif posit of trust can be
us for the specif purpos of solv a nonshar problem 8
ration
the third and final factor in the fraud triangl is the ration cressei point out that
the ration is not an ex post facto mean of justifi a theft that ha alreadi occur
significantli the ration is a necessari compon of the crime befor it take place in
fact it is a part of the motiv for the crime becaus the embezzl doe not view
himself as a crimin he must justifi hi misde befor he ever commit them the
ration is necessari so that the perpetr can make hi illeg behavior intellig to
himself and maintain hi concept of himself as a trust person9
after the crimin act ha taken place the ration will often be abandon that is of
cours becaus of the natur of us all the first time we do someth contrari to our
moral it bother us as we repeat the act it becom easier on hallmark of occup
fraud and abus offend is that onc the line is cross the illeg act becom more or
less continu so an occup fraudster might begin steal with the thought that ill
6 cressei p 84
7 cressei p 84
8 cressei p 85
9 cressei pp 9495
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4607
pai the monei back but after the initi theft is success he will usual continu to steal
past the point at which there is ani realist possibl of repai the stolen fund
cressei found that the embezzl he studi gener ration their crime by view
them as 1 essenti noncrimin 2 justifi or 3 part of a gener irrespons for
which thei were not complet account he also found that the ration us
by trust violat tend to be link to their posit and to the manner in which thei
commit their violat he examin thi by divid the subject of hi studi into three
categori independ businessmen longterm violat and abscond he discov
that each group had it own type of ration
independ businessmen
the independ businessmen in cressei studi were peopl who were in busi for
themselv and who convert deposit that had been entrust to them 11 perpetr in
thi categori tend to us on of two common excus 1 thei were borrow the
monei thei convert or 2 the fund entrust to them were realli theirsyou cant steal
from yourself cressei found the borrow ration wa the on most frequent
us these perpetr also tend to espous the idea that everyon in busi
misdirect deposit in some wai which therefor made their own misconduct less wrong
than steal 12 also the independ businessmen almost univers felt their illeg
action were predic by an unusu situati on which cressei conclud wa in realiti a
nonshar financi problem
longterm violat
cressei defin longterm violat as individu who convert their employ fund or
fund belong to their employ client by take rel small amount over a period
of time13 similar to independ businessmen the longterm violat gener prefer
the borrow ration other ration of longterm violat were
describ too but thei almost alwai were us in connect with the borrow theme
1 thei were embezzl to keep their famili from shame disgrac or poverti 2 their
wa a case of necess their employ were cheat them financi and 3 their
employ were dishonest toward other and deserv to be fleec some even point out
10 cressei p 93
11 cressei p 101102
12 cressei p 102
13 cressei p 102
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4608 2011 fraud examin manual
that it wa more difficult to return the fund than to steal them in the first place and claim
that thei did not pai back their borrow becaus thei fear that would lead to
detect of their theft a few in the studi actual kept track of their theft but most onli
did so at first later as the embezzl escal it is assum that the offend would
rather not know the extent of hi borrow
all of the longterm violat in the studi express a feel that thei would like to
eventu clean the slate and repai their de bt thi feel usual aros even befor the
perpetr perceiv that thei might be caught cressei point out that at thi point
whatev fear the perpetr felt in relat to their crime wa relat to lose their social
statu by the exposur of their nonshar problem not the exposur of the theft itself or
the possibl of punish or imprison thi is becaus their ration still
prevent them from perceiv their misconduct as crimin the trust violat cannot
fear the treatment usual accord to crimin until he come to look upon himself as
a crimin 14
eventu most of the longterm violat final realiz thei were in too deep it is at
thi point that the embezzl face a crisi while maintain the borrow ration
or other ration for that matter the trust violat is abl to maintain hi selfimag
as a lawabid citizen but when the level of theft escal to a certain point the
perpetr is confront with the idea that he is behav in a crimin manner thi is
contrari to hi person valu and the valu of the social group to which he belong thi
conflict creat a great deal of anxieti for the perpetr a number of offend describ
themselv as extrem nervou and upset tens and unhappy15
without the ration that thei were borrow longterm offend in the studi
found it difficult to reconcil convert monei while at the same time see themselv as
honest and trustworthi in thi situat thei have two option 1 thei can readopt the
attitud of the lawabid social group with which thei identifi befor the theft began
or 2 thei can adopt the attitud of the new categori of person crimin with whom
thei now identify16 from hi studi cressei wa abl to cite exampl of each type of
behavior those who sought to readopt the attitud of their lawabid social group mai
report their behavior to the polic or to their employ quit take fund or resolv to quit
14 cressei pp 120121
15 cressei p 121
16 cressei p 122
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4609
take fund specul or gambl wildli in order to regain the amount taken or leav the
field by abscond or commit suicid 17 on the other hand those who adopt the
attitud of the group of crimin to which thei now belong mai becom reckless in their
defalc take larger amount than formerli with less attempt to avoid detect and
with no notion of repay 18
abscond
the third group of offend cressei discuss wa abscond peopl who take the monei
and run cressei found that the nonshar problem for abscond usual result
from physic isol he observ that these peopl usual ar unmarri or separ
from their spous live in hotel or room hous have few primari group associ of
ani sort and own littl properti onli on of the abscond interview had held a higher
statu posit of trust such as an account busi execut or bookkeep 19 he also
found that the abscond tend to have lower occup and socioeconom statu
than the member of the other two categori
becaus abscond tend to lack strong social ti cressei found that almost ani financi
problem could be defin as nonshar for these person and also that ration
were easili adopt becaus the person onli had to sever a minimum of social ti when
thei absconded20 the abscond ration their conduct by note that their attempt to
live honest live had been futil henc their low statu thei also adopt an attitud of not
care what happen to them and a belief that thei could not help themselv becaus thei
were predispos to crimin behavior the latter two ration which were adopt
by everi abscond in cressei studi allow them to remov almost all person
account from their conduct21
in the 1950 when thi data wa gather by cressei embezzl were consid person
of higher socioeconom statu who took fund over a limit period of time becaus of
some person problem such as drink or gambl while thiev were consid
person of lower statu who took whatev fund were at hand cressei note sinc most
abscond identifi with the lower statu group thei look upon themselv as belong to a
17 cressei p 121
18 cressei p 122
19 cressei p 128
20 cressei p 129
21 cressei pp 128129
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4610 2011 fraud examin manual
special class of thiev rather than trust violat just as longterm violat and
independ businessmen do not at first consid the possibl of abscond with the
fund abscond do not consid the possibl of take rel small amount of
monei over a period of time 22
conjunctur of event
perhap the most import conclus to be drawn from the cressei studi wa that it took
all three element perceiv nonshar fi nancial problem perceiv opportun and
the abil to ration for the trust violat to occur
the three event make up the condit under which trust violat occur and the term
caus mai be appli to their conjunctur sinc trust violat is depend on that
conjunctur whenev the conjunc ture of event occur trust violat result and if the
conjunctur doe not take place there is no trust violat 23
conclus
cressei classic fraud triangl help explain the natur of mani but not alloccup
offend for exampl although academician have test hi model it ha still not fulli
found it wai into practic in term of develop fraud prevent program our sens
tell us that on model even cressei will not fit all situat plu the studi is nearli
half a centuri old there ha been consider social chang in the interim and now mani
antifraud profession believ there is a new breed of occup offenderon who
simpli lack a conscienc suffici to overcom temptat
dr steve albrecht
the albrecht studi
anoth pioneer research in occup fraud and abus is dr steve albrecht of
brigham young univers albrecht and two of hi colleagu keith r how and marshal
b romnei conduct an analysi of 212 fraud in the earli 1980 under a grant from the
institut of intern auditor research foundat lead to their book entitl deter
fraud the intern auditor perspect the studi methodolog involv obtain
demograph and background inform on the fraud through the us of extens
22 cressei p 133
23 cressei p 139
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4611
questionnair the particip in the survei were intern auditor of compani that had
experienc fraud
albrecht research includ an examin of comprehens data sourc to assembl a
complet list of pressur opportun and integr variabl result in a set of 50 possibl
red flag or indic of occup fraud and abus these variabl fell into two
principl categori perpetr characterist and organiz environ the purpos
of the studi wa to determin which of the red flag were most import to the commiss
and therefor to the detect and prevent of fraud the red flag rang from
unusu high person debt to belief that on job is in jeopardi from no separ of
asset custodi procedur to not adequ check a potenti employe background 24
the research gave particip both set of 25 motiv factor and ask which factor
were present in the fraud thei had dealt with particip were ask to rank these factor
on a sevenpoint scale indic the degre to which each factor exist in their specif
fraud the ten most highli rank factor from the list of person characterist base on
thi studi were
1 live beyond their mean
2 an overwhelm desir for person gain
3 high person debt
4 a close associ with custom
5 feel pai wa not commensur with respons
6 a wheelerdeal attitud
7 strong challeng to beat the system
8 excess gambl habit
9 undu famili or peer pressur
10 no recognit for job performance25
these motiv ar veri similar to the nonshar financi problem cressei identifi
the ten most highli rank factor from the list deal with organiz
environ were
24 while such red flag mai be present in mani occup fraud case on must reemphas albrecht caution that
the perpetr ar hard to profil and fraud is difficult to predict to underscor thi point albrecht research doe not
address and no current research ha been done to determin if nonoffend have mani of the same characterist if
so then the list mai not be discrimin enough to be us in short while on should be mind of potenti red flag
thei should not receiv undu attent absent other compel circumst
25 albrecht p 32
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4612 2011 fraud examin manual
1 place too much trust in kei employe
2 lack of proper procedur for author of transact
3 inadequ disclosur of person invest and incom
4 no separ of author of transact from the custodi of relat asset
5 lack of independ check on perform
6 inadequ attent to detail
7 no separ of custodi of asset from the account for those asset
8 no separ of duti between account function
9 lack of clear line of author and respons
10 depart that is not frequent review by intern auditors26
all of the factor on thi list affect employe opportun to commit fraud without be
caught opportun as you will recal wa the second factor identifi in cressei fraud
triangl in mani wai the studi by albrecht et al support cressei model like
cressei studi the albrecht studi suggest there ar three factor involv in occup
fraud it appear that three element must be present for a fraud to be commit a
situat pressur nonshar financi pressur a perceiv opportun to commit
and conceal the dishonest act a wai to secretli resolv the dishonest act or the lack of
deterr by manag and some wai to ration verbal the act as either be
inconsist with on person level of integr or justifi 27
the fraud scale 28
to illustr the concept albrecht develop the fraud scale which includ the
compon of situat pressur perceiv opportun and person integr when
situat pressur and perceiv opportun ar high and person integr is low
occup fraud is much more like to occur than when the opposit is true29
26 albrecht p 39
27 albrecht p 5
28 albrecht etal p 5
29 albrecht etal p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4613
albrecht describ situat pressur as t he immedi problem individu experi
within their environ the most overwhelm of which ar probabl high person
debt or financi loss 30 opportun to commit fraud albrecht sai mai be creat
by individu or by defici or miss intern control person integr refer to the
person code of ethic behavior each person adopt while thi factor appear to be a
straightforward determin of whether the person is honest or dishonest moral
develop research indic that the issu is more complex 31
in addit to it find on motiv factor of occup fraud the albrecht studi
also disclos sever interest relationship between the perpetr and the fraud thei
commit for exampl perpetr of larg fraud us the proce to purchas new
home and expens automobil recreat properti expens vacat support
extramarit relationship and make specul invest those commit small
fraud did not32 perpetr who were interest primarili in beat the system
commit larger fraud howev perpetr who believ their pai wa not adequ
commit primarili small fraud lack of segreg of respons place
undeserv trust in kei employe impos unrealist goal and oper on a crisi
basi were all pressur or weak associ with larg fraud colleg graduat were
less like to spend the proce of their loot to take extravag vacat purchas
recreat properti support extramarit relationship and bui expens automobil
final those with lower salari were more like to have a prior crimin record33
richard c holling
the hollingerclark studi
in 1983 richard c holling of purdu univers and john p clark of the univers of
minnesota publish feder fund research involv survei of nearli 10000 american
worker their book theft by employe reach a differ conclus than cressei thei
conclud that employe steal primarili as a result of workplac condit and that the
true cost of the problem ar vastli underst in sum when we take into consider
the incalcul social cost the grand total paid for theft in the workplac is no doubt
grossli underestim by the avail financi estim 34
30 albrecht p 5
31 albrecht p 6
32 albrecht p 42
33 albrecht p xiv
34 richard c holling and john p clark theft by employe lexington lexingt book 1983 p 6
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4614 2011 fraud examin manual
hypothes of employe theft
in review the literatur on employe theft holling and clark conclud that expert
had develop five separ but interrel set of hypothes of employe theft the first
is extern econom pressur such as the nonshar financi problem that cressei
describ the second hypothesi wa that contemporari employe specif young
on ar not as hardwork and honest as those in past gener the third theori
advoc primarili by those with year of experi in the secur and investig
industri is that everi employe can be tempt to steal from hi employ the theori
basic assum that peopl ar greedi and dishonest by natur the fourth theori wa
that job dissatisfact is the primari caus of employe theft and the fifth that theft
occur becaus of the broadli share formal and inform structur of organizationsthat
is over time the group norm whether good or bad becom the standard of conduct
the sum of their research gener conclud that the fourth hypothesi wa correct
employe devianc
employe theft is at on extrem of employe devianc which can be defin as conduct
detriment to the organ and to the employe at the other extrem is
counterproduct employe behavior such as goldbrick and abus of sick leav
holling and clark defin two basic categori of employe deviant behavior 1 act by
employe against properti and 2 violat of the norm regul accept level of
product the former includ misus and theft of compani properti such as cash or
inventori the latter involv act of employe devianc that affect product
holling and clark develop a written questionnair that wa sent to employe in three
differ sector retail hospit and manufactur the employe were present with
list of categori 1 and categori 2 offens and were ask which offens thei had been
involv in and with what frequenc the research eventu receiv 9175 valid
employe questionnair repres about 54 percent of those sampl below ar the
result of the questionnair the first tabl repres categori 1 offensesact against
property35 holling and clark found that approxim onethird of employe in each
sector admit to commit some form of properti devianc
35 holling and clark p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4615
the follow is a summari of the holling and clark research with respect to product
devianc not surprisingli thei found that thi form of employe misconduct wa two to
three time more common than properti violations36
36 holling and clark p 42
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4616 2011 fraud examin manual
job satisfact and devianc
the research of holling and clark strongli suggest that employe who ar dissatisfi
with their jobsacross all ag group but especi younger workersar the most like to
seek redress through counterproduct or illeg behavior in order to right the perceiv
inequ other writer notabl anthropol ogist gerald mar and research david
altheid have comment on thi connect mar observ that among both hotel dine
room employe and dock worker it wa believ that pilferag wa not theft but wa seen
as a moral justifi addit to wage inde as an entitl due from exploit
employ 37 altheid also document that theft is often perceiv by employe as a
wai of get back at the boss or supervisor 38 jason ditton document a pattern in us
industri call wage in kind in which employe situat in structur disadvantag
part of the organ receiv larg segment of their wage invis 39
37 holling and clark p 77
38 holling and clark p 86
39 holling and clark p 86
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4617
employe percept of control
the research also examin the perceptionnot necessarili the realityof employe
believ thei would be caught if thei commit theft we find that perceiv certainti of
detect is invers relat to employe theft for respond in all three industri
sectorsthat is the stronger the percept that theft would be detect the less the
likelihood that the employe would engag in deviant behavior 40
thi find is signific and consist with other research it suggest that increas the
percept of detect mai be the best wai to deter employe theft while increas the
sanction that ar impos on occup fraudster will have a limit effect recal that
under cressei model embezzl ar motiva ted to commit illeg act becaus thei face
some financi problem that thei cannot share with other becaus it would threaten their
statu it follow that the greatest threat to the perpetr would be that he might be caught
in the act of steal becaus that would bring hi nonshar problem out into the open
the possibl of sanction is onli a secondari concern the perpetr engag in the
illeg conduct onli becaus he perceiv there is an opportun to fix hi financi problem
without get caught therefor if an organ can increas in it employe mind the
percept that illeg act will be detect it can significantli deter occup fraud put
simpli occup fraudster ar not deter by the threat of sanction becaus thei do
not plan on get caught
control in the workplac accord to holling and clark consist of both formal and
inform social control formal control can be describ as extern pressur that ar
appli through both posit and neg sanction inform control consist of the
intern by the employe of the group norm of the organ these research
along with a host of other have conclud thata a gener propositioninform social
control provid the best deterr these da ta clearli indic that the loss of respect
among on acquaint wa the singl most effect variabl in predict futur deviant
involv furthermor in gener the probabl of suffer inform sanction is
far more import than fear of formal sanction in deter deviant activ 41 again thi
support the notion that the greatest deterr to the fraudster is the idea that he will be
caught not the threat of punish by hi employ
40 holling and clark p 117
41 holling and clark p 121
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4618 2011 fraud examin manual
other conclus
holling and clark reach sever other conclus base on their work first thei found
that substanti increas the intern secur presenc doe not seem to be appropri
given the preval of the problem in fact do so mai make thing wors second thei
conclud that the same kind of employe who engag in other workplac devianc ar
also princip the on who engag in employe theft thei found persuas evid that
slow or sloppi workmanship sickleav abus long coffe break alcohol and drug us at
work and come in late andor leav earli were more like to be present in the
employeethief
third the research hypothes that if effort ar made to reduc employe theft
without reduc it underli caus eg employe dissatisfact lack of ethic the
result could creat a hydraul effect that is tighten control over properti devianc
mai creat more detriment act affect the product of the organ if we push
down employe theft that action mai push up goldbrick fourth thei assert that
increas manag sensit to it employe will reduc all form of workplac
devianc fifth thei conclud special attent should be afford young employe as
these ar the on statist the most like to steal it must be point out howev that
although the incid of theft is higher among younger employe the loss associ
with those theft ar typic lower than loss caus by more senior employe who have
greater financi author
holling and clark assert that manag must pai attent to four aspect of polici
develop 1 a clear understand regard theft behavior 2 continu
dissemin of posit inform reflect of the compani polici 3 enforc
of sanction and 4 public the sanction
the research sum up their observ by sai perhap the most import
overal polici implic that can be drawn is that theft and workplac devianc ar in
larg part a reflect of how manag at all level of the organ is perceiv by the
employe specif if the employe is permit to conclud that hi contribut to the
workplac is not appreci or that the organ doe not seem to care about the theft
of it properti we expect to find greater involv in conclus a lower preval
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4619
of employe theft mai be on valuabl consequ of a manag team that is
respons to the current percept and attitud of it workforc 42
20082009 integr survei
in januari 2009 k pmg releas it report on it 20082009 integr survei the result of
the survei were base on respons from 5065 us employe span all level of job
respons 16 job function 13 industri sector and 4 threshold of organiz size
accord to the result of the survei nearli three out of four employe 74 percent
report that thei have observ misconduct in the workplac in the prior 12month period
with almost half of employe 46 percent report that what thei have observ wa
seriou misconduct that could caus a signific loss of public trust if discov kpmg
conduct similar survei in 2000 and 2005 in all three survei the report level of
overal misconduct remain larg consist with 74 percent in 2005 and 76 percent in
2000 report that thei had observ misconduct in the prior year similarli the three
survei have reveal consist level of seriou misconduct with 50 percent in 2005 and
49 percent in 2000 character the misconduct thei observ as capabl of caus a
signific loss of public trust if discov although the level of observ misconduct
ha remain constant employe report that the condit that facilit manag
abil to prevent detect and respond to fraud and misconduct within compani is
improv employe who work in compani with comprehens ethic and
complianc program report more favor result across the board than did those who
work in compani without such program for instanc employe who work in compani
with such program report fewer observ of misconduct and higher level of
confid in manag commit to integr
2010 report to the nation on occup fraud and abus
occup fraud and abus is a widespr ad problem that affect practic everi
organ regardless of size locat or industri in 1996 the acf releas the first
report to the nation on o cc upat fraud and abus which wa intend to shed light on the
immens and larg undefin cost that occup fraud impos on organ the
state goal of the first report were to
summar the opinion of expert on the percentag and amount of organiz
revenu lost to all form of occup fraud and abus
examin the characterist of the employe who commit occup fraud and abus
42 holling and clark p 144
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4620 2011 fraud examin manual
determin what kind of organ ar victim of occup fraud and abus
categor the wai in which seriou fraud and abus occur
all of the enumer goal of the first report fell under on larger and more all
encompass mission to better educ the public and antifraud profession about the
threat of occup fraud sinc that time with each subsequ edit of the report to the
nation that ha remain our primari goal
we releas updat edit of the report in even year between 2002and 2008 like the
first studi each subsequ edit ha been base on detail case inform about
specif fraud provid by the cfe who investig those case each report ha been
structur along the same line focus on the method us by employe manag and
execut to defraud their organ the loss caus by those fraud and the
characterist of both the perpetr and the victim of these crime
the 2010 edit of our report is base on 1843 actual case of occup fraud for the
first time ever we have widen our studi to includ case from countri outsid the
unit state thu the studi is now titl report to the nation on occup fraud and abus
thi expans allow us to more fulli explor the truli global natur of occup fraud
and provid an enhanc view into the sever and impact of these crime
the follow is an excerpt contain some of the more signific find of our studi
copi of the entir report to the nation can be download or view at no charg on the
acf websit wwwacfecom
measur the cost of occup fraud
measur the cost of occup fraud is an import yet incred challeng
endeavor arguabl the true cost is incalcul the inher clandestin natur of fraud
mean that mani case will never be reveal and of those that ar the full amount of
loss might not be uncov quantifi or report consequ ani measur of
occup fraud cost will be at best an estim nonetheless determin such an
approxim is critic to illustr the pandem and destruct natur of whitecollar
crime
we ask each cfe who particip in our survei to provid hi best estim of the
percentag of annual revenu that the typic organ lose to fraud in a given year
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4621
the median respons wa that the averag organ annual lose 5 of it revenu to
fraud appli thi percentag to the 2009 estim gross world product of 5807
trillion would result in a project total global fraud loss of more than 29 trillion
note that thi estim is base sole on the opinion of 1843 antifraud expert rather
than ani specif data or factual observ accordingli it should not be interpret as a
liter represent of the worldwid cost of occup fraud howev becaus there is
no wai to precis calcul the size of global fraud loss the best estim of antifraud
profession with a frontlin view of the problem mai be as reliabl a measur as we ar
abl to make in ani event it is undeni that the overal cost of occup fraud is
immens certainli cost organ hundr of billion or trillion of dollar each year
distribut of dollar loss
of the 1843 case of occup fraud that compris our studi 1822 includ the total
dollar loss the median loss for all scheme in the studi wa 160000 as the follow
chart show almost onefourth of all case in the 2010 studi involv loss of at least 1
million the distribut of dollar loss among case in the 2010 studi wa similar to the
distribut in our 2008 report in both studi more than 60 of scheme caus the
victim organ to suffer a loss of at least 100000
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4622 2011 fraud examin manual
how occup fraud is commit
previou acf research ha identifi three primari categori of occup fraud us
by individu to defraud their employ asset misappropri ar those scheme in
which the perpetr steal or misus an organ resourc these fraud includ
scheme such as skim cash receipt falsifi expens report and forg compani
check
corrupt scheme involv the employe us of hi influenc in busi transact in a
wai that violat hi duti to the employ for the purpos of obtain a benefit for himself
or someon els exampl of corrupt scheme includ briberi extort and a conflict
of interest
financi statement fraud scheme ar those involv the intent misstat or
omiss of materi inform in the organ financi report common method
of fraudul financi statement manipul includ record fictiti revenu
conceal liabil or expens and artifici inflat report asset
as indic in the follow chart asset misappropri ar by far both the most
frequent and the least costli form of occup fraud on the other end of the spectrum
ar case involv financi statement fraud these scheme were present in less than 5 of
the case report to us but caus a median loss of more than 4 million corrupt
scheme fell in the middl categori in both respect occur in just under onethird of all
case involv in our studi and caus a median loss of 250000
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4623
occup fraud by categoryfrequ 43
occup fraud by categorymedian loss
43 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus sever case involv multipl scheme from
more than on categori
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4624 2011 fraud examin manual
subcategori of asset misappropri
with nearli 90 of occup fraud involv some form of asset misappropri it is
instruct to further delin the method us by employe to embezzl organiz
asset we divid asset misappropri scheme into nine subcategori as illustr in
the tabl below the first eight subcategori repres scheme target cash these fraud
account for approxim 85 of all asset misappropri
two of the subschem skim and cash larceni involv pilfer incom cash
receipt such as sale revenu and account receiv collect the next five subcategori
bill expens reimburs check tamper payrol and fraudul
regist disburs scheme involv fraudul disburs of cash the eighth form
of cash misappropri target cash the organ ha on hand such as petti cash fund
or cash in a vault the final subcategori of asset misappropri cover the theft or
misus of noncash asset includ inventori suppli fix asset invest
intellectu properti and proprietari inform the tabl below provid the frequenc
and median loss associ with each asset misappropri subcategori
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4625
the sum of percentag in thi tabl exce 100 becaus sever case involv asset misappropri scheme from more than on categori
as previous mention our 2010 data includ fraud case from countri throughout the
world while our 2008 data contain onli usbas case in the follow chart we isol
the us case from our current studi to make a more direct comparison to our 2008 data
interestingli while financi statement fraud remain the least common and most costli
form of fraud among us case there wa a much lower percentag of financi statement
case in thi studi four percent as compar to 2008 ten percent addition the
median loss for all three categori of fraud were notabl smaller in 2010 than thei were in
2008
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4626 2011 fraud examin manual
occup fraud by categori us onlyfrequ 44
occup fraud by categori us onlymedian loss
durat of fraud scheme
in addit to examin the monetari cost of the fraud case report to us we analyz
the length of time these scheme last befor be detect the median durationth
time period from when the fraud first occur to when it wa discov for all case in
our studi wa 18 month not surprisingli case involv financi statement fraudth
most costli form of fraudlast the long est with a median durat of 27 month
fraudul regist disburs on the other hand were not onli the least costli form of
fraud in our studi but also tend to be detect the soonest
44the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becauses veral case involv scheme from more than
on categori
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4627
median durat of fraud base on scheme type
detect of fraud scheme
on of the princip goal of our research is to identifi how past fraud were detect so
that organ can appli that knowledg to their futur antifraud effort tip were by
far the most common detect method in our studi catch nearli three time as mani
fraud as ani other form of detect thi is consist with the find in our prior
report tip have been far and awai the most common mean of detect in everi studi
sinc 2002 when we began track the data
manag review and intern audit were the second and third most common form of
detect uncov 15 and 14 of fraud re spectiv it is also noteworthi that 11
of fraud were detect through channel that lie complet outsid of the tradit anti
fraud control structur accid polic notificat ion and confess in other word 11 of
the time the victim organ either had to stumbl onto the fraud or be notifi of it by
a third parti in order to detect it
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4628 2011 fraud examin manual
initi detect of occup fraud 45
sourc of tip
not surprisingli employe were the most common sourc of fraud tip howev
custom vendor competitor and acquaint ie noncompani sourc provid at
least 34 of fraud tip which suggest that fraud report polici and program should be
public not onli to employe but also to custom vendor and other extern
stakehold
while tip have consist been the most common wai to detect fraud the impact of tip
is if anyth underst by the fact that so mani organ fail to implement fraud
report system such system enabl employe to anonym report fraud or
misconduct by phone or through a webbas portal otherwis known as hotlin the
abil to report fraud anonym is kei becaus employe often fear make report due
to the threat of retali from superior or neg reaction from their peer also most
thirdparti hotlin system offer program to rais awar about how to report
misconduct consequ on would expect that the presenc of a fraud hotlin would
enhanc fraud detect effort and foster more tip
45 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in some case respond identifi more than
on detect method
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4629
percent of tip by sourc 46
geograph locat of organ
as mention previous for the first time in the histori of our research on occup
fraud we open up our studi to includ fraud case investig by cfe outsid the
unit state as a result the case discuss in thi report repres fraud perpetr in
106 countri around the world we receiv inform on the locat of 1797 of the
case that were report to us of these 43 occur outsid the unit state provid
us with a true insight into the global plagu of occup fraud
the chart below show the number and median loss of the case report to us broken
down by region for victim organ with locat in more than on countri we ask
survei particip to choos the locat where the primari perpetr wa locat for
exampl a fraud perpetr at a european arm of a japanes compani would be classifi
as occur in europ similarli a case involv fraud perpetr at the canadian offic
of a south american compani would be consid a fraud that occur in canada the
region breakdown on case data throughout thi report should consequ be read within
thi framework addition due to the larg number of us case report we separ
north america into the unit state and canada and group the remain countri by
contin
46 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in some case respond identifi more than
the sourc of the initi tip
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4630 2011 fraud examin manual
geograph locat of victim organ
victim of occup fraud
as part of our survei we ask each respond to provid demograph inform about
the organ that wa defraud we believ it is us to measur the differ wai in
which occup fraud impact differ type of organ our hope is that thi
analysi mai enabl organ to better identifi where to strengthen or focu their anti
fraud effort base on the experi of other similar organ
type of victim organ
more than 40 of victim organ in our studi were privat own busi and
nearli onethird were publicli trade compani mean that almost threequart of the
victim repres in our studi came from forprofit enterpris sixteen percent of the
fraud report to us occur at govern agenc notforprofit organ were
the least repres categori with less than 10 of fraud take place at these entiti
organ type of victimfrequ
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4631
in addit to experienc the most fraud privat and public compani were also victim
to the costliest scheme in our studi the me dian loss for the case at these busi wa
231000 and 200000 respect in cont rast the loss experienc by govern
agenc and notforprofit organ were about half as much govern agenc
had a median loss of 100000 while notforprofit lost a median of 90000
organ type of victim median loss
size of victim organ
continu the trend observ in our prior studi small organ those with fewer
than 100 employe suffer the greatest percentag of the fraud in our 2010 studi
account for more than 30 of the victim organ howev the variat between
size categori is rel small with 23 of victim have between 100 and 999
employe 26 have 1000 to 9999 employe and 21 have more than 10000
employe
thi rel small dispar contrast with our previou studi in which small
organ were involv in a much higher percent of fraud than ani other categori
addition our research ha histor shown that smaller organ suffer
disproportion larg loss due to occup fraud organ with fewer than 100
employe experienc the greatest median loss of all categori of victim organ in
our 2008 studi the same wa true in our 2006 studi
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4632 2011 fraud examin manual
size of victim organ frequenc
size of victim organ median loss
industri of victim organ
we look at the industri classif of the organ victim by the fraud case in
our studi it is import to view thi data as a represent of the compani that had
cfe investig intern fraud case within the last two year rather than as an indic of
which industri ar more or less like to be victim by fraud howev the follow
tabl do draw attent to some differ in the frequenc and cost associ with
occup fraud among differ sector for exampl the bank and financi servic
industri had the most case account for more than 16 of the fraud report to us the
period of time cover by our survei calendar year 2008 and 2009 wa fill with new
stori of fraud in the bank sector so thi find is not unexpect in contrast the
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4633
mine industri experienc the fewest fraud in our studi but those case caus a median
loss of 1 millionbi far the largest of ani of the industri we examined47
industri of victim organizationsort by frequenc
47 there wa a small sampl of onli 12 case in thi industri which mai imp act the reliabl of the
media n loss data
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4634 2011 fraud examin manual
industri of victim organ sort by median loss
victim antifraud control at time of fraud
we ask survei particip which of sever common antifraud control were in place at
the victim organ dure the perpetr of the fraud a distinct should be made
between the follow data and the prior discuss on fraud detect method the
follow analysi cover the mere presenc of each control not necessarili it role in
detect the fraud onc it start more than threequart of the victim organ in
our studi had their financi statement audit by extern auditor while twothird had
dedic intern audit or fraud examin depart and almost 60 had independ
audit of their intern control over financi report addition nearli 70 of the
organ had a formal code of conduct in place at the time of the fraud though onli
39 extend that to includ a formal antifraud polici
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4635
as mention in our discuss on fraud detect method tip ar the number on mean
by which fraud is detect howev less than half of the victim organ in our studi
had a hotlin in place at the time the fraud occur there is evid that the presenc of a
hotlin improv organ abil to detect fraud and limit fraud loss which should
caus more organ to implement fraud hotlin
frequenc of antifraud measur 48
antifraud control in small busi
we have long hypothes that mani small compani ar particularli suscept to fraud
at least partial due to the limit resourc thei devot to antifraud control to test thi
theori we compar the presenc of antifraud control at those compani with fewer than
100 employe to the control at compani with more than 100 employe our find
confirm what we suspect the small compani in our studi did inde have fewer
control in place than the larger organ a factor that mai contribut to the
disproportion impact of fraud on these compani while discrep in level of
certain control ar somewhat expect given the associ cost or resourc requir to
enact them the gap between control in small busi as oppos to larger organ
is strike for exampl it would be expect that small busi would have a lower rate
of extern audit and that fewer small compani would have a formal intern audit or
48the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus mani victim organ had more than on
antifraud control in place at the time of the fraud
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4636 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud examin function but even less expens control were often absent in small
busi while 64 of larg compani had so me sort of manag review of control
process account or transact less than half as mani small busi had the same
type of monitor in place likewis formal code of conduct and antifraud polici cost
veri littl to implement but serv as an effect wai to make a clear and explicit statement
against fraudul and uneth conduct within an organ yet onli 41 and 16 of
small busi had these polici respect in place when the fraud occur
number dwarf by the 83 and 50 rate of larger organ
perhap most concern is that onli 15 of small busi had a hotlin in place
compar to 64 of larger organ as previous discuss our research show that
hotlin ar consist the most effect fraud detect method further the median loss
for fraud at compani with hotlin wa 59 smaller than the median loss for fraud at
organ without such a mechan arguabl enact hotlin would go a long wai in
help smallbusi owner protect their asset from dishonest employe
frequenc of antifraud control by size of victim organ
effect of control
we compar the median loss experienc by those organ that had a particular anti
fraud control against the median loss for those organ without that control at the time
of the fraud hotlin were the control with the greatest associ reduct in median loss
reinforc their valu as an effect antifraud measur employe support program
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4637
surpris audit and fraud train for staff member at all level were also associ with
median loss reduct of more than 50 in terestingli financi statement auditsth
most commonli implement controlwa among the control with the smallest associ
reduct in median loss
median loss base on presenc of antifraud control
the perpetr
we ask respond to provid inform about the fraud perpetr in their case so
we could better understand how occup fraud level and loss ar relat to
demograph inform such as ag job type gender educ and posit of author
in case where there were multipl offend the respons relat to the princip
perpetratorth person identifi by the cfe as the primari culprit in the case the
follow is a summari of the data we receiv
perpetr posit
we ask survei respond whether the perpetr wa an employe a manag or an
ownerexecut below we see that the distribut of case base on the perpetr
posit wa fairli similar to what we found in our 2008 studi although the 2010
distribut wa slightli more skew toward employe and manag not surprisingli
there wa a strong correl between the perpetr posit of author and the loss
caus by fraud the median loss in ownerexecut fraud wa more than three time the
loss caus by manag and more than nine time higher than loss in employe fraud
case
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4638 2011 fraud examin manual
number of perpetr frequenc
perpetr gender
twothird of the fraud in our studi were commit by male which is a higher percentag
than we encount in 2008 but consist with the overal trend note in prior report
that most occup fraud ar commit by men
perpetr gender
the perpetr ag
the distribut of perpetr base on their ag wa similar to our 2008 studi but the
2010 perpetr tend to be slightli younger our past report have gener shown the
highest level of fraud to occur in the 365 0 ag rang but thi year we found more than
half of all case were commit by individu between the ag of 31 and 45 gener
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4639
speak median loss tend to rise with the ag of the perpetr which is consist
with our prior research the most notabl differ between 2008 and 2010 is the loss
caus by perpetr older than 60 in each studi howev we were deal with fewer
than 40 case in that categori given the small sampl size we believ thi is more like to
be an anomali than an indic of ani particular trend
ag of perpetr frequenc
ag of perpetr median loss
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4640 2011 fraud examin manual
perpetr crimin and employ histori
onli 7 of the fraud perpetr in our studi had been previous convict of a fraudrel
offens which wa virtual ident to our find in 2008 eightysix percent had
never been charg with or convict of a prior offens the low rate of prior convict
suggest that crimin background check mai have some effect in prevent fraud but the
effect is probabl limit
perpetr crimin histori frequenc
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4641
in addit to crimin histori past employ issu mai indic that an employe is
more like to engag in fraudul conduct in the futur of the respond in our survei
791 were abl to provid inform about the perpetr prior employ histori
among those case about 8 of perpetr had been previous punish and 10 had
been previous termin for fraudrel conduct
perpetr employ histori frequenc
behavior red flag displai by perpetr
while a fraud is ongo the perpetr often displai certain behavior or characterist
that might indic he ha a heighten risk of commit fraud on their own these
behavior red flag do not prove an individu is engag in a fraud but thei should rais
warn signal to the individu cowork and manag as well as the organ
antifraud staff when these red flag exist alongsid other indic of misconduct thi can
be a strong clue that someth is wrong as discuss earlier in thi report occup
fraud often last for month or year befor thei ar caught so the abil to detect fraud as
earli as possibl can have a big effect in limit loss
we present survei respond with a list of common behavior red flag and ask them
to identifi which of these warn sign had been displai by the perpetr prior to
detect of the fraud as shown in the follow chart the most common red flag
displai by perpetr were live beyond financi mean 43 of case experienc
financi difficulti 36 excess control i ssue with regard to their job 23 and an
unusu close associ with vendor or custom 22 thi distribut is veri similar
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4642 2011 fraud examin manual
to what we found in our 2008 studi as we continu to track thi data in futur studi we
hope to be abl to identifi consist relationship between behavior warn sign and the
occurr of occup fraud ideal thi data will help organ build better frauddetect
program that incorpor behavior data in addit to more standard antifraud
control
behavior red flag present dure fraud scheme sort by frequenc 49
we also broke down the distribut of red flag base on the type of fraud differ form
of occup fraud result from differ factor and circumst which we would
expect to show up in the fraudster behavior as the follow chart illustr individu
who engag in financi statement fraud were much more like than other perpetr to
exhibit control issu or to be under excess pressur to perform within their organ
meanwhil live beyond on mean and experi enc financi difficulti were not as
common among financi statement fraudster as other thi make sens becaus while
asset misappropri and corrupt scheme ar almost alwai commit to enrich the
fraudster in mani financi statement scheme other factorssuch as meet earn
49 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in mani case perpetr displai more than
on behavior red flag
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4643
forecast or hit budget target mai be as much of a motiv as person financi
gain an unusu close associ with a vendor or custom wa note as a red flag in
45 of corrupt case which is not surpris given that most corrupt fraud involv
briberi or some kind of illicit benefit a wheelerdeal attitud wa also more common in
corrupt case than in other form of fraud and 42 of all corrupt perpetr were
identifi as live beyond their mean among those who misappropri asset live
beyond on mean and financi difficult i were the two most common red flag
behavior red flag of perpetr base on scheme type 50
50 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus in mani case perpetr displai more than
on behavior red flag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4701
