2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Non-shareable Financial Problems


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Non-shareable Financial Problems 
That which is considered “non-shareable” is whol ly in the eyes of the potential occupational 
offender, Cressey said. “Thus a man could lose  considerable money at the race track daily 
but the loss, even if it construed a problem for the individual, might not constitute a non-
 shareable problem for him. Another man might define the problem as one which must be 
                                                 
2 Cressey, p. 33. 
3 Cressey, p. 34. 
 
 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
kept secret and private, that is, as one which is non-shareable. Similarly, a failing bank or 
business might be considered by one person as presenting problems which must be shared 
with business associates and members of the community, while another person might 
conceive these problems as non-shareable.” 4 
 
In addition to being non-shareable, the problem that drives the fraudster is described as 
“financial” because these are problems that can generally be solved by the theft of cash or 
other assets. A person with large gambling debts, for instance, would need cash to pay those 
debts. Cressey did note, however, that there are some non-financial problems that could be 
solved by misappropriating funds through a violation of trust. For example, a person who 
embezzles in order to get revenge on his employer for perceived “unfair” treatment uses 
financial means to solve what is essentially a non-financial problem.  
 
Through his research, Cressey also found that the non-shareable problems encountered by 
the people he interviewed arose from situations that could be divided into six basic 
categories: violation of ascribed obligations, problems resulting from personal failure, 
business reversals, physical isolation, status gaining, and employer-employee relations. All of 
these situations dealt in some way with status-seeking or status-maintaining activities by the 
subjects. In other words, the non-shareable problems threatened the status of the subjects, 
or threatened to prevent them from achieving a higher status than the one they occupied at 
the time of their violation. 
 
THE IMPORTANCE OF SOLVING THE PROBLEM IN SECRET 
Since Cressey’s study was done in the early 1950s, the workforce was obviously different 
than today’s workforce. But the employee faced  with an immediate, non-shareable financial 
need hasn’t changed much over the years. That employee still must find a way to relieve the 
financial pressure that bears down upon him. Simply stealing money, however, is not 
enough; Cressey found it was crucial that the employee be able to resolve the financial 
problem in secret.  
 
As we have seen, the non-shareable financial problems identified by Cressey all dealt in some 
way with questions of status; the trust violators were afraid of losing the approval of those 
around them and so were unable to tell others about their financial problems. If they could 
not share the fact that they were under financial pressure, it follows that they would not be 
                                                 
4 Cressey, p. 35. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.605  
able to share the fact that they were resorting to illegal means to relieve that pressure. To do 
so would be to admit that the problems existed in the first place.  
 
The interesting thing to note is that it is not the embezzlement itself that creates the need for 
secrecy in the perpetrator’s mind; it is the circumstances that led to the embezzlement (a 
violation of ascribed obligation, a business reversal, etc.). Cressey said: 
 
“In all cases [in the study] there was a distinct feeling that, because of activity prior to the 
defalcation, the approval of groups important to the trusted person had been lost, or a 
distinct feeling that present gr oup approval would be lost if certain activity were revealed 
[the non-shareable financial problem], with the result that the trusted person was effectively 
isolated from persons who could assist him in solving problems arising from that activity.” 
 
Although the clear conception of a financial problem as non-shareable does not invariably 
result in trust violation, it do es establish in trusted persons a desire for a specific kind of 
solution to their problems. The results desired in the cases encountered were uniform: the 
solution or partial solution of the problem by the use of funds which can be obtained in an 
independent, relatively secret, safe, and sure method in keeping with the ‘rationalizations’ 
available to the person at the time. 5  (emphasis added)  
 



:


nonshar financi problem
that which is consid nonshar is whol ly in the ey of the potenti occup
offend cressei said thu a man could lose consider monei at the race track daili
but the loss even if it constru a problem for the individu might not constitut a non
shareabl problem for him anoth man might defin the problem as on which must be
2 cressei p 33
3 cressei p 34
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4604 2011 fraud examin manual
kept secret and privat that is as on which is nonshar similarli a fail bank or
busi might be consid by on person as present problem which must be share
with busi associ and member of the commun while anoth person might
conceiv these problem as nonshar 4
in addit to be nonshar the problem that drive the fraudster is describ as
financi becaus these ar problem that can gener be solv by the theft of cash or
other asset a person with larg gambl debt for instanc would need cash to pai those
debt cressei did note howev that there ar some nonfinanci problem that could be
solv by misappropri fund through a violat of trust for exampl a person who
embezzl in order to get reveng on hi employ for perceiv unfair treatment us
financi mean to solv what is essenti a nonfinanci problem
through hi research cressei also found that the nonshar problem encount by
the peopl he interview aros from situat that could be divid into six basic
categori violat of ascrib oblig problem result from person failur
busi revers physic isol statu gain and employeremploye relat all of
these situat dealt in some wai with statusseek or statusmaintain activ by the
subject in other word the nonshar problem threaten the statu of the subject
or threaten to prevent them from achiev a higher statu than the on thei occupi at
the time of their violat
the import of solv the problem in secret
sinc cressei studi wa done in the earli 1950 the workforc wa obvious differ
than todai workforc but the employe face with an immedi nonshar financi
need hasnt chang much over the year that employe still must find a wai to reliev the
financi pressur that bear down upon him simpli steal monei howev is not
enough cressei found it wa crucial that the employe be abl to resolv the financi
problem in secret
as we have seen the nonshar financi problem identifi by cressei all dealt in some
wai with question of statu the trust violat were afraid of lose the approv of those
around them and so were unabl to tell other about their financi problem if thei could
not share the fact that thei were under financi pressur it follow that thei would not be
4 cressei p 35
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4605
abl to share the fact that thei were resort to illeg mean to reliev that pressur to do
so would be to admit that the problem exist in the first place
the interest thing to note is that it is not the embezzl itself that creat the need for
secreci in the perpetr mind it is the circumst that led to the embezzl a
violat of ascrib oblig a busi revers etc cressei said
in all case in the studi there wa a distinct feel that becaus of activ prior to the
defalc the approv of group import to the trust person had been lost or a
distinct feel that present gr oup approv would be lost if certain activ were reveal
the nonshar financi problem with the result that the trust person wa effect
isol from person who could assist him in solv problem aris from that activ
although the clear concept of a financi problem as nonshar doe not invari
result in trust violat it do es establish in trust person a desir for a specif kind of
solut to their problem the result desir in the case encount were uniform the
solut or partial solut of the problem by the us of fund which can be obtain in an
independ rel secret safe and sure method in keep with the ration
avail to the person at the time 5 emphasi ad
