2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Perceived Opportunity


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Perceived Opportunity 
According to the fraud triangle model, the presence of a non-shareable financial problem by 
itself will not lead an employee to commit fraud. The key to understanding Cressey’s theory 
is to remember that all three elements must be present for a trust violation to occur. The 
non-shareable financial problem creates the motive for the crime to be committed, but the 
employee must also perceive that he has an opportunity to commit the crime without being 
caught. This perceived opportunity  constitutes the second element. 
 
In Cressey’s view, there were two components of the perceived opportunity to commit a 
trust violation: general information and technical skill. General information  is simply the 
knowledge that the employee’s position of trust  could be violated. This knowledge might 
come from hearing of other embezzlements, from seeing dishonest behavior by other 
employees, or just from generally being aware of the fact that the employee is in a position 
where he could take advantage of his employer’s faith in him. Technical skill  refers to the 
                                                 
5 Cressey, p. 66–67. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.606   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
abilities needed to commit the violation. These are usually the same abilities that the 
employee needs to have to obtain and keep his position in the first place. Cressey noted that 
most embezzlers adhere to their occupational routines (and their job skills) in order to 
perpetrate their crimes.6 In essence, the perpetrator’s job will tend to define the type of 
fraud he will commit. “Accountants use checks which they have been entrusted to dispose 
of, sales clerks withhold receipts, bankers manipulate seldom-used accounts or withhold 
deposits, real estate men use deposits entrusted to them, and so on.” 7 
 
Obviously, the general information and technical skill that Cressey identified are not unique 
to occupational offenders; most if not all em ployees have these same characteristics. But 
because trusted persons possess this information and skill, when they face a non-shareable 
financial problem they see it as something that they have the power to correct. They apply 
their understanding of the possibility  for trust violation to the specific crises they are faced 
with. Cressey observed, “It is the next step whic h is significant to violation: the application 
of the general information to the specific situation, and conjointly, the perception of the fact 
that in addition to having general possibilities for violation, a specific position of trust can be 
used for the specific purpose of solving a non-shareable problem.” 8 
 



:


perceiv opportun
accord to the fraud triangl model the presenc of a nonshar financi problem by
itself will not lead an employe to commit fraud the kei to understand cressei theori
is to rememb that all three element must be present for a trust violat to occur the
nonshar financi problem creat the motiv for the crime to be commit but the
employe must also perceiv that he ha an opportun to commit the crime without be
caught thi perceiv opportun constitut the second element
in cressei view there were two compon of the perceiv opportun to commit a
trust violat gener inform and technic skill gener inform is simpli the
knowledg that the employe posit of trust could be violat thi knowledg might
come from hear of other embezzl from see dishonest behavior by other
employe or just from gener be awar of the fact that the employe is in a posit
where he could take advantag of hi employ faith in him technic skill refer to the
5 cressei p 6667
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4606 2011 fraud examin manual
abil need to commit the violat these ar usual the same abil that the
employe need to have to obtain and keep hi posit in the first place cressei note that
most embezzl adher to their occup routin and their job skill in order to
perpetr their crimes6 in essenc the perpetr job will tend to defin the type of
fraud he will commit account us check which thei have been entrust to dispos
of sale clerk withhold receipt banker manipul seldomus account or withhold
deposit real estat men us deposit entrust to them and so on 7
obvious the gener inform and technic skill that cressei identifi ar not uniqu
to occup offend most if not all em ploye have these same characterist but
becaus trust person possess thi inform and skill when thei face a nonshar
financi problem thei see it as someth that thei have the power to correct thei appli
their understand of the possibl for trust violat to the specif crise thei ar face
with cressei observ it is the next step whic h is signific to violat the applic
of the gener inform to the specif situat and conjointli the percept of the fact
that in addit to have gener possibl for violat a specif posit of trust can be
us for the specif purpos of solv a nonshar problem 8
