2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Rationalizations


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Rationalizations 
The third and final factor in the fraud triangle is the rationalization. Cressey pointed out that 
the rationalization is not an ex post facto means of justifying a theft that has already occurred. 
Significantly, the rationalization is a necessary component of the crime before  it takes place; in 
fact, it is a part of the motivation for the crime. Because the embezzler does not view 
himself as a criminal, he must justify his misdeeds before he ever commits them. The 
rationalization is necessary so that the perpetrator can make his illegal behavior intelligible to 
himself and maintain his concept of himself as a trusted person.9 
 
After the criminal act has taken place, the rationalization will often be abandoned. That is, of 
course, because of the nature of us all; the first time we do something contrary to our 
morals, it bothers us. As we repeat the act, it becomes easier. One hallmark of occupational 
fraud and abuse offenders is that once the line is crossed, the illegal acts become more or 
less continuous. So an occupational fraudster might begin stealing with the thought that “I’ll 
                                                 
6 Cressey, p. 84. 
7 Cressey, p. 84. 
8 Cressey, p. 85. 
9 Cressey, pp. 94–95. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.607  
pay the money back,” but after the initial theft is successful, he will usually continue to steal 
past the point at which there is any realistic possibility of repaying the stolen funds. 
 
Cressey found that the embezzlers he studied generally rationalized their crimes by viewing 
them as (1) essentially non-criminal, (2) justified, or (3) part of a general irresponsibility for 
which they were not completely accountable. He also found that the rationalizations used 
by trust violators tended to be linked to their positions and to the manner in which they 
committed their violations. He examined this by dividing the subjects of his study into three 
categories: independent businessmen, long-term violators, and absconders. He discovered 
that each group had its own types of rationalizations. 
 
INDEPENDENT BUSINESSMEN 
The independent businessmen in Cressey’s study were people who were in business for 
themselves and who converted “deposits” that had been entrusted to them. 11 Perpetrators in 
this category tended to use one of two common excuses: (1) they were “borrowing” the 
money they converted or (2) the funds entrusted to them were really theirs—you can’t steal 
from yourself. Cressey found the “borrowing” rationalization was the one most frequently 
used. These perpetrators also tended to espouse the idea that “everyone” in business 
misdirects deposits in some way, which therefore made their own misconduct less wrong 
than “stealing.” 12 Also, the independent businessmen almost universally felt their illegal 
actions were predicated by an “unusual situati on,” which Cressey concluded was in reality a 
non-shareable financial problem.  
 
LONG-TERM VIOLATORS 
Cressey defined long-term violators as individuals who converted their employer’s funds, or 
funds belonging to their employer’s clients, by taking relatively small amounts over a period 
of time.13 Similar to independent businessmen, the long-term violators generally preferred 
the “borrowing” rationalization. Other rationalizations of long-term violators were 
described, too, but they almost always were used in connection with the “borrowing” theme: 
(1) they were embezzling to keep their families from shame, disgrace, or poverty; (2) theirs 
was a case of “necessity”; their employers were cheating them financially; and (3) their 
employers were dishonest toward others and deserved to be fleeced. Some even pointed out 
                                                 
10 Cressey, p. 93. 
11 Cressey, p. 101–102. 
12 Cressey, p. 102. 
13 Cressey, p. 102. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.608   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that it was more difficult to return the funds than to steal them in the first place, and claimed 
that they did not pay back their “borrowings”  because they feared that would lead to 
detection of their thefts. A few in the study actually kept track of their thefts, but most only 
did so at first. Later, as the embezzlements escalated, it is assumed that the offender would 
rather not know the extent of his “borrowings.”  
 
All of the long-term violators in the study expressed a feeling that they would like to 
eventually “clean the slate” and repay their de bt. This feeling usually arose even before the 
perpetrators perceived that they might be caught. Cressey pointed out that at this point, 
whatever fear the perpetrators felt in relation to their crimes was related to losing their social 
status by the exposure of their non-shareable problem, not the exposure of the theft itself or 
the possibility of punishment or imprisonment. This is because their rationalizations still 
prevented them from perceiving their misconduct as criminal. “The trust violator cannot 
fear the treatment usually accorded to criminals until he comes to look upon himself as  
a criminal.” 14 
 
Eventually, most of the long-term violators finally realized they were “in too deep.” It is at 
this point that the embezzler faces a crisis. While maintaining the borrowing rationalization 
(or other rationalizations, for that matter), the trust violator is able to maintain his self-image 
as a law-abiding citizen; but when the level of theft escalates to a certain point, the 
perpetrator is confronted with the idea that he is behaving in a criminal manner. This is 
contrary to his personal values and the values of the social groups to which he belongs. This 
conflict creates a great deal of anxiety for the perpetrator. A number of offenders described 
themselves as extremely nervous and upset, tense, and unhappy.15 
 
Without the rationalization that they were borrowing, long-term offenders in the study 
found it difficult to reconcile converting money, while at the same time seeing themselves as 
honest and trustworthy. In this situation, they have two options: (1) they can readopt the 
attitudes of the (law-abiding) social group with which they identified before the thefts began, 
or (2) they can adopt the attitudes of the new category of persons (criminals) with whom 
they now identify.16 From his study, Cressey was able to cite examples of each type of 
behavior. Those who sought to readopt the attitudes of their law-abiding social groups “may 
report their behavior to the police or to their employer, quit taking funds or resolve to quit 
                                                 
14 Cressey, pp. 120–121. 
15 Cressey, p. 121. 
16 Cressey, p. 122.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.609  
taking funds, speculate or gamble wildly in order to regain the amounts taken, or “‘leave the 
field’ by absconding or committing suicide.” 17 On the other hand, those who adopt the 
attitudes of the group of criminals to which they now belong “may become reckless in their 
defalcations, taking larger amounts than formerly with less attempts to avoid detection and 
with no notion of repayment.” 18 
 
ABSCONDERS 
The third group of offenders Cressey discussed was absconders — people who take the money 
and run. Cressey found that the non-shareable problems for absconders usually resulted 
from physical isolation. He observed that these people, “usually are unmarried or separated 
from their spouses, live in hotels or rooming houses, have few primary group associations of 
any sort, and own little property. Only one of the absconders interviewed had held a higher 
status position of trust, such as an accountant, business executive, or bookkeeper.” 19 He also 
found that the absconders tended to have lower occupational and socio-economic status 
than the members of the other two categories.  
 
Because absconders tended to lack strong social ties, Cressey found that almost any financial 
problem could be defined as non-shareable for these persons, and also that rationalizations 
were easily adopted because the persons only had to sever a minimum of social ties when 
they absconded.20 The absconders rationalized their conduct by noting that their attempts to 
live honest lives had been futile (hence their low status). They also adopted an attitude of not 
caring what happened to them, and a belief that they could not help themselves because they 
were predisposed to criminal behavior. The latter two rationalizations, which were adopted 
by every absconder in Cressey’s study, allowed them to remove almost all personal 
accountability from their conduct.21 
 
In the 1950s, when this data was gathered by Cressey, embezzlers were considered persons 
of higher socioeconomic status who took funds over a limited period of time because of 
some personal problem such as drinking or gambling, while “thieves” were considered 
persons of lower status who took whatever funds were at hand. Cressey noted, “Since most 
absconders identify with the lower status group, they look upon themselves as belonging to a 
                                                 
17 Cressey, p. 121. 
18 Cressey, p. 122.  
19 Cressey, p. 128. 
20 Cressey, p. 129.  
21 Cressey, pp. 128–129. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.610   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
special class of thieves rather than trust violators. Just as long-term violators and 
independent businessmen do not at first consider the possibility of absconding with the 
funds, absconders do not consider the possibility of taking relatively small amounts of 
money over a period of time.” 22 
 



:


ration
the third and final factor in the fraud triangl is the ration cressei point out that
the ration is not an ex post facto mean of justifi a theft that ha alreadi occur
significantli the ration is a necessari compon of the crime befor it take place in
fact it is a part of the motiv for the crime becaus the embezzl doe not view
himself as a crimin he must justifi hi misde befor he ever commit them the
ration is necessari so that the perpetr can make hi illeg behavior intellig to
himself and maintain hi concept of himself as a trust person9
after the crimin act ha taken place the ration will often be abandon that is of
cours becaus of the natur of us all the first time we do someth contrari to our
moral it bother us as we repeat the act it becom easier on hallmark of occup
fraud and abus offend is that onc the line is cross the illeg act becom more or
less continu so an occup fraudster might begin steal with the thought that ill
6 cressei p 84
7 cressei p 84
8 cressei p 85
9 cressei pp 9495
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4607
pai the monei back but after the initi theft is success he will usual continu to steal
past the point at which there is ani realist possibl of repai the stolen fund
cressei found that the embezzl he studi gener ration their crime by view
them as 1 essenti noncrimin 2 justifi or 3 part of a gener irrespons for
which thei were not complet account he also found that the ration us
by trust violat tend to be link to their posit and to the manner in which thei
commit their violat he examin thi by divid the subject of hi studi into three
categori independ businessmen longterm violat and abscond he discov
that each group had it own type of ration
independ businessmen
the independ businessmen in cressei studi were peopl who were in busi for
themselv and who convert deposit that had been entrust to them 11 perpetr in
thi categori tend to us on of two common excus 1 thei were borrow the
monei thei convert or 2 the fund entrust to them were realli theirsyou cant steal
from yourself cressei found the borrow ration wa the on most frequent
us these perpetr also tend to espous the idea that everyon in busi
misdirect deposit in some wai which therefor made their own misconduct less wrong
than steal 12 also the independ businessmen almost univers felt their illeg
action were predic by an unusu situati on which cressei conclud wa in realiti a
nonshar financi problem
longterm violat
cressei defin longterm violat as individu who convert their employ fund or
fund belong to their employ client by take rel small amount over a period
of time13 similar to independ businessmen the longterm violat gener prefer
the borrow ration other ration of longterm violat were
describ too but thei almost alwai were us in connect with the borrow theme
1 thei were embezzl to keep their famili from shame disgrac or poverti 2 their
wa a case of necess their employ were cheat them financi and 3 their
employ were dishonest toward other and deserv to be fleec some even point out
10 cressei p 93
11 cressei p 101102
12 cressei p 102
13 cressei p 102
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4608 2011 fraud examin manual
that it wa more difficult to return the fund than to steal them in the first place and claim
that thei did not pai back their borrow becaus thei fear that would lead to
detect of their theft a few in the studi actual kept track of their theft but most onli
did so at first later as the embezzl escal it is assum that the offend would
rather not know the extent of hi borrow
all of the longterm violat in the studi express a feel that thei would like to
eventu clean the slate and repai their de bt thi feel usual aros even befor the
perpetr perceiv that thei might be caught cressei point out that at thi point
whatev fear the perpetr felt in relat to their crime wa relat to lose their social
statu by the exposur of their nonshar problem not the exposur of the theft itself or
the possibl of punish or imprison thi is becaus their ration still
prevent them from perceiv their misconduct as crimin the trust violat cannot
fear the treatment usual accord to crimin until he come to look upon himself as
a crimin 14
eventu most of the longterm violat final realiz thei were in too deep it is at
thi point that the embezzl face a crisi while maintain the borrow ration
or other ration for that matter the trust violat is abl to maintain hi selfimag
as a lawabid citizen but when the level of theft escal to a certain point the
perpetr is confront with the idea that he is behav in a crimin manner thi is
contrari to hi person valu and the valu of the social group to which he belong thi
conflict creat a great deal of anxieti for the perpetr a number of offend describ
themselv as extrem nervou and upset tens and unhappy15
without the ration that thei were borrow longterm offend in the studi
found it difficult to reconcil convert monei while at the same time see themselv as
honest and trustworthi in thi situat thei have two option 1 thei can readopt the
attitud of the lawabid social group with which thei identifi befor the theft began
or 2 thei can adopt the attitud of the new categori of person crimin with whom
thei now identify16 from hi studi cressei wa abl to cite exampl of each type of
behavior those who sought to readopt the attitud of their lawabid social group mai
report their behavior to the polic or to their employ quit take fund or resolv to quit
14 cressei pp 120121
15 cressei p 121
16 cressei p 122
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4609
take fund specul or gambl wildli in order to regain the amount taken or leav the
field by abscond or commit suicid 17 on the other hand those who adopt the
attitud of the group of crimin to which thei now belong mai becom reckless in their
defalc take larger amount than formerli with less attempt to avoid detect and
with no notion of repay 18
abscond
the third group of offend cressei discuss wa abscond peopl who take the monei
and run cressei found that the nonshar problem for abscond usual result
from physic isol he observ that these peopl usual ar unmarri or separ
from their spous live in hotel or room hous have few primari group associ of
ani sort and own littl properti onli on of the abscond interview had held a higher
statu posit of trust such as an account busi execut or bookkeep 19 he also
found that the abscond tend to have lower occup and socioeconom statu
than the member of the other two categori
becaus abscond tend to lack strong social ti cressei found that almost ani financi
problem could be defin as nonshar for these person and also that ration
were easili adopt becaus the person onli had to sever a minimum of social ti when
thei absconded20 the abscond ration their conduct by note that their attempt to
live honest live had been futil henc their low statu thei also adopt an attitud of not
care what happen to them and a belief that thei could not help themselv becaus thei
were predispos to crimin behavior the latter two ration which were adopt
by everi abscond in cressei studi allow them to remov almost all person
account from their conduct21
in the 1950 when thi data wa gather by cressei embezzl were consid person
of higher socioeconom statu who took fund over a limit period of time becaus of
some person problem such as drink or gambl while thiev were consid
person of lower statu who took whatev fund were at hand cressei note sinc most
abscond identifi with the lower statu group thei look upon themselv as belong to a
17 cressei p 121
18 cressei p 122
19 cressei p 128
20 cressei p 129
21 cressei pp 128129
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4610 2011 fraud examin manual
special class of thiev rather than trust violat just as longterm violat and
independ businessmen do not at first consid the possibl of abscond with the
fund abscond do not consid the possibl of take rel small amount of
monei over a period of time 22
