2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/The Albrecht Study


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


The Albrecht Study 
Another pioneering researcher in occupational fraud and abuse is Dr. Steve Albrecht of 
Brigham Young University. Albrecht and two of  his colleagues, Keith R. Howe and Marshall 
B. Romney, conducted an analysis of 212 frauds in the early 1980s under a grant from the 
Institute of Internal Auditors Research Foundation, leading to their book entitled Deterring 
Fraud: The Internal Auditor’s Perspective. The study’s methodology involved obtaining 
demographics and background information on the frauds through the use of extensive 
                                                 
22 Cressey, p. 133. 
23 Cressey, p. 139. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.611  
questionnaires. The participants in the survey were internal auditors of companies that had 
experienced frauds. 
 
Albrecht’s research included an examination of  comprehensive data sources to assemble a 
complete list of pressure, opportunity, and integrity variables, resulting in a set of 50 possible 
red flags or indicators of occupational fraud and abuse. These variables fell into two 
principle categories: perpetrator characteristics and organizational environment. The purpose 
of the study was to determine which of the red flags were most important to the commission 
(and therefore to the detection and prevention) of fraud. The red flags ranged from 
unusually high personal debts to belief that one’s  job is in jeopardy, from no separation of 
asset custodial procedures to not adequately checking a potential employee’s background. 24  
 
The researchers gave participants both sets of 25 motivating factors and asked which factors 
were present in the frauds they had dealt with. Participants were asked to rank these factors 
on a seven-point scale indicating the degree to which each factor existed in their specific 
frauds. The ten most highly ranked factors from the list of personal characteristics, based on 
this study, were:  
 
1. Living beyond their means 
2. An overwhelming desire for personal gain 
3. High personal debt 
4. A close association with customers 
5. Feeling pay was not commensurate with responsibility 
6. A wheeler-dealer attitude 
7. Strong challenge to beat the system 
8. Excessive gambling habits 
9. Undue family or peer pressure 
10. No recognition for job performance25 
 
These motivators are very similar to the non-shareable financial problems Cressey identified.  
 
The ten most highly ranked factors from the list dealing with organizational  
environment were:  
  
                                                 
24 While such red flags may be present in many occupational fraud cases, one must re-emphasize Albrecht’s caution that 
the perpetrators are hard to profile and fraud is difficult to predict. To underscore this point, Albrecht’s research does not 
address — and no current research has been done to determine — if nonoffenders have many of the same characteristics. If 
so, then the list may not be discriminating enough to be useful. In short, while one should be mindful of potential red flags, 
they should not receive undue attention absent other compelling circumstances. 
25 Albrecht, p. 32. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.612   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Placing too much trust in key employees 
2. Lack of proper procedures for authorization of transactions 
3. Inadequate disclosures of personal investments and incomes 
4. No separation of authorization of transactions from the custody of related assets 
5. Lack of independent checks on performance 
6. Inadequate attention to details 
7. No separation of custody of assets from the accounting for those assets 
8. No separation of duties between accounting functions 
9. Lack of clear lines of authority and responsibility 
10. Department that is not frequently reviewed by internal auditors26 
 
All of the factors on this list affect employees’ opportunity to commit fraud without being 
caught. Opportunity, as you will recall, was the second factor identified in Cressey’s fraud 
triangle. In many ways, the study by Albrecht, et al., supported Cressey’s model. Like 
Cressey’s study, the Albrecht study suggests there are three factors involved in occupational 
frauds: “. .. it appears that three elements must be present for a fraud to be committed: a 
situational pressure (non-shareable financial pressure), a perceived opportunity to commit 
and conceal the dishonest act (a way to secretly resolve the dishonest act or the lack of 
deterrence by management), and some way to rationalize (verbalize) the act as either being 
inconsistent with one’s personal level of integrity or justifiable.” 27 
 



:


the albrecht studi
anoth pioneer research in occup fraud and abus is dr steve albrecht of
brigham young univers albrecht and two of hi colleagu keith r how and marshal
b romnei conduct an analysi of 212 fraud in the earli 1980 under a grant from the
institut of intern auditor research foundat lead to their book entitl deter
fraud the intern auditor perspect the studi methodolog involv obtain
demograph and background inform on the fraud through the us of extens
22 cressei p 133
23 cressei p 139
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4611
questionnair the particip in the survei were intern auditor of compani that had
experienc fraud
albrecht research includ an examin of comprehens data sourc to assembl a
complet list of pressur opportun and integr variabl result in a set of 50 possibl
red flag or indic of occup fraud and abus these variabl fell into two
principl categori perpetr characterist and organiz environ the purpos
of the studi wa to determin which of the red flag were most import to the commiss
and therefor to the detect and prevent of fraud the red flag rang from
unusu high person debt to belief that on job is in jeopardi from no separ of
asset custodi procedur to not adequ check a potenti employe background 24
the research gave particip both set of 25 motiv factor and ask which factor
were present in the fraud thei had dealt with particip were ask to rank these factor
on a sevenpoint scale indic the degre to which each factor exist in their specif
fraud the ten most highli rank factor from the list of person characterist base on
thi studi were
1 live beyond their mean
2 an overwhelm desir for person gain
3 high person debt
4 a close associ with custom
5 feel pai wa not commensur with respons
6 a wheelerdeal attitud
7 strong challeng to beat the system
8 excess gambl habit
9 undu famili or peer pressur
10 no recognit for job performance25
these motiv ar veri similar to the nonshar financi problem cressei identifi
the ten most highli rank factor from the list deal with organiz
environ were
24 while such red flag mai be present in mani occup fraud case on must reemphas albrecht caution that
the perpetr ar hard to profil and fraud is difficult to predict to underscor thi point albrecht research doe not
address and no current research ha been done to determin if nonoffend have mani of the same characterist if
so then the list mai not be discrimin enough to be us in short while on should be mind of potenti red flag
thei should not receiv undu attent absent other compel circumst
25 albrecht p 32
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4612 2011 fraud examin manual
1 place too much trust in kei employe
2 lack of proper procedur for author of transact
3 inadequ disclosur of person invest and incom
4 no separ of author of transact from the custodi of relat asset
5 lack of independ check on perform
6 inadequ attent to detail
7 no separ of custodi of asset from the account for those asset
8 no separ of duti between account function
9 lack of clear line of author and respons
10 depart that is not frequent review by intern auditors26
all of the factor on thi list affect employe opportun to commit fraud without be
caught opportun as you will recal wa the second factor identifi in cressei fraud
triangl in mani wai the studi by albrecht et al support cressei model like
cressei studi the albrecht studi suggest there ar three factor involv in occup
fraud it appear that three element must be present for a fraud to be commit a
situat pressur nonshar financi pressur a perceiv opportun to commit
and conceal the dishonest act a wai to secretli resolv the dishonest act or the lack of
deterr by manag and some wai to ration verbal the act as either be
inconsist with on person level of integr or justifi 27
