2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Hypotheses of Employee Theft


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Hypotheses of Employee Theft 
In reviewing the literature on employee theft, Hollinger and Clark concluded that experts 
had developed five separate but interrelated sets of hypotheses of employee theft. The first 
is external economic pressures, such as the “non-shareable financial problem” that Cressey 
described. The second hypothesis was that contemporary employees, specifically young 
ones, are not as hardworking and honest as those in past generations. The third theory, 
advocated primarily by those with years of experience in the security and investigative 
industry, is that every employee can be tempted to steal from his employer. The theory 
basically assumes that people are greedy and dishonest by nature. The fourth theory was 
that job dissatisfaction is the primary cause of employee theft, and the fifth, that theft 
occurs because of the broadly shared formal and informal structure of organizations—that 
is, over time, the group norms, whether good or bad, become the standard of conduct. 
The sum of their research generally concluded that the fourth hypothesis was correct. 
 
EMPLOYEE DEVIANCE 
Employee theft is at one extreme of employee deviance, which can be defined as conduct 
detrimental to the organization and to the employee. At the other extreme is 
counterproductive employee behavior such as goldbricking and abuse of sick leave. 
Hollinger and Clark defined two basic categories of employee deviant behavior: (1) acts by 
employees against property, and (2) violations of the norms regulating acceptable levels of 
production. The former includes misuse and theft of company property such as cash or 
inventory. The latter involves acts of employee deviance that affect productivity. 
 
Hollinger and Clark developed a written questionnaire that was sent to employees in three 
different sectors: retail, hospital, and manufacturing. The employees were presented with 
lists of category 1 and category 2 offenses and were asked which offenses they had been 
involved in, and with what frequency. The researchers eventually received 9,175 valid 
employee questionnaires, representing about 54 percent of those sampled. Below are the 
results of the questionnaires. The first table represents category 1 offenses?acts against 
property.35 Hollinger and Clark found that approximately one-third of employees in each 
sector admitted to committing some form of property deviance.  
 
                                                 
35 Hollinger and Clark, p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.615  
 
The following is a summary of the Hollinger and Clark research with respect to production 
deviance. Not surprisingly, they found that this form of employee misconduct was two to 
three times more common than property violations.36 
 
                                                 
36 Hollinger and Clark, p. 42. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
 
JOB SATISFACTION AND DEVIANCE 
The research of Hollinger and Clark strongly suggests that employees who are dissatisfied 
with their jobs?across all age groups, but especially younger workers?are the most likely to 
seek redress through counterproductive or illegal behavior in order to right the perceived 
“inequity.” Other writers, notably anthropol ogist Gerald Mars and researcher David 
Altheide, have commented on this connection. Mars observed that among both hotel dining 
room employees and dock workers it was believed that pilferage was not theft, but was “seen 
as a morally justified addition to wages; indeed, as an entitlement due from exploiting 
employers.” 37 Altheide also documented that theft is often perceived by employees as a 
“way of getting back at the boss or supervisor.” 38 Jason Ditton documented a pattern in U.S. 
industries called “wages in kind,” in which employees “situated in structurally disadvantaged 
parts [of the organization] receive large segments of their wages invisibly.” 39 
 
                                                 
37 Hollinger and Clark, p. 77. 
38 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
39 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.617  
EMPLOYEE PERCEPTION OF CONTROL  
The researchers also examined the perception—not necessarily the reality—of employees 
believing they would be caught if they committed theft. “We find that perceived certainty of 
detection is inversely related to employee theft for respondents in all three industry 
sectors—that is, the stronger the perception that theft would be detected, the less the 
likelihood that the employee would engage in deviant behavior.” 40  
 
This finding is significant and consistent with other research. It suggests that increasing the 
perception of detection may be the best way to deter employee theft, while increasing the 
sanctions that are imposed on occupational fraudsters will have a limited effect. Recall that 
under Cressey’s model, embezzlers are motiva ted to commit illegal acts because they face 
some financial problem that they cannot share with others because it would threaten their 
status. It follows that the greatest threat to the perpetrator would be that he might be caught 
in the act of stealing because that would bring his non-shareable problem out into the open. 
The possibility of sanctions is only a secondary concern. The perpetrator engages in the 
illegal conduct only because he perceives there is an opportunity to fix his financial problem 
without getting caught.  Therefore, if an organization can increase in its employees’ minds the 
perception that illegal acts will be detected, it can significantly deter occupational fraud. Put 
simply, occupational fraudsters are not deterred by the threat of sanctions because they do 
not plan on getting caught. 
 
Control in the workplace, according to Hollinger and Clark, consists of both formal and 
informal social controls. Formal controls can be described as external pressures that are 
applied through both positive and negative sanctions; informal controls consist of the 
internalization by the employee of the group norms of the organization. These researchers, 
along with a host of others, have concluded that—as a general proposition—informal social 
controls provide the best deterrent. “These da ta clearly indicate that the loss of respect 
among one’s acquaintances was the single most effective variable in predicting future deviant 
involvement.” Furthermore, “... in general, the probability of suffering informal sanction is 
far more important than fear of formal sanctions in deterring deviant activity.” 41 Again, this 
supports the notion that the greatest deterrent to the fraudster is the idea that he will be 
caught, not the threat of punishment by his employer. 
 
                                                 
40 Hollinger and Clark, p. 117. 
41 Hollinger and Clark, p. 121. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
OTHER CONCLUSIONS 
Hollinger and Clark reached several other conclusions based on their work. First, they found 
that “substantially increasing the internal security presence does not seem to be appropriate, 
given the prevalence of the problem. In fact, doing so may make things worse.” Second, they 
concluded that the same kinds of employees who engage in other workplace deviance are 
also principally the ones who engage in employee theft. They found persuasive evidence that 
slow or sloppy workmanship, sick-leave abuses, long coffee breaks, alcohol and drug use at 
work, and coming in late and/or leaving early were more likely to be present in the 
employee-thief. 
 
Third, the researchers hypothesized that if efforts are made to reduce employee theft 
without reducing its underlying causes (e.g., employee dissatisfaction, lack of ethics), the 
result could create a “hydraulic effect.” That is, tightening controls over property deviance 
may create more detrimental acts affecting the productivity of the organization — if we push 
down employee theft, that action may push up goldbricking. Fourth, they asserted that 
increased management sensitivity to its employees will reduce all forms of workplace 
deviance. Fifth, they concluded special attention should be afforded young employees, as 
these are the ones statistically the most likely to steal. It must be pointed out, however, that 
although the incidence of theft is higher among younger employees, the losses associated 
with those thefts are typically lower than losses caused by more senior employees who have 
greater financial authority. 
 
Hollinger and Clark asserted that management must pay attention to four aspects of policy 
development: (1) a clear understanding regarding theft behavior, (2) continuous 
dissemination of positive information reflective of the company’s policies, (3) enforcement 
of sanctions, and (4) publicizing the sanctions. 
 
The researchers summed up their observations by saying, “perhaps the most important 
overall policy implication that can be drawn … is that theft and workplace deviance are in 
large part a reflection of how management at all levels of the organization is perceived by the 
employee. Specifically, if the employee is permitted to conclude that his contribution to the 
workplace is not appreciated or that the organization does not seem to care about the theft 
of its property, we expect to find greater involvement. In conclusion, a lowered prevalence 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.619  
of employee theft may be one valuable consequence of a management team that is 
responsive to the current perceptions and attitudes of its workforce.” 42 
 
2008-2009 Integrity Survey 
In January 2009, K PMG released its report on its 


:


hypothes of employe theft
in review the literatur on employe theft holling and clark conclud that expert
had develop five separ but interrel set of hypothes of employe theft the first
is extern econom pressur such as the nonshar financi problem that cressei
describ the second hypothesi wa that contemporari employe specif young
on ar not as hardwork and honest as those in past gener the third theori
advoc primarili by those with year of experi in the secur and investig
industri is that everi employe can be tempt to steal from hi employ the theori
basic assum that peopl ar greedi and dishonest by natur the fourth theori wa
that job dissatisfact is the primari caus of employe theft and the fifth that theft
occur becaus of the broadli share formal and inform structur of organizationsthat
is over time the group norm whether good or bad becom the standard of conduct
the sum of their research gener conclud that the fourth hypothesi wa correct
employe devianc
employe theft is at on extrem of employe devianc which can be defin as conduct
detriment to the organ and to the employe at the other extrem is
counterproduct employe behavior such as goldbrick and abus of sick leav
holling and clark defin two basic categori of employe deviant behavior 1 act by
employe against properti and 2 violat of the norm regul accept level of
product the former includ misus and theft of compani properti such as cash or
inventori the latter involv act of employe devianc that affect product
holling and clark develop a written questionnair that wa sent to employe in three
differ sector retail hospit and manufactur the employe were present with
list of categori 1 and categori 2 offens and were ask which offens thei had been
involv in and with what frequenc the research eventu receiv 9175 valid
employe questionnair repres about 54 percent of those sampl below ar the
result of the questionnair the first tabl repres categori 1 offensesact against
property35 holling and clark found that approxim onethird of employe in each
sector admit to commit some form of properti devianc
35 holling and clark p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4615
the follow is a summari of the holling and clark research with respect to product
devianc not surprisingli thei found that thi form of employe misconduct wa two to
three time more common than properti violations36
36 holling and clark p 42
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4616 2011 fraud examin manual
job satisfact and devianc
the research of holling and clark strongli suggest that employe who ar dissatisfi
with their jobsacross all ag group but especi younger workersar the most like to
seek redress through counterproduct or illeg behavior in order to right the perceiv
inequ other writer notabl anthropol ogist gerald mar and research david
altheid have comment on thi connect mar observ that among both hotel dine
room employe and dock worker it wa believ that pilferag wa not theft but wa seen
as a moral justifi addit to wage inde as an entitl due from exploit
employ 37 altheid also document that theft is often perceiv by employe as a
wai of get back at the boss or supervisor 38 jason ditton document a pattern in us
industri call wage in kind in which employe situat in structur disadvantag
part of the organ receiv larg segment of their wage invis 39
37 holling and clark p 77
38 holling and clark p 86
39 holling and clark p 86
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4617
employe percept of control
the research also examin the perceptionnot necessarili the realityof employe
believ thei would be caught if thei commit theft we find that perceiv certainti of
detect is invers relat to employe theft for respond in all three industri
sectorsthat is the stronger the percept that theft would be detect the less the
likelihood that the employe would engag in deviant behavior 40
thi find is signific and consist with other research it suggest that increas the
percept of detect mai be the best wai to deter employe theft while increas the
sanction that ar impos on occup fraudster will have a limit effect recal that
under cressei model embezzl ar motiva ted to commit illeg act becaus thei face
some financi problem that thei cannot share with other becaus it would threaten their
statu it follow that the greatest threat to the perpetr would be that he might be caught
in the act of steal becaus that would bring hi nonshar problem out into the open
the possibl of sanction is onli a secondari concern the perpetr engag in the
illeg conduct onli becaus he perceiv there is an opportun to fix hi financi problem
without get caught therefor if an organ can increas in it employe mind the
percept that illeg act will be detect it can significantli deter occup fraud put
simpli occup fraudster ar not deter by the threat of sanction becaus thei do
not plan on get caught
control in the workplac accord to holling and clark consist of both formal and
inform social control formal control can be describ as extern pressur that ar
appli through both posit and neg sanction inform control consist of the
intern by the employe of the group norm of the organ these research
along with a host of other have conclud thata a gener propositioninform social
control provid the best deterr these da ta clearli indic that the loss of respect
among on acquaint wa the singl most effect variabl in predict futur deviant
involv furthermor in gener the probabl of suffer inform sanction is
far more import than fear of formal sanction in deter deviant activ 41 again thi
support the notion that the greatest deterr to the fraudster is the idea that he will be
caught not the threat of punish by hi employ
40 holling and clark p 117
41 holling and clark p 121
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4618 2011 fraud examin manual
other conclus
holling and clark reach sever other conclus base on their work first thei found
that substanti increas the intern secur presenc doe not seem to be appropri
given the preval of the problem in fact do so mai make thing wors second thei
conclud that the same kind of employe who engag in other workplac devianc ar
also princip the on who engag in employe theft thei found persuas evid that
slow or sloppi workmanship sickleav abus long coffe break alcohol and drug us at
work and come in late andor leav earli were more like to be present in the
employeethief
third the research hypothes that if effort ar made to reduc employe theft
without reduc it underli caus eg employe dissatisfact lack of ethic the
result could creat a hydraul effect that is tighten control over properti devianc
mai creat more detriment act affect the product of the organ if we push
down employe theft that action mai push up goldbrick fourth thei assert that
increas manag sensit to it employe will reduc all form of workplac
devianc fifth thei conclud special attent should be afford young employe as
these ar the on statist the most like to steal it must be point out howev that
although the incid of theft is higher among younger employe the loss associ
with those theft ar typic lower than loss caus by more senior employe who have
greater financi author
holling and clark assert that manag must pai attent to four aspect of polici
develop 1 a clear understand regard theft behavior 2 continu
dissemin of posit inform reflect of the compani polici 3 enforc
of sanction and 4 public the sanction
the research sum up their observ by sai perhap the most import
overal polici implic that can be drawn is that theft and workplac devianc ar in
larg part a reflect of how manag at all level of the organ is perceiv by the
employe specif if the employe is permit to conclud that hi contribut to the
workplac is not appreci or that the organ doe not seem to care about the theft
of it properti we expect to find greater involv in conclus a lower preval
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4619
of employe theft mai be on valuabl consequ of a manag team that is
respons to the current percept and attitud of it workforc 42
20082009 integr survei
in januari 2009 k pmg releas it report on it
