2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Hypotheses of Employee Theft/EMPLOYEE PERCEPTION OF CONTROL


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


EMPLOYEE PERCEPTION OF CONTROL  
The researchers also examined the perception—not necessarily the reality—of employees 
believing they would be caught if they committed theft. “We find that perceived certainty of 
detection is inversely related to employee theft for respondents in all three industry 
sectors—that is, the stronger the perception that theft would be detected, the less the 
likelihood that the employee would engage in deviant behavior.” 40  
 
This finding is significant and consistent with other research. It suggests that increasing the 
perception of detection may be the best way to deter employee theft, while increasing the 
sanctions that are imposed on occupational fraudsters will have a limited effect. Recall that 
under Cressey’s model, embezzlers are motiva ted to commit illegal acts because they face 
some financial problem that they cannot share with others because it would threaten their 
status. It follows that the greatest threat to the perpetrator would be that he might be caught 
in the act of stealing because that would bring his non-shareable problem out into the open. 
The possibility of sanctions is only a secondary concern. The perpetrator engages in the 
illegal conduct only because he perceives there is an opportunity to fix his financial problem 
without getting caught.  Therefore, if an organization can increase in its employees’ minds the 
perception that illegal acts will be detected, it can significantly deter occupational fraud. Put 
simply, occupational fraudsters are not deterred by the threat of sanctions because they do 
not plan on getting caught. 
 
Control in the workplace, according to Hollinger and Clark, consists of both formal and 
informal social controls. Formal controls can be described as external pressures that are 
applied through both positive and negative sanctions; informal controls consist of the 
internalization by the employee of the group norms of the organization. These researchers, 
along with a host of others, have concluded that—as a general proposition—informal social 
controls provide the best deterrent. “These da ta clearly indicate that the loss of respect 
among one’s acquaintances was the single most effective variable in predicting future deviant 
involvement.” Furthermore, “... in general, the probability of suffering informal sanction is 
far more important than fear of formal sanctions in deterring deviant activity.” 41 Again, this 
supports the notion that the greatest deterrent to the fraudster is the idea that he will be 
caught, not the threat of punishment by his employer. 
 
                                                 
40 Hollinger and Clark, p. 117. 
41 Hollinger and Clark, p. 121. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     



:


employe percept of control
the research also examin the perceptionnot necessarili the realityof employe
believ thei would be caught if thei commit theft we find that perceiv certainti of
detect is invers relat to employe theft for respond in all three industri
sectorsthat is the stronger the percept that theft would be detect the less the
likelihood that the employe would engag in deviant behavior 40
thi find is signific and consist with other research it suggest that increas the
percept of detect mai be the best wai to deter employe theft while increas the
sanction that ar impos on occup fraudster will have a limit effect recal that
under cressei model embezzl ar motiva ted to commit illeg act becaus thei face
some financi problem that thei cannot share with other becaus it would threaten their
statu it follow that the greatest threat to the perpetr would be that he might be caught
in the act of steal becaus that would bring hi nonshar problem out into the open
the possibl of sanction is onli a secondari concern the perpetr engag in the
illeg conduct onli becaus he perceiv there is an opportun to fix hi financi problem
without get caught therefor if an organ can increas in it employe mind the
percept that illeg act will be detect it can significantli deter occup fraud put
simpli occup fraudster ar not deter by the threat of sanction becaus thei do
not plan on get caught
control in the workplac accord to holling and clark consist of both formal and
inform social control formal control can be describ as extern pressur that ar
appli through both posit and neg sanction inform control consist of the
intern by the employe of the group norm of the organ these research
along with a host of other have conclud thata a gener propositioninform social
control provid the best deterr these da ta clearli indic that the loss of respect
among on acquaint wa the singl most effect variabl in predict futur deviant
involv furthermor in gener the probabl of suffer inform sanction is
far more import than fear of formal sanction in deter deviant activ 41 again thi
support the notion that the greatest deterr to the fraudster is the idea that he will be
caught not the threat of punish by hi employ
40 holling and clark p 117
41 holling and clark p 121
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4618 2011 fraud examin manual
