2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/How Occupational Fraud Is Committed


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


How Occupational Fraud Is Committed 
Previous ACFE research has identified three primary categories of occupational fraud used 
by individuals to defraud their employers. Asset misappropriations are those schemes in 
which the perpetrator steals or misuses an organization’s resources. These frauds include 
schemes such as skimming cash receipts, falsifying expense reports, and forging company 
checks. 
 
Corruption schemes involve the employee’s use of his influence in business transactions in a 
way that violates his duty to the employer for the purpose of obtaining a benefit for himself 
or someone else. Examples of corruption schemes include bribery, extortion, and a conflict 
of interest.  
 
Financial statement fraud schemes are those involving the intentional misstatement or 
omission of material information in the organization’s financial reports. Common methods 
of fraudulent financial statement manipulation include recording fictitious revenues, 
concealing liabilities or expenses, and artificially inflating reported assets.  
 
As indicated in the following charts, asset misappropriations are by far both the most 
frequent and the least costly form of occupational fraud. On the other end of the spectrum 
are cases involving financial statement fraud. These schemes were present in less than 5% of 
the cases reported to us, but caused a median loss of more than $4 million. Corruption 
schemes fell in the middle category in both respects, occurring in just under one-third of all 
cases involved in our study and causing a median loss of $250,000. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.623  
Occupational Frauds by Category—Frequency 43 
 
 
Occupational Frauds by Category—Median Loss  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
43 The sum of percentages in this chart exceeds 100% because several cases involved multiple schemes from 
more than one category. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
SUB-CATEGORIES OF ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION 
With nearly 90% of occupational frauds involving some form of asset misappropriation, it is 
instructional to further delineate the methods used by employees to embezzle organizational 
assets. We divided asset misappropriation schemes into nine sub-categories, as illustrated in 
the table below. The first eight sub-categories represent schemes targeting cash; these frauds 
account for approximately 85% of all asset misappropriations. 
 
Two of the sub-schemes — skimming and cash larceny — involve pilfering incoming cash 
receipts, such as sales revenues and accounts receivable collections. The next five sub-categories — 
billing, expense reimbursement, check tampering, payroll, and fraudulent 
register disbursement schemes — involve fraudulent disbursements of cash. The eighth form 
of cash misappropriation targets cash the organization has on hand, such as petty cash funds 
or cash in a vault. The final sub-category of asset misappropriations covers the theft or 
misuse of non-cash assets, including inventory, supplies, fixed assets, investments, 
intellectual property, and proprietary information. The table below provides the frequency 
and median loss associated with each asset misappropriation sub-category. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.625  
The sum of percentages in this table exceeds 100% because several cases involved asset misappropriation schemes from more than one category. 
 
As previously mentioned, our 2010 data include fraud cases from countries throughout the 
world, while our 2008 data contain only U.S.-based cases. In the following charts, we isolated 
the U.S. cases from our current study to make a more direct comparison to our 2008 data. 
Interestingly, while financial statement fraud remained the least common and most costly 
form of fraud among U.S. cases, there was a much lower percentage of financial statement 
cases in this study (four percent) as compared to 2008 (ten percent). Additionally, the 
median losses for all three categories of fraud were notably smaller in 2010 than they were in 
2008. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.626   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Occupational Frauds by Category (U.S. Only)—Frequency 44  
 
 
Occupational Frauds by Category (U.S. Only)—Median Loss  
 



:


how occup fraud is commit
previou acf research ha identifi three primari categori of occup fraud us
by individu to defraud their employ asset misappropri ar those scheme in
which the perpetr steal or misus an organ resourc these fraud includ
scheme such as skim cash receipt falsifi expens report and forg compani
check
corrupt scheme involv the employe us of hi influenc in busi transact in a
wai that violat hi duti to the employ for the purpos of obtain a benefit for himself
or someon els exampl of corrupt scheme includ briberi extort and a conflict
of interest
financi statement fraud scheme ar those involv the intent misstat or
omiss of materi inform in the organ financi report common method
of fraudul financi statement manipul includ record fictiti revenu
conceal liabil or expens and artifici inflat report asset
as indic in the follow chart asset misappropri ar by far both the most
frequent and the least costli form of occup fraud on the other end of the spectrum
ar case involv financi statement fraud these scheme were present in less than 5 of
the case report to us but caus a median loss of more than 4 million corrupt
scheme fell in the middl categori in both respect occur in just under onethird of all
case involv in our studi and caus a median loss of 250000
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4623
occup fraud by categoryfrequ 43
occup fraud by categorymedian loss
43 the sum of percentag in thi chart exce 100 becaus sever case involv multipl scheme from
more than on categori
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4624 2011 fraud examin manual
subcategori of asset misappropri
with nearli 90 of occup fraud involv some form of asset misappropri it is
instruct to further delin the method us by employe to embezzl organiz
asset we divid asset misappropri scheme into nine subcategori as illustr in
the tabl below the first eight subcategori repres scheme target cash these fraud
account for approxim 85 of all asset misappropri
two of the subschem skim and cash larceni involv pilfer incom cash
receipt such as sale revenu and account receiv collect the next five subcategori
bill expens reimburs check tamper payrol and fraudul
regist disburs scheme involv fraudul disburs of cash the eighth form
of cash misappropri target cash the organ ha on hand such as petti cash fund
or cash in a vault the final subcategori of asset misappropri cover the theft or
misus of noncash asset includ inventori suppli fix asset invest
intellectu properti and proprietari inform the tabl below provid the frequenc
and median loss associ with each asset misappropri subcategori
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4625
the sum of percentag in thi tabl exce 100 becaus sever case involv asset misappropri scheme from more than on categori
as previous mention our 2010 data includ fraud case from countri throughout the
world while our 2008 data contain onli usbas case in the follow chart we isol
the us case from our current studi to make a more direct comparison to our 2008 data
interestingli while financi statement fraud remain the least common and most costli
form of fraud among us case there wa a much lower percentag of financi statement
case in thi studi four percent as compar to 2008 ten percent addition the
median loss for all three categori of fraud were notabl smaller in 2010 than thei were in
2008
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4626 2011 fraud examin manual
occup fraud by categori us onlyfrequ 44
occup fraud by categori us onlymedian loss
