2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Open Sources of Information/The Bootstrap Effect


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


The Bootstrap Effect 
With an understanding of the intelligence process, it becomes clear that open sources play 
two important roles. They may in some cases provide all the basic intelligence a company 
needs. A skilled intelligence analyst uses logic and the principles of inference to summarize, 
compare, and explain any missing pieces. In other words, the company never has to venture 
on the high seas of espionage; it satisfies itself  in the safe harbor of open sources. It learns 
what it needs to know at low cost and by legal means. 
 
But if penetrating the proprietary realm becomes necessary, open source information 
provides a bootstrap for the covert effort. The more one knows about a subject, the easier it 
is to discover additional information on that subject. Open sources serve as the homework a 
corporate spy does prior to conducting covert operations in hostile territory. 
 
As any filmmaker knows, the more time spent in pre-production (which is relatively 
inexpensive), the less time and money will have to be dedicated to production (which is very 
expensive). The professional filmmaker does his homework before shooting a foot of film. 
Likewise, the professional corporate spy does not  just show up at the target’s factory at 3 
a.m., armed with a crowbar, clumsily trying to break into the facility. 
 
Instead, the effective spy obtains plans on the layout of the targeted plant in advance, notes 
what type of alarm system is in place, learns about any security patrols, and then devises an 
appropriate penetration plan. But unlike a common thief, the effective spy sets that plan 
aside and first considers other options—less blatant means that may exist to ferret out the 
sought-after information. The spy understands that information is a unique commodity, and 
the theft of information can be accomplished in a number of unique ways. Often, 
information can be stolen without the target realizing it; copies or photographs can provide 
access to sensitive facts without requiring the source documents or files to ever be removed 
from their owner’s control. Burglary, something the police understand and take great interest 
in, is not always the best way to steal information. 
 
 



:


the bootstrap effect
with an understand of the intellig process it becom clear that open sourc plai
two import role thei mai in some case provid all the basic intellig a compani
need a skill intellig analyst us logic and the principl of infer to summar
compar and explain ani miss piec in other word the compani never ha to ventur
on the high sea of espionag it satisfi itself in the safe harbor of open sourc it learn
what it need to know at low cost and by legal mean
but if penetr the proprietari realm becom necessari open sourc inform
provid a bootstrap for the covert effort the more on know about a subject the easier it
is to discov addit inform on that subject open sourc serv as the homework a
corpor spy doe prior to conduct covert oper in hostil territori
as ani filmmak know the more time spent in preproduct which is rel
inexpens the less time and monei will have to be dedic to product which is veri
expens the profession filmmak doe hi homework befor shoot a foot of film
likewis the profession corpor spy doe not just show up at the target factori at 3
am arm with a crowbar clumsili try to break into the facil
instead the effect spy obtain plan on the layout of the target plant in advanc note
what type of alarm system is in place learn about ani secur patrol and then devis an
appropri penetr plan but unlik a common thief the effect spy set that plan
asid and first consid other optionsless blatant mean that mai exist to ferret out the
soughtaft inform the spy understand that inform is a uniqu commod and
the theft of inform can be accomplish in a number of uniqu wai often
inform can be stolen without the target realiz it copi or photograph can provid
access to sensit fact without requir the sourc document or file to ever be remov
from their owner control burglari someth the polic understand and take great interest
in is not alwai the best wai to steal inform
