2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/How Information Is Lost/Guarding Manual Systems


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Guarding Manual Systems 
Manual systems are all human-readable files and documents. These include commonly 
overlooked items like rolodexes and calendars. Attacks on these systems range from pilfering 
trash to infiltrating a company in the guise of a cleaning crew or vendors to outright theft or 
burglary. Reasonable measures to protect documents include the following: 
1. Place sensitive documents in high - grade locked filing cabinets. It might also be 
advisable to lock sensitive documents in a safe when not in use and at the end of the day. 
Locks or safes should be able to withstand a physical attack of at least one to two hours. 
2. Use a shredder for sensitive documentary waste. In the alternative, organizations 
may opt to have sensitive trash disposed of by a bonded waste-disposal company. If so, 
the trash should be securely stored until it is collected by that company.  
3. Receive and send mail at a secure site. Options include mail drops, post office boxes, 
or locked mailboxes. The key is that the site remains secure. 
4. Provide reasonable perimeter security for offices. Use an alarm system, add secure 
locks to doors and windows, or employ both. 
5. Pay attention to securing auxiliary materials such as: 
? Calendars (they may note key events in a sensitive matter). 
? Specialized internal telephone directories. 
? Notebooks and expense logs from sensitive cases. 
? Works in progress such as reports, notes, and graphics on sensitive cases. 
? Mailing lists. All such lists that have proprietary value should have trapped names 
placed on them as a safeguard. A trapped name is a fictitious one with an address 
that the organization controls. If mail is ever delivered to the trapped name, it will be 
apparent that the list has been compromised. Furthermore, the nature of the mailing 
will probably indicate who bought the list, and may help the victim determine where 
the security breach occurred.  
? Index cards and Rolodexes (if they contain sensitive information.) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.826                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Blackboards, as well as diagrams and charts on easel pads (If they cannot be easily 
locked up, take a Polaroid photo of them and then erase the original. Secure these 
photographs.) 
? Computer-paper carbons and writing tablets that have impressions from notes on 
sensitive topics. (Shred them every day.) 
? Computer printouts of sensitive data (Keep them locked up and use a shredder to 
dispose of them.) 
 
Organizations concerned about the possibility of corporate espionage should establish 
procedures for classifying and marking sensitive items and should have provisions for their 
short-term and long-term storage, as well as their disposal or destruction. Large offices 
should have a structured log-out procedure for sensitive files so it is always possible to 
determine who had what document, as well as where and when they had it.  
 



:


guard manual system
manual system ar all humanread file and document these includ commonli
overlook item like rolodex and calendar attack on these system rang from pilfer
trash to infiltr a compani in the guis of a clean crew or vendor to outright theft or
burglari reason measur to protect document includ the follow
1 place sensit document in high grade lock file cabinet it might also be
advis to lock sensit document in a safe when not in us and at the end of the dai
lock or safe should be abl to withstand a physic attack of at least on to two hour
2 us a shredder for sensit documentari wast in the altern organ
mai opt to have sensit trash dispos of by a bond wastedispos compani if so
the trash should be secur store until it is collect by that compani
3 receiv and send mail at a secur site option includ mail drop post offic box
or lock mailbox the kei is that the site remain secur
4 provid reason perimet secur for offic us an alarm system add secur
lock to door and window or emploi both
5 pai attent to secur auxiliari materi such as
calendar thei mai note kei event in a sensit matter
special intern telephon directori
notebook and expens log from sensit case
work in progress such as report note and graphic on sensit case
mail list all such list that have proprietari valu should have trap name
place on them as a safeguard a trap name is a fictiti on with an address
that the organ control if mail is ever deliv to the trap name it will be
appar that the list ha been compromis furthermor the natur of the mail
will probabl indic who bought the list and mai help the victim determin where
the secur breach occur
index card and rolodex if thei contain sensit inform
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1826 2011 fraud examin manual
blackboard as well as diagram and chart on easel pad if thei cannot be easili
lock up take a polaroid photo of them and then eras the origin secur these
photograph
computerpap carbon and write tablet that have impress from note on
sensit topic shred them everi dai
comput printout of sensit data keep them lock up and us a shredder to
dispos of them
organ concern about the possibl of corpor espionag should establish
procedur for classifi and mark sensit item and should have provis for their
shortterm and longterm storag as well as their dispos or destruct larg offic
should have a structur logout procedur for sensit file so it is alwai possibl to
determin who had what document as well as where and when thei had it
