2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Basic Principles of Spying/Counter-Recruitment Training


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Counter-Recruitment Training 
Compromising a person’s credibility and integrity requires a series of moves that are 
generally played out over a fairly extended period of time. The methods spies use to turn an 
employee can be very complex and can occur in a multitude of situations; no security officer 
can see far enough ahead to forestall every potential compromise. It is therefore imperative 
to train employees to report any suspected recruitment effort made against them as early as 
possible. The importance of this statement cannot be overestimated. Key employees should 
be made aware of the most common recruitment techniques, which were described above. 
In particular, they should be trained to be wary of people who:   
• Encourage and finance some vice of the employee. 
• Express a great deal of sympathy for a cause that is important to the employee. 
• Offer to help with a serious financial problem. 
• Attempt to seduce the employee. 
• Attempt to blackmail the employee.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.830                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, some of these techniques involve ve ry personal matters that the typical employee 
will not feel comfortable discussing with their company. That is precisely why spies use these 
avenues to attack recruits. No amount of training will convince every employee to bring their 
dark secrets out into the light, but by making employees aware of the ways in which spies 
operate, an organization may be able to help its employees resist their initial overtures. This 
sort of training prepares employees to recognize a recruitment campaign before it has 
advanced to the stage at which the employee can no longer back out.  
 



:


counterrecruit train
compromis a person credibl and integr requir a seri of move that ar
gener plai out over a fairli extend period of time the method spi us to turn an
employe can be veri complex and can occur in a multitud of situat no secur offic
can see far enough ahead to forestal everi potenti compromis it is therefor imper
to train employe to report ani suspect recruit effort made against them as earli as
possibl the import of thi statement cannot be overestim kei employe should
be made awar of the most common recruit techniqu which were describ abov
in particular thei should be train to be wari of peopl who
encourag and financ some vice of the employe
express a great deal of sympathi for a caus that is import to the employe
offer to help with a seriou financi problem
attempt to seduc the employe
attempt to blackmail the employe
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1830 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious some of these techniqu involv ve ry person matter that the typic employe
will not feel comfort discuss with their compani that is precis why spi us these
avenu to attack recruit no amount of train will convinc everi employe to bring their
dark secret out into the light but by make employe awar of the wai in which spi
oper an organ mai be abl to help it employe resist their initi overtur thi
sort of train prepar employe to recogn a recruit campaign befor it ha
advanc to the stage at which the employe can no longer back out
