2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Cloaking and Misdirection/Hackers


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Hackers
If hackers or information thieves penetrate the computer system, security should give them 
something to munch on. The idea is to place worthless, highly technical sounding files on 
the company’s system. If someone signs on from an off-site location and starts to download 
one of these files, security is notified and an investigation begins. 
 
The same tactic applies to PCs. Sensitive data should be placed on disks and locked in a safe 
when not in use. Bogus files containing misinformation can be left on the hard drive for 
prying eyes. If a security manager really wants spies to take the bait, she can add password 
protection to the system to protect the bogus files. The fact that the files are protected helps 
convince potential thieves that they contain valuable information. The same idea works for a 
computer sent out for repair. Placing bogus data on the hard drive prevents service 
technicians from stealing and selling actual company trade secrets. 
 
Another twist on the same theme is to place documents and computer auxiliary items 
containing bogus data in the trash. Auxiliary items include old disks and CDs, old magnetic 
tapes, used computer paper, and other media. This technique is an excellent method for 
managing information thieves who like to go dumpster diving.  
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.861 
If an employee is suspected of stealing computer files, that individual should be assigned a 
computer with a honey pot of bogus technical information. If the information shows up in 
the public sector, security will know who is leaking the information. 
 
 



:


hacker
if hacker or inform thiev penetr the comput system secur should give them
someth to munch on the idea is to place worthless highli technic sound file on
the compani system if someon sign on from an offsit locat and start to download
on of these file secur is notifi and an investig begin
the same tactic appli to pc sensit data should be place on disk and lock in a safe
when not in us bogu file contain misinform can be left on the hard drive for
pry ey if a secur manag realli want spi to take the bait she can add password
protect to the system to protect the bogu file the fact that the file ar protect help
convinc potenti thiev that thei contain valuabl inform the same idea work for a
comput sent out for repair place bogu data on the hard drive prevent servic
technician from steal and sell actual compani trade secret
anoth twist on the same theme is to place document and comput auxiliari item
contain bogu data in the trash auxiliari item includ old disk and cd old magnet
tape us comput paper and other media thi techniqu is an excel method for
manag inform thiev who like to go dumpster dive
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1861
if an employe is suspect of steal comput file that individu should be assign a
comput with a honei pot of bogu technic inform if the inform show up in
the public sector secur will know who is leak the inform
