2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Investigating an Information Theft Case


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Investigating an Information Theft Case 
Most corporate espionage cases begin with the discovery of the offense. Something is 
missing, or information is out in the public sector. The critical first step is finding out how 
the sensitive information was compromised. K nowing how the data went out the door often 
reveals who stole the secret. For example, if a trapped list becomes compromised, the 
organization will know the list has been compromised because it receives a mailing. From 
the mailing envelope and its contents, the organization will be able to determine who bought 
the list. By checking the company’s internal records, it will be possible to determine who had 
access to the list within the company. So simply by knowing how the leak occurred and that 
someone bought the list, two avenues of inquiry are already established. The company that 
mailed the list should be contacted, and an internal investigation of people who had an 
opportunity to compromise the list should be commenced.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.877 
The first step in any corporate espionage investigation is to determine the means of the 
compromise. Investigators should attempt to rule out accidental and procedural causes first. 
In response to a compromise, the security investigator or auditor will need to do a survey to 
see if inadequate measures are the causative factor. Once the company’s negligence is ruled 
out, the investigation can focus on potential suspects.  
 
Most investigations should begin with the pe rsons closest to the sensitive information and 
then work outwards. For example, if a marketing list were stolen, it would make the most 
sense to first look for suspects among the group that manages the list. Background 
investigations on these employees should be run. Check to see if any of those employees 
have risk factors that would make them likely recruits for corporate spies. Risk factors 
include recent financial or lifestyle changes that appear out of the ordinary. Red flags that 
particularly stand out are employees who suddenly seem to spend a lot more money or work 
a lot of extra hours that do not seem particularly necessary, given the employee’s job. 
 
If the members of the closest circle pass muster, the investigation moves outward to 
consider other employees, vendors, customers, and visitors. For example, a security officer 
might examine visitor logs to see who has visited the marketing group recently. General 
service personnel like the cleaning crew, the copier or computer repairperson, or a delivery 
person who has regular access to the area should also be considered suspects. It is a good 
idea to look for records or observations of suspicious activity, such as people coming in at 
unusual hours, being in places not necessary for their work, pumping employees for 
information, or accessing computer files.  
 
If the investigation fails to develop any leads on employees, vendors, or visitors, then look to 
deception techniques. Re-interview employees in the affected areas to find out if they 
received any suspicious telephone calls, e-mails, or redirecting mail processes at or near the 
time of the loss. Also, be sure to ask employees if anyone has approached them for 
information at trade shows or in social situations. 
 
If deception does not appear to have been the avenue of attack, the next consideration 
should be physical penetration of the site. Review surveillance videotapes of recent traffic in 
and out of the affected area for intruders pretending to be employees. Again, interviewing 
employees may uncover memories of persons who appeared suspicious.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.878                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Obviously, an investigator would also check internal records for any incidents of criminal 
activity onsite at or near the time of the loss. Such activity could include a burglary or theft 
that appeared unrelated to information security at the time. It could be a trespassing charge 
or disorderly conduct on company property. Do not overlook intelligence or incident 
reports of security personnel on activities such as people trying to get into the trash 
dumpster and loitering about the parking lot. Conducting a security survey at this stage is 
also a good idea. It will help the investigator detect weaknesses in the organization’s physical 
security and may help point out how an intruder could have entered the site. 
 
After exhausting all other options, consider the possibility of surveillance against the site. If 
sensitive details are going out the door, electronic eavesdropping, Van Eck monitoring, or 
computer system penetrations could be to blame. The response to electronic eavesdropping 
should be a physical inspection of the affected areas and perhaps the engagement of a TSCM 
sweep as outlined later in this section. At the same time, research all records regarding work 
orders or vendor access to the affected areas. This documentation may help identify who 
planted the devices.  
 
 



:


investig an inform theft case
most corpor espionag case begin with the discoveri of the offens someth is
miss or inform is out in the public sector the critic first step is find out how
the sensit inform wa compromis k now how the data went out the door often
reveal who stole the secret for exampl if a trap list becom compromis the
organ will know the list ha been compromis becaus it receiv a mail from
the mail envelop and it content the organ will be abl to determin who bought
the list by check the compani intern record it will be possibl to determin who had
access to the list within the compani so simpli by know how the leak occur and that
someon bought the list two avenu of inquiri ar alreadi establish the compani that
mail the list should be contact and an intern investig of peopl who had an
opportun to compromis the list should be commenc
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1877
the first step in ani corpor espionag investig is to determin the mean of the
compromis investig should attempt to rule out accident and procedur caus first
in respons to a compromis the secur investig or auditor will need to do a survei to
see if inadequ measur ar the caus factor onc the compani neglig is rule
out the investig can focu on potenti suspect
most investig should begin with the pe rson closest to the sensit inform and
then work outward for exampl if a market list were stolen it would make the most
sens to first look for suspect among the group that manag the list background
investig on these employe should be run check to see if ani of those employe
have risk factor that would make them like recruit for corpor spi risk factor
includ recent financi or lifestyl chang that appear out of the ordinari red flag that
particularli stand out ar employe who suddenli seem to spend a lot more monei or work
a lot of extra hour that do not seem particularli necessari given the employe job
if the member of the closest circl pass muster the investig move outward to
consid other employe vendor custom and visitor for exampl a secur offic
might examin visitor log to see who ha visit the market group recent gener
servic personnel like the clean crew the copier or comput repairperson or a deliveri
person who ha regular access to the area should also be consid suspect it is a good
idea to look for record or observ of suspici activ such as peopl come in at
unusu hour be in place not necessari for their work pump employe for
inform or access comput file
if the investig fail to develop ani lead on employe vendor or visitor then look to
decept techniqu reinterview employe in the affect area to find out if thei
receiv ani suspici telephon call email or redirect mail process at or near the
time of the loss also be sure to ask employe if anyon ha approach them for
inform at trade show or in social situat
if decept doe not appear to have been the avenu of attack the next consider
should be physic penetr of the site review surveil videotap of recent traffic in
and out of the affect area for intrud pretend to be employe again interview
employe mai uncov memori of person who appear suspici
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1878 2011 fraud examin manual
obvious an investig would also check intern record for ani incid of crimin
activ onsit at or near the time of the loss such activ could includ a burglari or theft
that appear unrel to inform secur at the time it could be a trespass charg
or disorderli conduct on compani properti do not overlook intellig or incid
report of secur personnel on activ such as peopl try to get into the trash
dumpster and loiter about the park lot conduct a secur survei at thi stage is
also a good idea it will help the investig detect weak in the organ physic
secur and mai help point out how an intrud could have enter the site
after exhaust all other option consid the possibl of surveil against the site if
sensit detail ar go out the door electron eavesdrop van eck monitor or
comput system penetr could be to blame the respons to electron eavesdrop
should be a physic inspect of the affect area and perhap the engag of a tscm
sweep as outlin later in thi section at the same time research all record regard work
order or vendor access to the affect area thi document mai help identifi who
plant the devic
