2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI)/Corporate Telephone Exchanges


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Corporate Telephone Exchanges 
Private branch exchanges (PBXs) are located in a company’s tel ephone closet where wires, 
mounted neatly and predictably upon row after row, lead to corporate executives’ offices and 
other areas of interest to competitors. These rooms should be, but seldom are, locked and 
physically secured. People with tool belts go in and out with little notice from anyone. 
Keeping the eavesdropper out is easier than trying to detect his handiwork.  
 
EXAMPLE 
In one case, a surveillance team found that an executive’s phone line had been tampered 
with. They installed a motion detector in the telephone closet. The alarm sent report-only 
signals to an alarm central station. After two weeks, the central station’s records revealed a 
pattern of early morning visits to the closet  on Mondays and Thursdays. Surveillance was 
set up and the eavesdropper was caught. 
 
Another good idea is to have an escort for anyone entering the area. The identity of the 
worker should also be verified. 
 
Computer-driven PBXs or switches present numerous opportunities for eavesdropping. 
Using an on-site or off-site control terminal, the information thief can hide invisible wiretaps 
among millions of software instruction codes. The hidden codes, for example, could cause a 
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and terminate into a hidden tape 
recorder. 
 
An appropriately trained investigator should regularly print out the user configuration 
instructions. Paying particular attention to those extensions that are likely to be of interest to 
eavesdroppers, the investigator can look for modified instruction codes.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.884                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


corpor telephon exchang
privat branch exchang pbx ar locat in a compani tel ephon closet where wire
mount neatli and predict upon row after row lead to corpor execut offic and
other area of interest to competitor these room should be but seldom ar lock and
physic secur peopl with tool belt go in and out with littl notic from anyon
keep the eavesdropp out is easier than try to detect hi handiwork
exampl
in on case a surveil team found that an execut phone line had been tamper
with thei instal a motion detector in the telephon closet the alarm sent reportonli
signal to an alarm central station after two week the central station record reveal a
pattern of earli morn visit to the closet on mondai and thursdai surveil wa
set up and the eavesdropp wa caught
anoth good idea is to have an escort for anyon enter the area the ident of the
worker should also be verifi
computerdriven pbx or switch present numer opportun for eavesdrop
us an onsit or offsit control termin the inform thief can hide invis wiretap
among million of softwar instruct code the hidden code for exampl could caus a
second phone line to connect to a target phone line and termin into a hidden tape
record
an appropri train investig should regularli print out the user configur
instruct pai particular attent to those extens that ar like to be of interest to
eavesdropp the investig can look for modifi instruct code
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1884 2011 fraud examin manual
