2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Effective Note-Taking


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Effective Note-Taking 
Note-taking is a demanding and necessary fraud examination skill; good reports are based on 
good notes. Once the notes have helped the examiner prepare a memorandum of interview, 
they have fulfilled their essential purpose. However, some jurisdictions require that notes 
pertaining to criminal matters be retained for evidence. 
 
The most common types of note taking include manual, stenographic, and electronic. 
Manual note-taking is the most usual method. Its main advantage is that no extra people 
need to be present during the interview. However, manual note-taking can be obtrusive and 
distracting during questioning. 
 
A stenographer might be present during the interview to take notes (rather than a verbatim 
transcript). This allows the interviewer to concentrate on the questioning. A potential 
disadvantage of this method is that the respondent might be inhibited by the presence of 
another individual. 
 
Electronic note-taking commonly entails tape recording an interview, then summarizing the 
recording to reflect the most pertinent information. Its main advantages are increased 
accuracy and information-gathering efficiency. It can be especially helpful in complicated 
interview situations, or in situations where terminology is defined or explained.  
 
Electronic note-taking has the disadvantage of requiring a duplication of effort. In some 
instances, an electronic recording device can be inhibiting. In a limited number of situations 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.905 
it might be illegal without the respondent’s consent. See the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual for more information. 
 
 



:


effect notetak
notetak is a demand and necessari fraud examin skill good report ar base on
good note onc the note have help the examin prepar a memorandum of interview
thei have fulfil their essenti purpos howev some jurisdict requir that note
pertain to crimin matter be retain for evid
the most common type of note take includ manual stenograph and electron
manual notetak is the most usual method it main advantag is that no extra peopl
need to be present dure the interview howev manual notetak can be obtrus and
distract dure question
a stenograph might be present dure the interview to take note rather than a verbatim
transcript thi allow the interview to concentr on the question a potenti
disadvantag of thi method is that the respond might be inhibit by the presenc of
anoth individu
electron notetak commonli entail tape record an interview then summar the
record to reflect the most pertin inform it main advantag ar increas
accuraci and informationgath effici it can be especi help in complic
interview situat or in situat where terminolog is defin or explain
electron notetak ha the disadvantag of requir a duplic of effort in some
instanc an electron record devic can be inhibit in a limit number of situat
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3905
it might be illeg without the respond consent see the law section of the fraud
examin manual for more inform
