2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Analyzing the Reader/Attorneys


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Attorneys 
Reports will be read by attorneys from within the organization and without. In reports 
prepared at the request of counsel, mark each page “privileged and confidential.” This 
procedure will document any privilege claim (discussed below). Understand, however, that 
marking the report in such a manner will not necessarily ensure that the privilege will be 
sustained. 
 
Attorneys for the defendant(s) will likely gain access to a report during the discovery phase 
of civil litigation. These lawyers will scrutinize the report for errors, omissions, and/or 
misstatements. You should be certain that the report is accurate down to the most seemingly 
unimportant detail. Defense attorneys will cite the smallest error as evidence that the entire 
document is inaccurate. In criminal cases, prosecuting attorneys and law enforcement 
personnel will also review a report. These individuals will look primarily at evidence and 
witness statements that will best sustain a criminal prosecution. 
 



:


attornei
report will be read by attornei from within the organ and without in report
prepar at the request of counsel mark each page privileg and confidenti thi
procedur will document ani privileg claim discuss below understand howev that
mark the report in such a manner will not necessarili ensur that the privileg will be
sustain
attornei for the defend will like gain access to a report dure the discoveri phase
of civil litig these lawyer will scrutin the report for error omiss andor
misstat you should be certain that the report is accur down to the most seemingli
unimport detail defens attornei will cite the smallest error as evid that the entir
document is inaccur in crimin case prosecut attornei and law enforc
personnel will also review a report these individu will look primarili at evid and
wit statement that will best sustain a crimin prosecut
