2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Analyzing the Reader/Presenting the Case to Prosecutors


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Presenting the Case to Prosecutors 
If fraud is discovered, the examiner will also have to discuss with the relevant individuals and 
determine whether the case should be presented to criminal prosecutors.  
 
Of course, no matter what the results of a company’s fraud examination, the company does 
not prosecute — or decide to prosecute — an offending individual. Instead, prosecution — in 
the sense of charging and trying a person on criminal charges — is exclusively the right of the 
state, and attorneys for state or federal government have the discretion to decide whether to 
bring criminal charges against a person and with what crimes he will be charged.  
 
But even though these decisions belong to the government, there are several reasons an 
entity may wish to prosecute an offending employee. For example, prosecution punishes the 
employee and, hopefully, will deter other employees from engaging in similar offenses. In 
addition, criminal charges brought against an employee may help a company defray the 
losses suffered as a result of fraud. Similarly, prosecution may aid the victim company in 
pursuing civil remedies against an offending employee. 
 
Even if an entity establishes a solid case against an employee or contractor, the prosecutor 
might be reluctant to bring criminal charges in a fraud case because of the time and expense 
involved, lack of expertise, the high standard of proof required for conviction, and so on. 
 
Nevertheless, fraud examiners can do a number of things to help their chances of 
prosecution. For instance, before presenting a case to the police or prosecutor, it will benefit 
the fraud examiner to develop a relationship with either or both, or at least to know enough 
about both agencies to know whom to call so that any submission of a case is not lost in the 
administrative netherworld of bureaucracies. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.908   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
And generally, attorneys will take cases that enhance their reputations and statistics. 
Government lawyers have high conviction rate in the cases they prosecute, and this is due in 
part to their reluctance to take cases they might lose. Therefore, a prosecutor will be more 
likely to pursue the case if the evidence is strong or if the case involves significant losses, 
deals with notorious or important defendants (e.g., prior criminal records), and does not 
appear to be unduly complex. 
 
Furthermore, prosecutors, like all professionals, are very busy, handling enormous caseloads 
in clogged dockets around the country, and many prosecutors have a limited background in 
financial matters. Regardless, here are some basic rules for dealing with prosecutors.  
 
First, examiners should never show up at a prosecutor’s office with a pile of cancelled checks 
and innuendo about what they think happened in a case. In general, a prosecutor is legally 
and ethically bound to proceed only on what he can prove beyond a reasonable doubt in 
court through competent evidence. (Note that the laws of evidence are different from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction—you should have a fundamental familiarity with these laws prior 
to presentation of any case to the prosecutor.) 
 
Second, examiners should not approach the prosecutor unless their investigation is 
complete. Have all of the relevant documents been gathered? Has the examiner made all of 
his observations? Has the examiner interviewed all necessary witnesses? 
 
Third, to get the full attention of the prosecuting attorney, the examiner must have his case 
ready to present in an organized and clear package. A fraud examiner may have done a great 
job in developing evidence, but that information must be communicated effectively to the 
government, which must be convinced that the case is worth the time and effort necessary 
to pursue legal action against the wrongdoer. 
 
Moreover, examiners can enhance their chances of prosecution if: 
• They have obtained a legal and binding admission of guilt. 
• They obtain a commitment from the outset for the lawyer to “consider prosecution” 
based on the evidence obtained. 
• They avail themselves to the lawyer for aid in the prosecution. 
• They follow-up regularly with the lawyer to ensure their case does not fall through the 
cracks. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.909 
And if possible, present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who has: 
• A successful track record in white-collar cases 
• A reputation as a hard worker 
 
 



:


present the case to prosecutor
if fraud is discov the examin will also have to discuss with the relev individu and
determin whether the case should be present to crimin prosecutor
of cours no matter what the result of a compani fraud examin the compani doe
not prosecut or decid to prosecut an offend individu instead prosecut in
the sens of charg and try a person on crimin charg is exclus the right of the
state and attornei for state or feder govern have the discret to decid whether to
bring crimin charg against a person and with what crime he will be charg
but even though these decis belong to the govern there ar sever reason an
entiti mai wish to prosecut an offend employe for exampl prosecut punish the
employe and hopefulli will deter other employe from engag in similar offens in
addit crimin charg brought against an employe mai help a compani defrai the
loss suffer as a result of fraud similarli prosecut mai aid the victim compani in
pursu civil remedi against an offend employe
even if an entiti establish a solid case against an employe or contractor the prosecutor
might be reluct to bring crimin charg in a fraud case becaus of the time and expens
involv lack of expertis the high standard of proof requir for convict and so on
nevertheless fraud examin can do a number of thing to help their chanc of
prosecut for instanc befor present a case to the polic or prosecutor it will benefit
the fraud examin to develop a relationship with either or both or at least to know enough
about both agenc to know whom to call so that ani submiss of a case is not lost in the
administr netherworld of bureaucraci
report standard investig
3908 2011 fraud examin manual
and gener attornei will take case that enhanc their reput and statist
govern lawyer have high convict rate in the case thei prosecut and thi is due in
part to their reluct to take case thei might lose therefor a prosecutor will be more
like to pursu the case if the evid is strong or if the case involv signific loss
deal with notori or import defend eg prior crimin record and doe not
appear to be unduli complex
furthermor prosecutor like all profession ar veri busi handl enorm caseload
in clog docket around the countri and mani prosecutor have a limit background in
financi matter regardless here ar some basic rule for deal with prosecutor
first examin should never show up at a prosecutor offic with a pile of cancel check
and innuendo about what thei think happen in a case in gener a prosecutor is legal
and ethic bound to proce onli on what he can prove beyond a reason doubt in
court through compet evid note that the law of evid ar differ from
jurisdict to jurisdictiony should have a fundament familiar with these law prior
to present of ani case to the prosecutor
second examin should not approach the prosecutor unless their investig is
complet have all of the relev document been gather ha the examin made all of
hi observ ha the examin interview all necessari wit
third to get the full attent of the prosecut attornei the examin must have hi case
readi to present in an organ and clear packag a fraud examin mai have done a great
job in develop evid but that inform must be commun effect to the
govern which must be convinc that the case is worth the time and effort necessari
to pursu legal action against the wrongdoer
moreov examin can enhanc their chanc of prosecut if
thei have obtain a legal and bind admiss of guilt
thei obtain a commit from the outset for the lawyer to consid prosecut
base on the evid obtain
thei avail themselv to the lawyer for aid in the prosecut
thei followup regularli with the lawyer to ensur their case doe not fall through the
crack
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3909
and if possibl present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who ha
a success track record in whitecollar case
a reput as a hard worker
