2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Visual Aids/Link-Network Diagrams


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Link-Network Diagrams 
Link networks show the relationships between people, organizations, and events. Different 
symbols are used to represent different entities: a square can symbolize an organization; a 
circle, a person; a triangle, an event; and so fo rth. It doesn’t matter which symbols you use as 
long as you use them consistently. Confirmed connections between entities can be 
represented by a solid line or enclosure within another symbol. Speculative or presumed 
relationships can be indicated by broken lines. To achieve its intended purpose, a graphic 
should always be clear. Don’t cross lines if possible.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Smith is vice-president of the ABC Corporat ion and president of the DEF Corporation, a 
subsidiary of ABC. Jones is general partner in  the First and Second Partnerships. Brown and 
Green are limited partners in the First Partne rship. Brown and Black are limited partners in 
the Second Partnership. Black is also a general partner in the Third Partnership. Smith also 
might have an interest in  the First Partnership. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.923 



:


linknetwork diagram
link network show the relationship between peopl organ and event differ
symbol ar us to repres differ entiti a squar can symbol an organ a
circl a person a triangl an event and so fo rth it doesnt matter which symbol you us as
long as you us them consist confirm connect between entiti can be
repres by a solid line or enclosur within anoth symbol specul or presum
relationship can be indic by broken line to achiev it intend purpos a graphic
should alwai be clear dont cross line if possibl
exampl
smith is vicepresid of the abc corporat ion and presid of the def corpor a
subsidiari of abc jone is gener partner in the first and second partnership brown and
green ar limit partner in the first partn rship brown and black ar limit partner in
the second partnership black is also a gener partner in the third partnership smith also
might have an interest in the first partnership
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3923
