2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ENGAGEMENT CONTRACTS OPINION LETTERS/Fraud Policy Review Opinion


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Fraud Policy Review Opinion 
 
 
[Date] 
 
 
Mr./Ms. [                    ] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Detection and Deterrence Review] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                   ]: 
 
Pursuant to your request, XYZ & Associates (XYZ) has performed a review of the policies 
and procedures of the ABC Company (the Company) for the purpose of reviewing their 
adequacy to detect and deter fraud. 
 
This review does not provide assurance that fraud does not or will not exist. Having 
completed the following steps, we have determined that in order to strengthen its fraud 
detection potential, the Company’s procedures need improvement in the areas outlined 
herein. 
 
Part of the purpose of an internal control system is to assure that the assets of the Company 
are properly safeguarded from employee or outsider misapplication. In addition, an adequate 
system of internal control contains detection methods so that if misappropriation takes 
place, the irregularity will come to the attention of those who can remedy the situation and 
take suitable action against it. An adequate system of internal control is not designed to 
prevent or detect a collusive fraud scheme among employees and/or management. Our 
review included some the following procedures: 
 
[In this section, brie fly describe the main procedures follo wed. For example]: 
 
a. We read the Company’s policy and procedural manual. 
b. Through interviews with personnel key to the operations at the Company, we 
determined if the existing policies and procedures were being followed. 
c. We charted the current flow of business transactions as they are being recorded at the 
Company. 
d. We compared the flow of transaction approval and recording with the policies and 
procedural manuals. 
Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters Investigation Appendix 
3.1304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Page 2 
 
The following discrepancies were noted in ABC’s system of internal control: 
 
[In this section, explain briefly the differences between the established internal 
controls and those procedures followed by the company’s personnel.] 
 
Based on our review, we recommend the following changes be instituted in the Company’s 
internal accounting controls system: 
 
[In this section, make your recommendations.] 
 
In addition to the above recommendations, we suggest the Company consider the following 
proactive approach to fraud deterrence: 
 
[In this section suggest proactive steps such as: ] 
 
 An internal audit structure reporting to the board of directors 
 Active inquiry of fraudulent transactions 
 Hotlines 
 Annual conflict of interest statements  
 Annual review of employee expense accounts, etc. 
 
This report is not intended for general circulation or publication, nor is it to be reproduced 
for any purpose other than that outlined above. XYZ does not assume any responsibility or 
liability for losses occasioned to one or others as a result of the circulation, publication, 
reproduction, or use of our report contrary to the conditions of this paragraph. The validity 
of our report is predicated on the extent to which full, honest, and complete disclosure was 
made by all parties. 
 
We will be in contact soon to discuss the details of this report. In the meantime, please feel 
free to call with questions. 
 
Sincerely yours,  
Investigation Appendix  Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1305 



:


fraud polici review opinion
date
mrm
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud detect and deterr review
dear mrm
pursuant to your request xyz associ xyz ha perform a review of the polici
and procedur of the abc compani the compani for the purpos of review their
adequaci to detect and deter fraud
thi review doe not provid assur that fraud doe not or will not exist have
complet the follow step we have determin that in order to strengthen it fraud
detect potenti the compani procedur need improv in the area outlin
herein
part of the purpos of an intern control system is to assur that the asset of the compani
ar properli safeguard from employe or outsid misappl in addit an adequ
system of intern control contain detect method so that if misappropri take
place the irregular will come to the attent of those who can remedi the situat and
take suitabl action against it an adequ system of intern control is not design to
prevent or detect a collus fraud scheme among employe andor manag our
review includ some the follow procedur
in thi section brie fly describ the main procedur follo wed for exampl
a we read the compani polici and procedur manual
b through interview with personnel kei to the oper at the compani we
determin if the exist polici and procedur were be follow
c we chart the current flow of busi transact as thei ar be record at the
compani
d we compar the flow of transact approv and record with the polici and
procedur manual
engag contractsopinion letter investig appendix
31304 2011 fraud examin manual
page 2
the follow discrep were note in abc system of intern control
in thi section explain briefli the differ between the establish intern
control and those procedur follow by the compani personnel
base on our review we recommend the follow chang be institut in the compani
intern account control system
in thi section make your recommend
in addit to the abov recommend we suggest the compani consid the follow
proactiv approach to fraud deterr
in thi section suggest proactiv step such as
an intern audit structur report to the board of director
activ inquiri of fraudul transact
hotlin
annual conflict of interest statement
annual review of employe expens account etc
thi report is not intend for gener circul or public nor is it to be reproduc
for ani purpos other than that outlin abov xyz doe not assum ani respons or
liabil for loss occas to on or other as a result of the circul public
reproduct or us of our report contrari to the condit of thi paragraph the valid
of our report is predic on the extent to which full honest and complet disclosur wa
made by all parti
we will be in contact soon to discuss the detail of thi report in the meantim pleas feel
free to call with question
sincer your
investig appendix engag contractsopinion letter
2011 fraud examin manual 31305
