2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Why Financial Statement Fraud Is Committed


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


Why Financial Statement Fraud Is Committed 
There are a number of reasons why individuals commit financial statement fraud. Most 
commonly, financial statement fraud is used to make a company’s earnings look better on 
paper. It sometimes covers up the embezzlement of company funds. Financial fraud occurs 
through a variety of methods, such as valuation judgments and fine points of timing the 
recording of transactions. These more subtle types of fraud are often dismissed as either 
mistakes or errors in judgment and estimation. Some of the more common reasons why 
people commit financial statement fraud include: 
• To encourage investment through the sale of stock. 
• To demonstrate increased earnings per share or partnership profits interest, thus 
allowing increased dividend/distribution payouts. 
• To cover inability to generate cash flow.  
• To dispel negative market perceptions. 
• To obtain financing, or to obtain more favorable terms on existing financing. 
• To receive higher purchase prices for acquisitions. 
• To demonstrate compliance with financing covenants. 
• To meet company goals and objectives. 
• To receive performance-related bonuses. 
 
This limited list of reasons shows that the motivation for financial fraud does not always 
involve direct personal financial gain. Sometimes, the cause of fraudulent financial reporting 
is the combination of situational pressures on either the company or the manager and the 
opportunity to commit the fraud without the perception of being detected. These pressures 
are known as “red flags.” That is to say, if red flags (situational pressures and opportunity) 
are present, then the risk of financial reporting fraud increases significantly. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Financial Statement Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.305 
Examples of situational pressures include: 
• Sudden decreases in revenue or market share experienced by a company or an industry. 
• Unrealistic budget pressures, particularly for short-term results (the pressures become 
even greater with arbitrarily established budgets that are without reference to current 
conditions).  
• Financial pressures resulting from bonus plans that depend on short-term economic 
performance (these pressures are particularly acute if the bonus is a significant 
component of the individual’s total compensation). 
 
Opportunities to commit fraud most often arise gradually. Generally, these opportunities can 
stem from a lack of adequate oversight functions within the company. The existence of an 
oversight function does not, in and of itself, guarantee the detection of fraudulent acts; the 
oversight function must also respond effectively. The perception of detection, not internal 
control per se, is arguably the strongest deterrent to fraud.  
 
Some of the more obvious opportunities for the existence of fraud are: 
• Absence of a board of directors or audit committee. 
• Improper oversight or other neglectful behavior by the board of directors or audit 
committee. 
• Weak or nonexistent internal controls, including an ineffective internal audit staff and a 
lack of external audits. 
• Unusual or complex transactions (an understanding of the transactions, their component 
parts, and their impact on financial statements is paramount to fraud deterrence).  
• Financial estimates that require significant subjective judgment by management. 
 
 



:


why financi statement fraud is commit
there ar a number of reason why individu commit financi statement fraud most
commonli financi statement fraud is us to make a compani earn look better on
paper it sometim cover up the embezzl of compani fund financi fraud occur
through a varieti of method such as valuat judgment and fine point of time the
record of transact these more subtl type of fraud ar often dismiss as either
mistak or error in judgment and estim some of the more common reason why
peopl commit financi statement fraud includ
to encourag invest through the sale of stock
to demonstr increas earn per share or partnership profit interest thu
allow increas dividenddistribut payout
to cover inabl to gener cash flow
to dispel neg market percept
to obtain financ or to obtain more favor term on exist financ
to receiv higher purchas price for acquisit
to demonstr complianc with financ coven
to meet compani goal and object
to receiv performancerel bonus
thi limit list of reason show that the motiv for financi fraud doe not alwai
involv direct person financi gain sometim the caus of fraudul financi report
is the combin of situat pressur on either the compani or the manag and the
opportun to commit the fraud without the percept of be detect these pressur
ar known as red flag that is to sai if red flag situat pressur and opportun
ar present then the risk of financi report fraud increas significantli
financi transact financi statement fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1305
exampl of situat pressur includ
sudden decreas in revenu or market share experienc by a compani or an industri
unrealist budget pressur particularli for shortterm result the pressur becom
even greater with arbitrarili establish budget that ar without refer to current
condit
financi pressur result from bonu plan that depend on shortterm econom
perform these pressur ar particularli acut if the bonu is a signific
compon of the individu total compens
opportun to commit fraud most often aris gradual gener these opportun can
stem from a lack of adequ oversight function within the compani the exist of an
oversight function doe not in and of itself guarante the detect of fraudul act the
oversight function must also respond effect the percept of detect not intern
control per se is arguabl the strongest deterr to fraud
some of the more obviou opportun for the exist of fraud ar
absenc of a board of director or audit committe
improp oversight or other neglect behavior by the board of director or audit
committe
weak or nonexist intern control includ an ineffect intern audit staff and a
lack of extern audit
unusu or complex transact an understand of the transact their compon
part and their impact on financi statement is paramount to fraud deterr
financi estim that requir signific subject judgment by manag
