2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL STATEMENT FRAUD/Financial Statement Fraud Schemes/What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Asset Valuation?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Statement Fraud


:


What Red Flags Are Associated with Improper Asset Valuation? 
• Recurring negative cash flows from operations or an inability to generate positive cash 
flows from operations while reporting earnings and earnings growth. 
• Significant declines in customer demand and increasing business failures in either the 
industry or the overall economy. 
• Assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve 
subjective judgments or uncertainties that are difficult to support. 
• Non-financial management’s excessive part icipation in or preoccupation with the 
selection of accounting principles or the determination of significant estimates.  
• Unusual increase in gross margin or margin in excess of industry peers. 
• Unusual growth in the number of days’ sales in receivables ratio. 
• Unusual growth in the number of days’ purchases in inventory ratio. 
• Reduction in allowances for bad debts, excess inventory, obsolete inventory, etc., 
especially if relevant ratios are out of line with those of industry peers. 
• Unusual change in the relationship between fixed assets and depreciation. 
• Adding to assets while competitors are reducing capital tied up in assets. 
 
Financial Statement Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.322                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


what red flag ar associ with improp asset valuat
recur neg cash flow from oper or an inabl to gener posit cash
flow from oper while report earn and earn growth
signific declin in custom demand and increas busi failur in either the
industri or the overal economi
asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv
subject judgment or uncertainti that ar difficult to support
nonfinanci manag excess part icip in or preoccup with the
select of account principl or the determin of signific estim
unusu increas in gross margin or margin in excess of industri peer
unusu growth in the number of dai sale in receiv ratio
unusu growth in the number of dai purchas in inventori ratio
reduct in allow for bad debt excess inventori obsolet inventori etc
especi if relev ratio ar out of line with those of industri peer
unusu chang in the relationship between fix asset and depreci
ad to asset while competitor ar reduc capit ti up in asset
financi statement fraud financi transact
1322 2011 fraud examin manual
