2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Responsibility for Fraud Prevention/Control Environment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Control Environment 
The control environment  sets the moral tone of an organization, influencing the control 
consciousness of the organization and providing a foundation for all other control 
components. This component takes into account whether managers and employees within 
the organization exhibit integrity in their activities.  
 
COSO envisions that upper management will be  responsible for the control environment of 
organizations. Employees look to management for guidance in most business affairs, and 
organizational ethics are no different. It is important for upper management to operate in an 
ethical manner, and it is equally important for employees to view management in a positive 
light. Managers must set an appropriate moral to ne for the operations of an organization.  
 
In addition to merely setting a good example, however, COSO suggests that upper 
management take direct control of an organization’s efforts at internal controls. This idea 
should be regularly reinforced within the organization. There are several actions that 
management can take to establish the proper control environment for an organization. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.705  
These include:  
• The establishment of a code of ethics for the organization. The code should be disseminated to all 
employees and every new employee should be required to read and sign it. The code 
should also be disseminated to contractors who do work on behalf of the organization. 
Under certain circumstances, companies may face liability due to the actions of 
independent contractors. It is therefore very important to explain the organization’s 
standards to any outside party with whom the organization conducts business.  
• Careful screening of job applicants. One of the easiest ways to establish a strong moral tone 
for an organization is to hire morally sound employees. Too often, the hiring process is 
conducted in a slipshod manner. Where permitted by law, organizations should conduct 
thorough background checks on all new employees, especially managers and those 
employees handling sensitive financial functions. In addition, it is important to conduct 
thorough interviews with applicants to ensure that they have adequate skills to perform 
the duties that will be required of them.  
• Proper assignment of authority and responsibility. In addition to hiring qualified, ethical 
employees, it is important to put these people in situations where they are able to thrive 
without resorting to unethical conduct. Organizations should provide employees with 
well-defined job descriptions and performance goals. Performance goals should be 
routinely reviewed to ensure that they do not set unrealistic standards. Training should 
be provided on a consistent basis to ensure that employees maintain the skills to perform 
effectively. Regular training on ethics will also help employees identify potential trouble 
spots and avoid getting caught in compromising situations. Finally, management should 
quickly determine where deficiencies in an employee’s conduct exist and work with the 
employee to fix the problem.  
• Effective disciplinary measures. No control environment will be effective unless there is 
consistent discipline for ethical violations. Consistent discipline requires a well-defined 
set of sanctions for violations, and strict adherence to the prescribed disciplinary 
measures. If one employee is punished for an act and another employee is not punished 
for a similar act, the moral force of the company’s ethics policy will be diminished. The 
levels of discipline must be sufficient to deter violations. It may also be advisable to 
reward ethical conduct. This will reinforce the importance of organizational ethics in the 
eyes of employees.  
 



:


control environ
the control environ set the moral tone of an organ influenc the control
conscious of the organ and provid a foundat for all other control
compon thi compon take into account whether manag and employe within
the organ exhibit integr in their activ
coso envis that upper manag will be respons for the control environ of
organ employe look to manag for guidanc in most busi affair and
organiz ethic ar no differ it is import for upper manag to oper in an
ethic manner and it is equal import for employe to view manag in a posit
light manag must set an appropri moral to ne for the oper of an organ
in addit to mere set a good exampl howev coso suggest that upper
manag take direct control of an organ effort at intern control thi idea
should be regularli reinforc within the organ there ar sever action that
manag can take to establish the proper control environ for an organ
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4705
these includ
the establish of a code of ethic for the organ the code should be dissemin to all
employe and everi new employe should be requir to read and sign it the code
should also be dissemin to contractor who do work on behalf of the organ
under certain circumst compani mai face liabil due to the action of
independ contractor it is therefor veri import to explain the organ
standard to ani outsid parti with whom the organ conduct busi
care screen of job applic on of the easiest wai to establish a strong moral tone
for an organ is to hire moral sound employe too often the hire process is
conduct in a slipshod manner where permit by law organ should conduct
thorough background check on all new employe especi manag and those
employe handl sensit financi function in addit it is import to conduct
thorough interview with applic to ensur that thei have adequ skill to perform
the duti that will be requir of them
proper assign of author and respons in addit to hire qualifi ethic
employe it is import to put these peopl in situat where thei ar abl to thrive
without resort to uneth conduct organ should provid employe with
welldefin job descript and perform goal perform goal should be
routin review to ensur that thei do not set unrealist standard train should
be provid on a consist basi to ensur that employe maintain the skill to perform
effect regular train on ethic will also help employe identifi potenti troubl
spot and avoid get caught in compromis situat final manag should
quickli determin where defici in an employe conduct exist and work with the
employe to fix the problem
effect disciplinari measur no control environ will be effect unless there is
consist disciplin for ethic violat consist disciplin requir a welldefin
set of sanction for violat and strict adher to the prescrib disciplinari
measur if on employe is punish for an act and anoth employe is not punish
for a similar act the moral forc of the compani ethic polici will be diminish the
level of disciplin must be suffici to deter violat it mai also be advis to
reward ethic conduct thi will reinforc the import of organiz ethic in the
ey of employe
