2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Responsibility for Fraud Prevention/Risk Assessment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Risk Assessment  
Risk assessment  involves an entity’s identification and assessment of the risks involved in 
achieving organizational objectives. This component involves tailoring ethics policies or 
Fraud Prevention Programs Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
compliance programs to the nature of the organization’s business. According to COSO, risk 
assessment is a three-step process: 
• Set objectives for the organization. Management should establish mission statements or similar 
expressions of organizational objectives. These statements must take into account the 
nature of the organization’s business, the industry in which the organization operates, 
and the political and economic environment in which it operates, as well as the 
organization’s resources and goals. In stating its goals, the organization should establish 
measurable criteria so that progress can be measured. Goals should not be so lofty that 
they cannot be reached considering the organization’s resources and environment. In 
setting objectives, input from all levels of management should be sought. Once an 
appropriate statement of objectives is established, it should be communicated to  
all employees.  
• Analyze potential risks of violations. COSO divides risks into two categories: external risks 
and internal risks. External risks include things like increased competition, changes in 
technology, shifting economic conditions, and new legislation. Internal risks are factors 
such as personnel changes, availability of funds for organizational projects, new 
operating systems, and the development of new products.  
• Develop a strategy to manage risks. Organizations should identify and be prepared to react to 
any external or internal risk. This means developing controls that are tailored to the 
inherent risks of the organization’s business and establishing set policies for dealing  
with violations.  
 



:


risk assess
risk assess involv an entiti identif and assess of the risk involv in
achiev organiz object thi compon involv tailor ethic polici or
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4706 2011 fraud examin manual
complianc program to the natur of the organ busi accord to coso risk
assess is a threestep process
set object for the organ manag should establish mission statement or similar
express of organiz object these statement must take into account the
natur of the organ busi the industri in which the organ oper
and the polit and econom environ in which it oper as well as the
organ resourc and goal in state it goal the organ should establish
measur criteria so that progress can be measur goal should not be so lofti that
thei cannot be reach consid the organ resourc and environ in
set object input from all level of manag should be sought onc an
appropri statement of object is establish it should be commun to
all employe
analyz potenti risk of violat coso divid risk into two categori extern risk
and intern risk extern risk includ thing like increas competit chang in
technolog shift econom condit and new legisl intern risk ar factor
such as personnel chang avail of fund for organiz project new
oper system and the develop of new product
develop a strategi to manag risk organ should identifi and be prepar to react to
ani extern or intern risk thi mean develop control that ar tailor to the
inher risk of the organ busi and establish set polici for deal
with violat
