2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Procedures to Prevent Fraud/Management Climate


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Management Climate 
If the style of management is conducted by objective measures rather than by subjective 
measures, then employees will not manufacture or imagine the performance criteria 
employed by management. In addition, it is obvious that management that is perceived to be 
dishonest will beget dishonest employees. 
 
EXAMPLE  
Jim, a loan officer for a mortgage bank, received his primary compensation based on the total 
volume of loans (measured by dollars) he was able to put on the books each year. Dollar 
volume was the only criteria for the compensation. In addition, the loan officers were all in 
competition with each other for the high volume  award of the year. The pressure to earn more 
than his fellow officers became more acute each year. 
 
When the mortgage company was closed down, most of Jim’s loans were in default. Because 
Jim perceived that his job performance was based solely on volume, no attention was paid to 
the quality of the loans. In fact, it was discov ered that on several occasions, Jim coerced the 
loan processing department to close loans, even though all the requirements had not been 
completed. 
 
EXAMPLE  
A large fast food chain lost $200,000 when one of its buyers got involved with a supplier. 
The company decided to notify all of its vendors of the company’s policy prohibiting the giving 
of anything of value to influence a purchasing decision. Two vendors called in with complaints 
about competitors, resulting in the discovery of two other frauds totaling an additional 
$360,000. 
 



:


manag climat
if the style of manag is conduct by object measur rather than by subject
measur then employe will not manufactur or imagin the perform criteria
emploi by manag in addit it is obviou that manag that is perceiv to be
dishonest will beget dishonest employe
exampl
jim a loan offic for a mortgag bank receiv hi primari compens base on the total
volum of loan measur by dollar he wa abl to put on the book each year dollar
volum wa the onli criteria for the compens in addit the loan offic were all in
competit with each other for the high volum award of the year the pressur to earn more
than hi fellow offic becam more acut each year
when the mortgag compani wa close down most of jim loan were in default becaus
jim perceiv that hi job perform wa base sole on volum no attent wa paid to
the qualiti of the loan in fact it wa discov er that on sever occas jim coerc the
loan process depart to close loan even though all the requir had not been
complet
exampl
a larg fast food chain lost 200000 when on of it buyer got involv with a supplier
the compani decid to notifi all of it vendor of the compani polici prohibit the give
of anyth of valu to influenc a purchas decis two vendor call in with complaint
about competitor result in the discoveri of two other fraud total an addit
360000
