2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Fraud Prevention Policy/Selling Fraud Prevention to Management


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Selling Fraud Prevention to Management 
Management might not support fraud prevention for one of several reasons: 
• Management’s concerns are often on areas other than audit or fraud. They don’t typically 
understand that fraud is hidden and that losses go undetected. They also might refuse to 
believe that their own workers are capable of stealing even when studies suggest a third 
of us might do such a thing. 
• Because of the hidden nature of fraud, managers are understandably reluctant to believe 
in the presence of fraud. And if one employee is caught committing fraud, management 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.729  
might too often claim that this is an isolated problem and not worth additional 
consideration. Management must understand that when instances of fraud are detected, 
it is too late to do anything about them.  
• Management sometimes unreasonably feels that  bringing up the issue will alienate the 
work force. This problem can be addressed by reminding management that the rank-and-file workers 
appreciate working for an honest company. It is also helpful to point 
out to management what the losses might be. 
 
Many auditors complain that management does not adequately support fraud prevention 
efforts. That is largely for two reasons: either they believe that fraud is not really a problem 
in the company or they believe that even addressing the subject has a negative impact. In 
either scenario, it is difficult for the auditor to break down management’s built-in resistance 
to dealing with fraud prevention. Some of the following suggestions might be helpful in 
“selling” fraud prevention to management.  
 



:


sell fraud prevent to manag
manag might not support fraud prevent for on of sever reason
manag concern ar often on area other than audit or fraud thei dont typic
understand that fraud is hidden and that loss go undetect thei also might refus to
believ that their own worker ar capabl of steal even when studi suggest a third
of us might do such a thing
becaus of the hidden natur of fraud manag ar understand reluct to believ
in the presenc of fraud and if on employe is caught commit fraud manag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4729
might too often claim that thi is an isol problem and not worth addit
consider manag must understand that when instanc of fraud ar detect
it is too late to do anyth about them
manag sometim unreason feel that bring up the issu will alien the
work forc thi problem can be address by remind manag that the rankandfil worker
appreci work for an honest compani it is also help to point
out to manag what the loss might be
mani auditor complain that manag doe not adequ support fraud prevent
effort that is larg for two reason either thei believ that fraud is not realli a problem
in the compani or thei believ that even address the subject ha a neg impact in
either scenario it is difficult for the auditor to break down manag builtin resist
to deal with fraud prevent some of the follow suggest might be help in
sell fraud prevent to manag
