2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/IV.  DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


IV.  DELEGATIONS OF AUTHORITY  
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that substantial discretionary authority shall not be 
delegated to individuals who the Corporation knows, or through the exercise of 
diligence could know, have a propensity to engage in illegal activities. In particular, 
substantial discretionary authority shall be delegated only to individuals who the 
Corporation is confident will not engage in illegal activities. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, review the delegations of 
discretionary authority within the Corporation, the checks, balances, and controls 
applicable to such delegated discretionary authority, and the performance and 
background of the persons exercising such authority to determine whether any 
current delegation violates corporate policy. In conducting such review, the 
Compliance Coordinator may rely on information in personnel files, on the results of 
corporate audits, on the opinions of managers and supervisors, on consultation with 
the Corporation’s independent outside auditors, on surveys of persons outside the 
Corporation who deal with the Corporation, and on other available information. At 
least annually, the Compliance Coordinator shall report in writing to the Chief 
Executive Officer the results of that review. The Compliance Coordinator shall 
recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator and the Personnel Department shall from time to time 
jointly review the Corporation’s procedures (including background and reference 
checks) and criteria for filling (whether by new hiring or by promotion from within) 
positions involving substantial discretion, so as to ensure that only persons of 
integrity are selected for such positions. The Compliance Coordinator and the 
Personnel Department shall recommend to Management any needed actions. 
 



:


iv deleg of author
a it is the polici of compani that substanti discretionari author shall not be
deleg to individu who the corpor know or through the exercis of
dilig could know have a propens to engag in illeg activ in particular
substanti discretionari author shall be deleg onli to individu who the
corpor is confid will not engag in illeg activ
b the complianc coordin shall at least annual review the deleg of
discretionari author within the corpor the check balanc and control
applic to such deleg discretionari author and the perform and
background of the person exercis such author to determin whether ani
current deleg violat corpor polici in conduct such review the
complianc coordin mai reli on inform in personnel file on the result of
corpor audit on the opinion of manag and supervisor on consult with
the corpor independ outsid auditor on survei of person outsid the
corpor who deal with the corpor and on other avail inform at
least annual the complianc coordin shall report in write to the chief
execut offic the result of that review the complianc coordin shall
recommend to manag ani need action
c the complianc coordin and the personnel depart shall from time to time
jointli review the corpor procedur includ background and refer
check and criteria for fill whether by new hire or by promot from within
posit involv substanti discret so as to ensur that onli person of
integr ar select for such posit the complianc coordin and the
personnel depart shall recommend to manag ani need action
