2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Code of Business Ethics and Conduct/Introduction


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Introduction 
This section reaffirms the importance of high standards of business conduct. Adherence to 
this Code of Business Ethics and Conduct by all employees is the only sure way we can 
merit the confidence and support of the public. 
 
Many of us came from a culture that provided answers or direction for almost every 
situation possible. Managing our business was not so complex; the dilemmas we faced 
were — for the most part — simple, making our choices relatively easy. We would probably all 
agree that managing in today’s environment is not so simple. 
 
This code has been prepared as a working guide and not as a technical legal document. Thus, 
emphasis is on brevity and readability rather than providing an all-inclusive answer to 
specific questions. For example, the term employee  is used in its broadest sense and refers to 
every officer and employee of the company and its subsidiaries. The word “law” refers to 
laws, regulations, orders, etc. 
 
In observance of this code, as in other business conduct, there is no substitute for common 
sense. Each employee should apply this code with common sense and the attitude of seeking 
full compliance with the letter and spirit of the rules presented. 
 
It is incumbent upon you, as an employee of the company, to perform satisfactorily and to 
follow our policies and comply with our rules as they are issued or modified from time  
to time. 
 
These policies and rules are necessary to effectively manage the business and meet the ever-
 changing needs of the marketplace. Good performance and compliance with business rules 
lead to success. Both are crucial since our ability to provide you with career opportunities 
depends totally upon our success in the marketplace. Nonetheless, changes in our economy, 
our markets, and our technology are inevitable. Indeed, career opportunities will vary 
between the individual companies. For these reasons, we cannot contract or even imply that 
your employment will continue for any particular period of time. While you might terminate 
your employment at any time, with or without cause, we reserve that same right. This 
relationship might not be modified, except in writing signed by an appropriate representative 
of the company. 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.754   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
This Code of Business Ethics and Conduct is a general guide to acceptable and appropriate 
behavior at the company, and you are expected to comply with its contents; however, it does 
not contain all of the detailed information you will need during the course of your 
employment. Nothing contained in this code or in other communications creates or implies 
an employment contract or term of employment. We are committed to reviewing our 
policies continually. Thus, this code might be modified or revised from time to time. 
 
You should familiarize yourself with this code so that you might readily distinguish any 
proposal or act that would constitute a violation. Each employee is responsible for his 
actions. Violations can result in disciplinary action, including dismissal and criminal 
prosecution. There will be no reprisal against an employee who in good faith reported a 
violation or suspected violation. 
 
The absence of a specific guideline practice or instruction covering a particular situation  
does not relieve an employee from exercising the highest ethical standards applicable to  
the circumstances. 
 
If any employee has doubts regarding a questionable situation that might arise, that 
employee should immediately consult his supervisor or a higher-level manager. 
 



:


introduct
thi section reaffirm the import of high standard of busi conduct adher to
thi code of busi ethic and conduct by all employe is the onli sure wai we can
merit the confid and support of the public
mani of us came from a cultur that provid answer or direct for almost everi
situat possibl manag our busi wa not so complex the dilemma we face
were for the most part simpl make our choic rel easi we would probabl all
agre that manag in todai environ is not so simpl
thi code ha been prepar as a work guid and not as a technic legal document thu
emphasi is on breviti and readabl rather than provid an allinclus answer to
specif question for exampl the term employe is us in it broadest sens and refer to
everi offic and employe of the compani and it subsidiari the word law refer to
law regul order etc
in observ of thi code as in other busi conduct there is no substitut for common
sens each employe should appli thi code with common sens and the attitud of seek
full complianc with the letter and spirit of the rule present
it is incumb upon you as an employe of the compani to perform satisfactorili and to
follow our polici and compli with our rule as thei ar issu or modifi from time
to time
these polici and rule ar necessari to effect manag the busi and meet the ever
chang need of the marketplac good perform and complianc with busi rule
lead to success both ar crucial sinc our abil to provid you with career opportun
depend total upon our success in the marketplac nonetheless chang in our economi
our market and our technolog ar inevit inde career opportun will vari
between the individu compani for these reason we cannot contract or even impli that
your employ will continu for ani particular period of time while you might termin
your employ at ani time with or without caus we reserv that same right thi
relationship might not be modifi except in write sign by an appropri repres
of the compani
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4754 2011 fraud examin manual
thi code of busi ethic and conduct is a gener guid to accept and appropri
behavior at the compani and you ar expect to compli with it content howev it doe
not contain all of the detail inform you will need dure the cours of your
employ noth contain in thi code or in other commun creat or impli
an employ contract or term of employ we ar commit to review our
polici continu thu thi code might be modifi or revis from time to time
you should familiar yourself with thi code so that you might readili distinguish ani
propos or act that would constitut a violat each employe is respons for hi
action violat can result in disciplinari action includ dismiss and crimin
prosecut there will be no repris against an employe who in good faith report a
violat or suspect violat
the absenc of a specif guidelin practic or instruct cover a particular situat
doe not reliev an employe from exercis the highest ethic standard applic to
the circumst
if ani employe ha doubt regard a question situat that might aris that
employe should immedi consult hi supervisor or a higherlevel manag
