2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD 
 
Over the last four decades, computer systems have improved dramatically. They are more 
powerful, smaller, cheaper, and more user-friendly. As they have advanced, computers have 
proliferated in our society, our businesses, and our personal lives. Most modern businesses 
and governments depend on their computer systems to support their operations, from 
personnel to financial management and everything in between.  
 
Initially, computers used to support business and government processes were backed up 
with hard copies. If the computer went down, the hard copies were used and everyone went 
back to manual forms and processes. However, in today’s environment, most businesses and 
government processes could not survive without the computer — there are few hard  
copy backups.  
 
Computers have become the mainstay of business and government processes. Without 
today’s computers, entire businesses and government operations would almost cease to 
function. Imagine trying to manually process tax returns, use robotics, compile budgets, 
build automobiles, build weapons systems, check law enforcement files, or get cash from 
automated teller machines (ATM) without the aid of computers.  
 
The proliferation of cheap, powerful, user-friendly computers has enabled more and more 
people to use them and more importantly, rely on them as part of their normal way of life. 
As businesses, government agencies, and individuals come to increasingly depend on 
computers as a necessary tool, so do the criminals. They use computers to support their 
illegal operations. Computer crimes and frauds are increasing and will no doubt continue to 
increase as more computers are networked internationally, thus giving global access to 
computer criminals. 
 
The following results were derived from the 2009 Computer Crime and Security Survey, 
conducted by the Computer Security Institute: 
• Respondents reported big jumps in incidence of password sniffing, financial fraud, and 
malware infection. 
• One-third of respondents’ organizations were fraudulently represented as the sender of a 
phishing message. 
• Average losses due to security incidents were down from $289,000 per respondent to 
$234,244 per respondent. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1802                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Twenty-five percent of respondents felt that over 60 percent of their financial losses 
were due to non-malicious actions by insiders. 
• Respondents were satisfied, though not overjoyed, with all security technologies. 
• Most respondents felt their investment in end-user security awareness training was 
inadequate, but most felt their investments in other components of their security 
program were adequate. 
• When asked what actions were taken following a security incident, 22 percent of 
respondents stated that they notified individuals whose personal information was 
breached and 17 percent stated that they provided new security services to users or 
customers. 
• When asked what security solutions ranked highest on their wishlists, many respondents 
named tools that would improve their visibility, such as better log management, security 
information and event management, security data visualization, and security dashboards. 
• Respondents generally said that regulatory compliance efforts have had a positive effect 
on their organization's security programs. 
  
The CSI figures also included data about the occurrence of threats to cyber-security in 2009 
compared to those in 2008: 
• 64.3 percent of respondents experienced malware infection, compared to 2008’s 50 
percent. 
• 29.2 percent experienced denial-of-service attacks, compared to 2008’s 21 percent. 
• 17.3 percent experienced password sniffing, compared to 9 percent in 2008. 
• 13.5 percent experienced Web site defacement, compared to 2008’s 6 percent. 
• 7.6 percent experienced instant messaging abuse, down from 21 percent in 2008.  
 
Unlike traditional fraud cases, computer fraud cases can be difficult for the fraud examiner 
because they: 
• Lack a traditional paper audit trail. 
• Require an understanding of the technology used to commit the crime. 
• Usually require an understanding of the technology of the victim computer. 
• Very often require the use of one or more specialists to assist the fraud examiner, even 
when the fraud examiner is computer literate. 
 
Before exploring the specifics of high tech crime however, let us clarify the computer’s 
function in the commission of these schemes. Computer crime is most often thought of as a 
crime that is committed with the aid of a computer. Yet the computer has various roles in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1803 
high tech crime, both as tool and target. According to Donn B. Parker, a cybercrime 
authority and author, the function of the computer in crime is fourfold. In Fighting  
Computer Crime, Mr. Parker describes how the computer serves as an object, a subject, a tool, 
and a symbol. 
• The computer as an object — Computers and network systems are themselves often objects or 
targets of crime, subject to physical sabotage, theft, or destruction of information. 
• The computer as a subject — According to Parker, computers are the direct subjects of crime 
“when they are the environment in which technologists commit crimes.” This category 
includes virus attacks.  
• The computer as a tool — Computers are used as the means to commit crime, whether 
embezzlement, theft of proprietary information, or hacking. 
• The computer as a symbol — Computers lend fraudsters an air of credibility and are often 
used to deceive victims into investment and pyramid schemes. 
 
In these four capacities, common computer crimes include: 
• Data alteration 
• Unauthorized access and entry to systems and information 
• Reading another’s e-mail without permission 
• Data destruction and sabotage 
• Internet consumer fraud 
• Sale of proprietary data 
• Desktop counterfeiting 
• Data extortion 
• Disclosure of confidential data 
• Identity theft 
• Electronic letter bombing 
• Software piracy 
• PBX fraud 
• Voicemail fraud 
• Cellular telephone fraud 
• Stolen long-distance calling cards 
 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1804                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Computer Fraud Versus Computer Crime 
A line that should be drawn is that between computer fraud and computer crime, terms that 
are commonly used interchangeably with little distinction made between the two. Some 
substantial differences exist between them, however, as we shall see. 
 
Computer Fraud 
A general definition of computer fraud is: 
 
Any defalcation or embezzlement accomplished by tampering with computer programs, data 
files, operations, equipment, or media, and resulting in losses sustained by the organization 
whose computer system was manipulated. 
 
The distinguishing characteristic of computer fraud is that access occurs with the intent to 
execute a fraudulent scheme. Computer fraud statutes have established two very important 
principles:  
• First, the statutes contain definitions of computer-related terms. These statutes allow the 
prosecutor to sidestep having to explain to the jury technical “computer speak” and its 
cumbersome fit with common law terminology. 
• Second, the statutes create an offense based on proof of access with a particular intent. 
Success in carrying away property (money) does not have to be proven. Tracing the flow 
of proceeds is likely to be difficult without paper records and access might be the only 
provable event. 
 
Most states have defined computer fraud as an attempt crime. By viewing the computer as a 
protected asset, the protection is independent of the actual loss to the owner as a result of 
the intrusion. 
 
Computer Crime 
Computer crime  differs from computer fraud in two major ways. Employees who, as a part of 
their normal duties, have access to the computers are deemed to have authorized access and 
thus do not come under the law against access. Manipulation (alteration) or destruction of 
data (including computer software) is independent of fraudulent or other schemes. Such 
action does not fit into the normal vandalism crimes because the data is intangible. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1805 
Computer-Assisted Crime 
It is sometimes said that most computer fraud is not “computer crime” but involves the use 
of computers instead of other means to break the law. In some cases these traditionally 
illegal acts can yield more loot by recourse to the high speed of the computer. These are in 
reality computer-assisted crimes and the existing criminal statutes can be appropriately 
applied to them. However, where detection and proof problems are exacerbated by the 
involvement of electronic media, computer fraud laws are invaluable for  
effective prosecution. 
 
Information Crime 
In some cases, the computer is an active weapon. These kinds of cases are termed information 
crimes; the crime would not be possible without computer technology. Examples of 
information crimes include the theft of computer time, software, and data. 
 
 
Computer Hacking 
As the number of computers and computer users increases, so does the number and types of 
hackers. A 2007 study by the University of Ma ryland’s A. James Clark School of Engineering 
reported that hackers attack computers with Internet connections every 39 seconds, or about 
2,244 times a day. In addition, a 2007 research report conducted by WhiteHat, a website 
security services provider, showed that as many as 90 percent of all websites remain 
vulnerable to some form of computer hack.  
 
Although the term hacker was originally used to describe a computer enthusiast, the term has 
now evolved to mean someone seeking unauthorized access to computer systems and the 
information contained therein. It includes organizations’ employees, members of hacker 
gangs, and hackers for profit. Motives vary according to the targeted system, information 
desired, and the perpetrator. While hacking was once commonly thought of as a precocious 
teenager’s hobby, it has changed dramatically in the last twenty years to encompass a large 
and diverse group. 
 
Definition 
Hacking is basically breaking into computers and telecommunications systems by learning 
the vulnerabilities of various hardware and software, and using a computer to systematically 
“guess” the user’s system identification and password.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1806                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hackers use various “rogue” software applications to penetrate a system, or sometimes they 
enlist the help of the user surreptitiously by installing a program that is downloaded via an e-
 mail or by visiting a website. These programs operate in the background of the infected 
computer and can disable security settings and capture information that is sent back to  
the hacker. 
 
But, the most direct way of gaining access to a computer is to use someone else’s password 
or generate (without authorization) a password of one’s own. Passwords are designed to 
keep computers safe. If you don’t know the password, the machine will not run. However, 
most users choose passwords that, while not easy to crack, follow certain patterns. People 
usually pick something familiar and easy as their password. A deep-sea fisherman uses 
“marlin”; the man’s secretary, who received a mug about “soaring with the eagles and 
working with turkeys” from her boss last Christmas, uses “turkey” as her password. There 
are lists circulated among hackers of the most likely passwords.  
 
If the hacker knows or can learn something about his target, his job is even easier. That 
fisherman, for example, probably has a huge marlin mounted on his wall. It’s located directly 
in the man’s line of sight as he logs on each morning; it’s a good guess this guy will have 
“marlin” or “reel” or something else fishy in his password. A simple lesson here: real-word 
passwords, even in variation, are not secure. The safest passwords combine letters, numbers, 
and other special characters, such as punctuation. 
 
Social Engineering 
Another means of gaining access to a system involves simple deception. The hacker uses his 
verbal skills to deceive victims into disclosing information they ought not to divulge, or 
convinces victims to commit acts that facilitate the hacker’s scheme. Often posing as an 
employee or someone hired by the organization, the hacker easily deceives real employees 
into revealing information. In order to research his scheme, he may avail himself of 
documents in the company dumpster, such as internal telephone directories and 
correspondence. 
 
The hacker may assume a number of different guises to accomplish this deception. He may 
pose as a new or temporary worker and ask information systems employees for a password 
so that he can begin work. He may also pose as someone in a position of authority and 
intimidate employees into revealing confidential information.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1807 
Sometimes overt deception is not required. In large corporations, hackers can take advantage 
of the anonymity among employees. By donning office attire, they can blend into the crowd 
and thus peruse the premises, perhaps gaining a password written down at an employee’s 
desk in the process. 
 
Hacker Computer Manipulation  
Trojan Horse 
A Trojan horse is the covert placement of instructions in a program that causes the 
computer to perform unauthorized functions but usually still allows the program to perform 
its intended purpose. This method is one of the most commonly used techniques in 
computer-based frauds and sabotage. 
 
Spyware 
Spyware is a type of malware (short for malicious software) that is installed on computers and 
collects little bits of information at a time about users without their knowledge. The presence 
of spyware is typically hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect. The most 
common use of spyware for fraud is the theft of personal information (including financial 
information such as credit card numbers), 
 
Trap Doors 
When developing large programs, programmers insert instructions for additional code and 
intermediate output capabilities. The design of computer operating systems attempts to 
prevent this from happening. Therefore, programmers insert instructions that allow them to 
circumvent these controls. Hackers take advantage of these trap doors. 
 
Salami Techniques 
Salami techniques involve the execution of unauthorized programs used to steal small 
amounts of assets from a large number of sources without noticeably reducing the whole. 
For example, in a banking system, the amount of interest to be credited to an account is 
typically rounded off. A fraudster might set up the system so that instead of rounding off the 
number, that fraction of it is credited to a special account owned by the perpetrator. 
 
Logic Bombs 
A logic bomb is a computer program executed at a specific time period or when a specific 
event occurs. For example, a programmer can write a program to instruct the computer to 
delete all personnel and payroll files if his name were ever removed from the file. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1808                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data Diddling 
Data diddling is the changing of data before or during entry into the computer system. 
Examples include forging or counterfeiting documents used for data entry and exchanging 
valid disks and tapes with modified replacements. 
 
Scavenging and Dumpster Diving 
Scavenging involves obtaining information left around a computer system, in the computer 
room trash cans, and so on. Dumpster diving refers to gleaning sensitive information from 
an organization’s trash receptacles and dumpsters.  
 
Data Leakage 
Data leakage is the removing of information by smuggling it out as part of a printed 
document, encoding the information to look like something different, and removing it from 
the facility. 
 
Piggybacking/Impersonation 
Piggybacking and impersonation are frequently used to gain access to restricted areas. 
Examples include following someone in through a door with a badge reader, electronically 
using another’s user identification and password to gain computer access, and tapping into 
the terminal link of a user to cause the computer to believe that both terminals are the same 
person. 
 
Simulation and Modeling 
Simulation and modeling is a computer manipulation technique using the computer as a tool 
or instrument to plan or control a criminal act. 
 
Wire Tapping 
Wire tapping into a computer’s communications  links is another technique used by hackers. 
This method enables perpetrators to read the information being transmitted between 
computers, or between computers and terminals. 
 
Network Weaving 
This technique, more commonly known as looping, involves using numerous networks in an 
attempt to avoid detection. For example, a hacker might dial into Company A’s PBX system 
to obtain an outside line that can be used to dial into Company B’s network. If Company B 
can track the origin of the hacker’s call, it w ill lead them to Company A, not to the hacker. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1809 
The above is a relatively simple example. Hackers have been known to “loop” through 15 or 
20 different networks before arriving at their final destination. Network weaving can make it 
extremely difficult for an investigator or fraud examiner to trace the point of origin for a 
specific telephone call or data transmission. 
 
Altering the Way a System Generates Passwords 
Not all passwords are supplied by users. Some are generated by a computer system’s 
“randomizer” function. For example, many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) give first-time 
users a randomly generated password (and sometimes a random user name as well), which 
gets the person online. Then the user changes the log-in information to their  
own preference.  
 
By learning how a certain system’s randomizer works, the hacker can imitate the generation 
of valid passwords, or alter how the system operates. For example, with some tinkering, the 
randomizer can be set to give every new user the same, seemingly random, password: 
EVBDCL8. But that won’t work for long. It’s better to have the machine make a password 
built off some information about the user that is publicly available. Using a relatively simple 
set of algorithms, a hacker can convert a user name, such as “halbfish” into an obscure 
looking string like “rueavzhr” (letters are read as numbers by computers speaking ASCII 
code, so the algorithms are using sine values to convert the ASCII values into a new set  
of numbers).  
 
Here’s a good example of how manipulating a randomizer works. Dennis Ritchie, who 
helped develop UNIX technology, reported how a hacker attacked one company’s system. 
Computer officials at the company had their system generate passwords, each eight 
characters long, mixing letters and digits. In a brute force attack, it should have taken 112 
years to crack the nearly 3 trillion possibilities. However, the randomizer on the company 
system could only take 32,768 seeds for passwords. The hacker used his own machine to 
generate and test each of those combinations, using, according to Ritchie, “a total of only 
about one minute of machine time.” In less time than the average commercial break runs on 
television, the hacker breached a seemingly impenetrable system. 
 
Buffer Overflow Exploits 
Buffer overflow exploits are one of the largest problems in computer security today. In all 
application programs, there are buffers that hold data. These buffers have a fixed size. If an 
attacker sends too much data into one of these buffers, the buffer overflows. The server 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1810                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
then executes the data that “overflowed” as a program. This program may do any number of 
things, like sending passwords to Russia, altering system files, or installing 
backdoors, depending on what data the attacker sent to the buffer. 
 
Privilege Escalation Exploits 
Privilege escalation exploits grant administrator or root-level access to users who previously 
did not have such access. For example, an account exists on all Windows NT and 2000 
servers called “Guest.” This account, by default, has no password. Anyone can log-in to the 
server using this “Guest” account and then use a common privilege escalation exploit called 
“GetAdmin” to gain administrator-level access to the system. Many other privilege escalation 
exploits exist, such as HackDLL and others. These exploits are very useful, since they allow 
anyone who has any level of access to a system to easily elevate their privilege level and 
perform any activities they desire. 
 
Backdoors 
When attackers obtain root-level access to a server (using a buffer overflow exploit or a 
privilege escalation exploit, for example) they will want to do two things: 
• Install a backdoor  
• Cover their tracks  
 
Backdoors allow attackers to remotely access a system again in the future. For example, the 
attacker may have used a particular security hole to get root-level access to a computer. 
However, over time, that particular security hole may be closed, preventing the attacker from 
accessing the system again. In order to avoid being shut out in the future, attackers install 
backdoors. These backdoors take different forms, but all allow an attacker to access the 
server again without going through the standard log-in procedures and without having to 
repeat the attack that gave them access in the first place. Many worms install backdoors as a 
part of their malicious payload. Code Red II, for example, installed a backdoor that provided 
access to the C and D drives of the compromised Web server from anywhere on the 
Internet. Other common backdoor programs are Netbus and BackOrifice, which allow 
attackers to remotely control a compromised server. Once a backdoor is established, the 
hacker retreats and covers his tracks to keep the initial attack unnoticed.  
 
HTTP Exploits 
HTTP exploits involve using the Web server application to perform malicious activities. 
These attacks are very common and are growing in popularity because firewalls typically 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1811 
block most traffic from the Internet to keep it away from corporate servers. However, 
HTTP traffic, used for Web browsing, is almost always allowed to pass through firewalls 
unhindered. Thus, attackers have a direct line to the Web server. If they can coerce the Web 
server into performing malicious activities, they can access resources that would otherwise 
be unavailable. 
 
Anti-Hacker Measures 
Because hackers require dial-in capability to gain access, the best prevention strategy is to 
eliminate as many dial-in ports as possible. Unfortunately, the trend today is to install more, 
not fewer, dial-in capabilities because telecommuting and customer connectivity are driving 
the demand for more dial-in capability. The following are some preventive measures that can 
be implemented: 
• Welcome screens are usually proudly displayed at sign-in with a message such as: 
 
Welcome to the XYZ Corporation Computer network. 
 
To discourage unauthorized use, such a screen might be replaced with one that informs 
the user that he is about to access a proprietary network. Additionally, the screen should 
warn that unauthorized access is prohibited and will be prosecuted under the law. The 
screen should not identify either the organization or the network. 
• Security policies should be established and disseminated throughout the organization. 
These policies should include training for all employees, customers (who will appreciate 
the additional security), and others who have a need to access the network. 
• Call-back modems should be used wherever practical. These modems will answer an 
incoming call and require the sender to enter a password. Once the caller has identified 
himself, the modem will terminate the connection, and dial a previously established 
phone number. When the prearranged number is called, the sender must again perform 
the sign-on procedure.  
• Security software packages should be secured to the highest level possible. Most major 
software companies today have to release updates and patches to their software every so 
often. Check your software vendor’s websites on a regular basis for new security patches 
or use the new automated patching features that some companies offer. 
• Passwords should be used in accordance with sound security practices. For example: 
? Passwords should be changed periodically (every 90 days is suggested). 
? Passwords should be of sufficient length to deter guessing (a minimum of 8 
characters is suggested). 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1812                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Passwords of transferred or terminated employees should be changed immediately. 
• Most purchased software comes with a ve ndor supplied password that is used for 
installation and then deleted. All packages should be audited to ensure that these default 
passwords (which are widely known) have been changed. 
• Encryption should be considered for sensitive data files, password files, and sensitive 
computer programs. 
• Communications software should terminate any connection (whether dial-in or direct 
connect) after: 
? A reasonable number of unsuccessful attempts to enter a valid password (usually no 
more than three). 
? A terminal (direct connect or dial-in) has been connected for a period of time with 
no activity. This is called “timing-out.”  
The terminated connection will require redialing into the network and/or re-performing 
the log-in and verification process. Some companies require the data security officer to 
issue a new password before the user can log-in again. 
• Hacker publications and communications should be reviewed to learn the current jargon 
and hacker “handles,” which are the names that hackers use for their online personas. 
Hackers have used the Internet quite efficiently to communicate with each other, while 
producing a significant amount of hacking documentation and programs. Almost any 
hacker website will contain a large number of text files that explain “how to hack,” or 
how various systems operate. Many of these files will also explain the standard 
vulnerabilities of the systems, and the best methods to penetrate their security. 
 
Hacker Detection Measures 
An adequate hacker detection program contains three primary components: 
• Almost all communication systems maintain a log file that records all successful and 
unsuccessful system access attempts. These also allow for the printing of reports 
containing sign-on and sign-off activity. These reports should be printed out regularly and 
reviewed by the data security officer. Where possible, special reports should be printed 
on the number of unsuccessful access attempts. These attempts at logging into the 
system should be followed up by data security to determine their cause.  
• The data security function should have sufficient resources and staff to administer 
passwords, maintain the security software, review system activity reports, and follow up 
on all potential security violations.  
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1813 
• Finally, periodic reviews of telecommunications security should be performed by 
consultants and/or internal or external auditors, if the latter have the necessary 
experience and qualifications. 
 
Hacking Insurance 
During the past three years, a handful of cyber-insurers have begun offering coverage 
specifically designed to address new forms of information age exposure. These e-commerce 
risks can include theft, damage or disclosure of data, denial of service attacks, theft of 
intellectual property, unauthorized access, loss of revenue, infringement of copyright and 
trademark, and the consequent damage to business reputation. These types of e-commerce 
risks are covered by what is known as first-party coverage. 
 
Third-party coverage covers the company if it is being sued for problems caused by 
technology product errors and omissions; the pilfering, public release, or misuse of sensitive 
or confidential information; the unwitting spread of disruptive viruses; hacker tampering to 
the information and advertising carried on websites; e-mail-facilitated sexual harassment; and 
privacy infringement. 
 
Many businesses believe that their traditional business coverage will suffice, or failing that, 
their Web host or ISP will cover damages caused by any of the above. In both cases, they are 
probably wrong. Unless your business insurance policy or Internet service level agreement 
specifically includes language addressing e-commerce liability, any damages will probably not 
be covered. 
 
 
Electronic Mail  
E-mail has revolutionized the ability of businesses to interact swiftly and, indeed, global 
business has embraced the e-mail system wholeheartedly. Few organizations do not provide 
some form of internal electronic communications. Due to the speed at which businesses can 
now interact and conduct business, as well as the relative cost advantage e-mail enjoys over 
other means of communication, the number of new e-mail users will no doubt continue  
to boom.  
 
E-mail does, however, also give organizations a degree of vulnerability. Aside from 
employees using it for personal correspondence, e-mail can be used to sabotage and crash 
organizations’ networks. Forwarding viruses or even simple virus hoaxes are often enough to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1814                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
overload a system. Using e-mail through such systems as the Internet endows senders with 
identity protection—the original sender of the message can be disguised or obscured. 
Therefore, because a sender’s identity can be concealed, sensitive business information can 
be safely forwarded to an unauthorized address. 
 
Consider: 
• Company employees now possess the ability to quickly disclose sensitive company 
materials to outside parties, increasing the opportunity for corporate espionage. 
• Companies that employ a company-wide e-mail system can now be held responsible for 
any unethical or illegal activities conducted by employees on the e-mail system. 
• Companies must now be concerned with the repercussions of the actions of any 
disgruntled or rash employees. The speed with which an e-mail can be “fired off” creates 
the opportunity for ill-advised communications. 
• Once an e-mail message has left a company’s system, it may travel through any number 
of “foreign” e-mail systems before reaching its destination. An e-mail transmission can 
quite easily be intercepted or compromised without the use of encryption software.  
• Without a security-enhanced e-mail system, the receiver of an e-mail message has little 
assurance that the e-mail is authentic. E-mail addresses can be easily “spoofed” or cloned 
by a knowledgeable user. 
 
E-mail can be delivered almost instantaneously anywhere the networks, computers, and 
software exist to handle its transmission and reception. In fact, one of the emerging security 
problems concerning e-mail is the huge volume of space required to archive old messages. In 
some organizations, people are regularly asked to cull through their old e-mail messages and 
delete those no longer needed. In addition, some organizations will delete any old e-mail 
messages left on the mail server machines after a certain amount of time (e.g., one or two 
months). 
 
E-Mail Security Concerns 
Since e-mail has become a fact of life for most organizations, it is appropriate to discuss 
some e-mail security concerns from both a user-based and an organizational perspective. 
Organizations often fail to set boundaries for employees regarding e-mail and may later face 
legal ramifications as a result.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1815 
E-Mail Ownership 
Who owns e-mail messages on an organization’s system? This is the common question, but 
it is not necessarily the right question. An e-mail message that an employee wrote himself is a 
work of authorship and as such the rules of copyright apply. In general, if the employee 
wrote the message as part of his duties for his employer (i.e., “in the scope of your 
employment”) the employer owns the copyright. If the e-mail was not part of the employee’s 
duties (something personal or related to another activity, whether permitted by the employer 
or not), then the user has copyright, but the employer, as owner of the system on which it 
was created or passed through, may have some rights to the copy on the system. If an 
employee is forwarding a message written by someone else, the issue gets even more 
complicated. For instance, does the original author have the right or the intention to 
authorize any forwarding? 
 
Organizational Liability 
As with any communications media, legal issues of the Internet are emerging at a rapid rate, 
with a lot of discussion, but are of limited consensus so far. It can be said that employers do 
have some liability for how employees use a company’s e-mail system. The issues are similar 
to an employee’s use of the company telephone, the company postage meter, the company 
vehicle, and so on.  
 
The best general advice is to exercise some caution when dealing with an e-mail system. 
Within the company, e-mail can become a vehicle for sexual harassment, for creating a 
hostile work environment, or setting up gambling pools. Outside the company, employees 
can use e-mail to operate their own businesses or to send out fabricated messages in the 
name of other employees or their employer. Some employers monitor their e-mail systems, 
which presents legal issues, such as invasion of privacy. E-mail has also been used to gather 
evidence against employers or employees. Of course, there are no more dangers and pitfalls 
of e-mail than there are of any form of communications, whether inside or outside the 
organization. The telephone and postal systems are just as capable of such problems. 
 
As with any potential liability issue, employers must set guidelines for the proper internal and 
external use of e-mail, just as they would for the proper use of the company telephone, 
stationery and postage, vehicles, and so on. For instance, the organization should have a 
policy reminding employees in writing that e-mail must not be used to send inappropriate 
and unprofessional messages, including: 
• Harassing other users of the system. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1816                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consuming unreasonable amounts of available resources. 
• Intentionally sending other users viruses. 
• Evading software licensing or copying mechanisms. 
• Crashing/disrupting system services. 
• Impersonating another user anywhere on the Internet. 
• Bypassing system security mechanisms. 
• Translating encrypted material without authorization. 
• Eavesdropping on other e-mail interactions. 
• Using the system for any personal gain either monetarily or politically unless permitted 
by the organization. 
 
A number of prominent liability law firms recommend some monitoring of e-mail, but this 
decision should not be taken lightly and not just because of employee’s privacy concerns. 
For instance, the fact that the company does try to monitor e-mail may be used against the 
company when something slips through that monitoring. 
 
Due to rapid growth of the Internet and e-mail, there is a great deal of uncertainty in the law. 
Organizations may want to seek legal counsel in establishing proper use guidelines and 
before taking disciplinary action against employees because of alleged abuses. 
 
 
Computer Viruses 
Viruses are hidden computer programs that use all the computer’s resources, thereby 
shutting down the system or slowing it down significantly. Computer viruses typically use 
the infected computer’s resources to replicate itself and spread the infection to other 
computer systems on a network or through the Internet via e-mail. Computer viruses range 
from the relatively harmless (displaying a message or greeting) to shut-downs of entire 
computer networks for extended periods. 
 
A computer virus is a program that contains instruction codes to attack software. The attack 
might erase data or display a message on the screen. The computer virus can copy itself to 
other programs. This copy ability can affect large networks. In recent years, viruses have 
disrupted large networks and caused the expenditure of millions of dollars in staff and 
machine hours to remove these viruses and restore normal operations. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1817 
Hoaxes 
A massive amount of media attention in recent years has focused on computer viruses. Many 
of the virus scares that occur, however, are hoaxes. While that is, on one hand, fortunate, 
these phony warnings cause harm of their own. They slow down transmission of 
information and have been known to cause overloads of organizational e-mail networks. 
Most of these fraudulent warnings urge recipients to “forward this to everyone you know.” 
Before forwarding a questionable warning, it is wise to consult a few of the authorities who 
track viruses. The following sites can be accessed to confirm or debunk virus notifications: 
• www.symantec.com/avcenter/hoax.html 
• www.vmyths.com 
• www.fsecure.com/virus-info/hoax/ 
• www.snopes.com 
 
Types and Terminology of Computer Viruses  
Macro Virus 
A macro is an instruction that carries out program commands automatically. Many common 
applications (e.g., word processing, spreadsheet, and slide presentation applications) make 
use of macros. Macro viruses are macros that self-replicate. If a user accesses a document 
containing a viral macro and unwittingly executes this macro virus, it can then copy itself 
into that application’s startup files. The computer is now infected — a copy of the macro 
virus resides on the machine. 
 
Any document on that machine that uses the same application can then become infected. If 
the infected computer is on a network, the infection is likely to spread rapidly to other 
machines on the network. Moreover, if a copy of an infected file is passed to anyone else 
(for example, by e-mail or CD), the virus can spread to the recipient’s computer. This 
process of infection will end only when the virus is noticed and all viral macros are 
eradicated.  
 
Macro viruses are the most common type of viruses, and are usually spread via e-mail 
messages containing infected attachments. Macro viruses can be written with very little 
specialist knowledge, and these viruses can spread to any platform on which the application 
is running. However, the main reason for their success is that documents are exchanged far 
more frequently than executables or disks, a direct result of e-mail’s popularity and Web use. 
Opening the e-mail attachment infects your ma chine; the virus overwrites certain files on 
your hard drive(s) and sends itself out to everyone in your e-mail address book. This 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1818                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
attachment will most likely come from someone you know. Consequently, the best 
protection against such viruses is to simply not open any attachment unless you are sure that 
it is virus free. If you’re unsure, ask for the sender to confirm that the attachment was 
intended for you.  
 
Boot Sector Viruses 
The boot sector is the first logical sector of a hard disk or floppy disk. Seventy-five to 90 
percent of viruses have been boot sector viruses. These viruses use system BIOS, replace the 
boot sector, and move the boot sector to another location. It then writes a copy of its own 
program code that will run every time the system is booted or when programs are being run. 
A boot sector cannot infect a computer if it is introduced after the machine is running the 
operating system. An example of a boot sector virus is Parity Boot. This virus’s payload 
displays the message “Parity Check” and fr eezes the operating system, rendering the 
computer useless. This virus message is taken from an actual error message that is displayed 
to users when a computer’s memory is faulty. As a result, a user whose computer is infected 
with the Parity Boot virus is led to believe that the machine has a memory fault rather than a 
disruptive virus infection. 
 
Parasitic Viruses 
Parasitic viruses attach themselves to programs known as executables. When a user launches 
a program that has a parasitic virus, the virus is surreptitiously launched first. To cloak its 
presence from the user, the virus then triggers the original program to open. The parasitic 
virus, because the operating system understands it to be part of the program, is given the 
same rights as the program to which the virus is attached. These rights allow the virus to 
replicate, install itself into memory, or release its payload. In the absence of antivirus 
software, only the payload might raise the normal user’s suspicions. A famous parasitic virus 
called Jerusalem has a payload of slowing down the sy stem and eventually deleting every 
program the user launches. 
 
TSRAM Viruses 
Terminate and Stay Resident (TSR) viruses usually hide in memory and cause system crashes, 
depending on their memory location. The TSR takes control of the operating system by 
passing its request to DOS each time DOS is executed. The virus Cascade B is a TSR virus 
that sometimes causes the system to crash. It also causes characters to fall down the screen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1819 
Application Software Viruses 
These types of viruses copy their virus code to a program file and modify the program so the 
virus code gets executed first. The virus does this by writing over the existing code or 
attaching itself to the program file. The more sophisticated types replicate themselves with a 
.com extension each time the user accesses an executable program file. The virus Vienna is a 
type of application virus. It increases infected files by 648 bytes and destroys the system by 
making it reboot when running certain programs. 
 
Multi-Partite Viruses  
Multi-partite viruses share some of the characteristics of boot sector viruses and file viruses, 
which increases its ability to spread. They can infect .com and .exe files, and the boot sector 
of the computer’s hard drive. 
 
On a computer booted up with an infected diskette, a typical multi-partite virus will first 
reside in memory and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive. From there the virus can 
infect a PC’s entire environment. This type of virus accounts for a large number of 
infections. 
 
The Tequila virus is a type of multi-partite virus. Tequila is a memory resident master boot 
sector (partition table) and .exe file infector. It uses a complex encryption method and 
garbling to avoid detection. When a program infected with Tequila is executed, the virus will 
modify the hard disk master boot sector, if it is not already infected. The virus also copies 
itself to the last six sectors of the system hard disk. When the workstation is later rebooted 
from the system hard disk, Tequila will become memory resident. Once Tequila is memory 
resident, it infects .exe files when they are executed.  
 
The CHKDSK command will indicate the system has 3,072 fewer bytes of memory than 
what is installed. Infected .exe programs increase in size by 2,468 bytes, though the file 
length increase cannot be seen in the disk directory listing because the virus hides it.  
Tequila activates four months after the initial date of infection. At this time, and every 
month thereafter, the virus will display a graphic and the following message: “Execute: mov 
ax, FE03 / int 21. Key to go on.”  
 
Polymorphic Viruses 
Polymorphic viruses create varied (though fully functional) copies of themselves as a way to 
avoid detection by antivirus software. Some polymorphic viruses use different encryption 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1820                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
schemes and require different decryption routines. Thus, the same virus may look 
completely different on different systems or even within different files. Other polymorphic 
viruses vary instruction sequences and use false commands in the attempt to thwart antivirus 
software. One of the most advanced polymorphic viruses uses a mutation engine and 
random-number generators to change the virus code and its decryption routine. 
Spanska.4250  is a type of polymorphic virus. This virus infects program files (files with .exe 
and .com extensions). When one of the programs is infected, the virus hides in the 
computer’s memory. Spanska.4250 remains in memory on the lookout to infect programs 
executed by users. Once Spanska.4250 carries out its infection the size of the infected 
programs will increase by 4250 bytes (the virus size). Moreover, the following message will 
be displayed: “(c) Spanska 97.” This virus uses an anti-tracing technique to make it more 
difficult to detect. In addition, it uses the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possible to 
find up to 366 different variants of this virus. 
 
Stealth Viruses 
Stealth viruses are more sophisticated viruses. They constantly change their patterns in an 
effort to blend into the system. They attempt to avoid detection by bypassing DOS interrupt 
calls when they are installed, and remove their code from the infected files before the file is 
accessed by the requesting program. 
 
The 4096 virus is a type of stealth virus. It increases the file size by 4096 bytes and decreases 
the memory by approximately 6kb. The message “FRODO LIVES” might appear in the 
middle of the screen. If the infected file is run on September 21, it causes the system  
to crash. 
 
Mutation Engine Viruses 
This modern day virus uses a special language-driven algorithm generator that enables it to 
create an infinite variety of original encryption algorithms. It avoids the checksum detection 
method, like stealth viruses, by not changing the infected file size. Each time they replicate, 
they produce a new and different code. 
 
Network Viruses 
It was just a matter of time before network-specific viruses were developed to attack the 
increased number of Local Area Networks (LANs) and other types of networks coming 
online. These viruses are generally developed to attack the file servers.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1821 
The boot sector and partition table viruses infect the boot operation of the file server. This 
virus does not spread from the workstation to the file server. However, if you are using 
NetWare it can cause the software to lose the location of its partition table on the file server 
if the file server is booted with an infected disk. 
 
Viruses that infect programs seem to be limited to infecting files on the server. However, 
because the files are continuously being accessed by workstations, this type of virus is 
difficult to contain. 
 
At least two NetWare-specific viruses have been discovered in Europe. One is the GP1 (Get 
Password 1) virus. It was allegedly created to penetrate Novell security features and then 
spread throughout the network. The second, CZ2986  virus, in Czechoslovakia. This virus 
places itself in memory and intercepts NetWare function calls when the workstations log in to 
the server. After it collects 15 user name/password combinations, it saves them in an infected 
file and uses them to gain access to the network. 
 
Worms 
A worm is a self-replicating program that resides as a file on a system, executes an 
autonomous process, and deliberately moves from system to system. It looks for other 
nodes on the networks, copies itself to them, and causes the self-copy to execute on other 
nodes. These programs find network utilities showing node names, monitor network traffic, 
and randomly select network identification codes as well as other mischief. 
 
An example of a worm is the SQL Slammer, which raced across the globe and wreaked havoc 
on the Internet in January 2003. This worm doubled the number of computers it infected 
every 8.5 seconds in the first minute of its appearance. The worm, which exploited a flaw in 
Microsoft Corporation’s SQL Server database software, caused damage by rapidly replicating 
itself and clogging the pipelines of the global data network. The worm did not erase or cause 
damage to desktop computers, but was designed to replicate itself so fast and so effectively 
that no other traffic could get through networks. 
 
Virus Carriers 
Viruses can infect computer systems from many sources. Some of the more common virus 
carriers are: 
• Unknown or unchecked application software 
• Software or media brought in by employees 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1822                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Programs downloaded from modem bulletin boards 
• Unsolicited e-mails 
• Vendors and suppliers with infected software 
• Uncontrolled and shared program applications 
• Demonstration software 
• Freeware and shareware 
 
Virus Indicators 
The following are some of the indicators that a computer might exhibit suggesting that it 
might be infected: 
• A sudden and sometimes dramatic decrease of free space on your media. 
• The system suddenly, and for no apparent reason, slows down its command-response 
time. 
• An increase in the size of some files. 
• There has been a change in the length of executable files, a change in their content, or a 
change in their file date/time stamp. 
• An unexpected number of disk accesses, especially to particular file(s). 
• The operating system and/or other programs suddenly begin behaving in unpredictable 
ways. Sometimes disk files that should be there cannot be accessed or are suddenly 
erased with no warning. 
• Unusual messages and graphics. 
• Unable to boot-up the system. 
• Unable to access files. 
• Unexplained and repeated maintenance repairs. 
• System or data files disappear or become fragmented. 
• Unexplained changes in memory. 
• Unexplained changes in program sizes. 
• Resident antiviral software programs display messages that a virus has been encountered. 
Note that until the source of the virus has been identified and removed from the system, 
antiviral systems might continually inform the operator that a virus is being encountered 
and removed. 
 
Virus Protection 
Computer users should take measures to protect their computers against viruses. Some of 
the steps that can be taken are: 
• Do not use a disk to boot your system. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1823 
• If you must boot your system from a disk, make sure it is properly labeled and 
continuously protected. 
• Don’t install shareware or other untested programs on your system, but if you do, don’t 
put them in the root directory. 
• In a network environment, don’t place untested programs on the server. 
• If you are sharing information on disks, ensure they only contain information and no 
executable files. 
• Use current antivirus software to detect potential viruses. 
• Back up all programs and files. 
• Write virus-free warranties and indemnities into your purchase orders and contracts. 
• Always write-protect your systems and program disks. 
• Teach computer users about computer viruses so that they can recognize them. 
• Always use caution when opening e-mail attachments. 
 
Antivirus Software Operation 
Conventional Disk Scanners 
This is the standard virus check program. It is run when the user requests it, and it scans the 
contents of the disk, directories, or files that the user wants, for any boot sectors and/or files 
that contain viruses that it recognizes based on the virus description information in its virus 
definition files. Usually run manually by the user either as a preventative maintenance activity 
or when a virus is suspected, scanning can also be automated through the use of a program 
scheduler.  
 
Heuristic Scanners 
These scanners inspect executable files for code using algorithms to identify operations that 
would indicate an unknown virus. They might also examine macros to detect virus-like 
behavior. 
 
Behavior-Based Detection Scanners   
These applications run continuously, looking for behavior that might indicate virus activity 
(for example, instructions to format a hard drive.) 
 
Change Detection Scanners   
Change detection scanners generate a database of characteristics for executable files and 
check for changes to these files that might signify a virus attack. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1824                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inoculation 
This is a totally different approach to virus detection. Instead of looking for the viruses 
themselves, this technique looks for the changes that the viruses make to files and boot 
sectors. Starting with a clean system, the software “inoculates” each boot sector and 
program file by storing a snapshot of information about it based on its content and size. 
Then, periodically, it reexamines these files to see if anything has changed. If it has, then the 
utility will inform the user; if the user hasn’t made the change, the virus may have. 
 
The main advantage of this type of virus detection is that since it is looking at the effects of 
the virus, it doesn’t need to know what the virus itself is; this means it will detect even new 
viruses without requiring updated virus definition files all of the time. The disadvantage, and 
why it is not used that often, is that it generates a substantial amount of false positives.   
 
Investigating Virus Infections 
Virus infections can be investigated by taking the following action:  
• Isolate the system and all media 
• Run antivirus software 
• Document findings 
• Interview the system custodian and all users, and determine: 
? Symptoms 
? Damage 
? Prior clean-up conducted  
? Access controls in place and working 
? System malfunction 
? Personal media used 
? Unauthorized media used 
? Virus identification 
• Follow the audit trail of the infection 
• Determine the source of the virus—person, system, or media 
• Make users aware of protection policies and procedures 
• Ensure countermeasures are in place and working 
• Track costs of virus problems  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1825 
Internet Fraud 
A booming segment of computer fraud, Internet fraud has become a growing concern to the 
law enforcement community. This type of fraud has proliferated and will continue to 
proliferate because of the ripe conditions that exist on the World Wide Web for fraudulent 
activities. The Internet is still a developing technology for much of international business 
and thus has not been subjected to much litigation or policing. The laws that do currently 
apply to the Internet are difficult to enforce, since the Internet crosses virtually every 
international border on the planet. The lack of international laws and the difficulty enforcing 
those laws gives Internet fraudsters a better than average chance of avoiding capture  
and punishment.  
 
For consumers to retain their confidence in Internet transactions, the perception that the 
Internet is a safe way to shop and do business must be fostered. Consumer awareness of 
online fraud must be raised without causing a loss of consumer confidence. This difficult 
endeavor may require an unprecedented effort by the private sector in conjunction with law 
enforcement. Consequently, private investigative resources may be called upon in greater 
numbers than ever, given law enforcement’s deficiencies in the area of computer fraud.  
 
Internet Fraud Schemes 
According to the 2009 Internet Crime Report, the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) 
received 336,665 complaints related to fraudulent and non-fraudulent issues on the Internet. 
The total dollar loss from all referred cases of fraud was $559.7 million, with a median dollar 
loss of $575 per complaint. All complaints received by IC3 are accessible to federal, state, 
and local law enforcement to support active investigations, trend analysis, and public 
outreach and awareness efforts. 
 
The top ten 2009 IC3 complaint categories are as follows: 
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1826                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internet Scheme Percentage of Complaints 
FBI Scams 16.6% 
Non-Delivery/Merchandise Scams 11.9% 
Advanced Fee 9.8% 
Identity Theft 8.2 
Overpayment Fraud 7.3% 
Miscellaneous Frauds 6.3 
Spam 6.2 
Credit Card Fraud 6.0% 
Auction Fraud 5.7% 
Computer Damage 4.5% 
 
The Internet presents fraudsters with myriad opportunities to multiply the devices at their 
disposal. Some fraudsters have even used reputations of charitable organizations to exploit 
the most benevolent of human impulses. Perhaps the best way to guard against Internet-
 facilitated scams is to simply stay informed. Keeping informed of the latest scams on the 
Internet may enable Internet users to recognize and report these scams instead of losing 
money to one of them. 
 
Modem Hijacking 
According to the Federal Trade Commission, this scheme is designed to exploit Internet 
users. While users are online, their computer modems are secretly disconnected from their 
ISP and reconnected to the Internet, only this time through an expensive international line. 
Victims have usually downloaded a special “viewer” program from a website offering free 
computer images. Once activated, the downloaded material began the hijacking 
disconnection and reconnection process. Long-distance charges continued to mount until 
victims shut down their computers, even if their Internet connection had already been 
terminated.  
 
Internet Commerce 
Much has been made in the national media about the dangers of providing credit card 
numbers to companies on the Internet. And it is understandable that many businesses and 
individuals have apprehensions concerning Internet commerce; the Internet is the most 
impersonal form of communication and it is also the least well known to most users. This 
concern, the feeling that a criminal might be “lurking in the shadows” of the Internet, scares 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1827 
many potential customers from making that initial transaction. There are some precautions 
to be taken before purchasing online items, but conducting business transactions on the 
Internet is ultimately as safe as making an order from a company via the telephone.  
 
Get Rich Quick  
Entering the phrase get rich quick in an Internet search engine results in sites with names like 
$50,000 First 10 Months, Secrets of the Millionaires, and Best Business Resource Center. These types 
of sites hawk everything from home businesses to investment opportunities. Some push 
home- and Internet-based businesses; others’ selling point is that telemarketers close all sales. 
The common denominator in these types of schemes is that consumers who spend money 
on them find themselves with worthless materials and information. 
 
The medium through which victims are snared lends the scam a false appearance of 
credibility. Glossy websites give the operations an official air. But, as with all get-rich-quick 
schemes, victims are sucked in through their desire to make easy money.  
 
Pyramid Schemes 
The tried-and-true pyramid has found a high-tech home on the Internet. As in most pyramid 
schemes, the initial participants of the scheme are rewarded handsomely, while the 
participants who join the scheme later are bilked out of their investment money.  
 
Foreign Trusts 
Information on this scheme is easily found on the Internet. The set-up caters to the desire to 
avoid taxes. For a fee, the company purports to be able to create a foreign trust to which 
taxpayers can transfer their assets. Since the trust is not within the taxpayer’s country, the 
logic goes, the assets are not subject to taxation. 
 
The logic is faulty for several reasons. First, if the taxpayer derives use from the funds in the 
trust, according to law those funds are considered taxable income. Thus, consumers who fall 
for this scam subject themselves to prosecution for tax evasion. 
 
That is, of course, only if the trust is set up at all. Some of the operators of this scheme 
simply take consumers’ money and disappear. And, sadly, those are the consumers who get 
off lightly. Others who have fallen for this pitch find that they have transferred all of their 
assets to a trust of which they are not the beneficiaries. Their assets then legally belong to 
another entity and getting them transferred back to their control is virtually impossible. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1828                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Chain Letters 
This fraud has once again become popular due to the Internet’s e-mail capabilities. Instead 
of sending numerous letters through the mail, as fraudsters were forced to do in the past, e-
 mail capabilities allow the fraudster to compose one letter and send thousands of copies to 
potential victims. The letter sent to unsuspecting targets generally forewarns of the grave 
dangers that await the target should he not reply to the letter. The letter asks for a small cash 
donation in exchange for the target’s piece of mind that no bad tidings will be spread, 
providing examples of some of the unfortunates who did not heed the letter. The money 
should be sent to a P.O. box, the e-mail often instructs.  
 
Investment and Securities Fraud 
Websites that offer investment or securities advice are not in short supply. Many of these 
sites are reputable, but an illicit cottage industry has been born on many of these sites. A 
fraudulent website will claim to have insider information about the value of a given stock, 
suggesting that something unexpected will soon happen to that company. When the 
unknowing stock investor takes the advice of the supposedly knowledgeable investment 
advisor, the advisor manipulates the stock price to his advantage. 
 
Spamming  
Spamming  involves sending e-mail to subscribers whose names appear on electronic versions 
of the phone list and posting ads to the plethora of discussion and chat groups using the 
Internet. These postings are often disguised to look like tips from individual citizens who 
 are supposedly engaged in a lawful enterprise, when in fact they are part of an Internet 
boiler room. 
 
Counterfeit Check Scams 
This scam has several variations but usually starts with the victim offering something for sale 
on the Internet. Usually it is a big ticket item. Somehow the fraudster has obtained a 
legitimate check from a person or company, scanned it, and altered it to support the scheme. 
The fraudster then contracts with the victim to buy the item but must supply a down 
payment first. The check is delivered by a highly recognized international carrier such as 
FedEx, further adding to the false impression that this is a legitimate deal. The victim 
deposits the check, but before it clears, the fraudster requests a refund and backs out of the 
deal offering to let the victim keep a portion of the funds for his trouble. The victim 
forwards part of the money back. Of course the victim later learns that his bank has reversed 
the deposit amount because the check was no good. The fraudsters usually claim to be in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1829 
another country and must therefore use a “middle man” such as a lawyer to facilitate the 
transaction on their behalf. This is designed to create a sense of false security for the victim. 
 
Another variation on this scheme involves a seemingly chance meeting in a harmless chat 
room. Once the chat relationship develops the fr audster explains that they are in a foreign 
country and need some help. It seems that they are unable to cash certain traveler’s checks in 
their country and ask for the victim’s help to cash the checks for them in the United States 
and then send them a money order, less a small token of their appreciation. They usually 
invent some unfortunate circumstance or urgency for the request. The first time it occurs the 
checks are good and everything works out. In a second request, they ask for the victim’s help 
again, this time it’s a much larger amount and this time the checks are counterfeit. The 
victim unknowingly participates in a forgery by passing the counterfeit checks.  
 
Phishing 
Phishing scams are some of the fastest-growing threats on the Internet. According to the 
Gartner research firm, more than 5 million U.S. consumers lost money to phishing attacks in 
the 12 months ending in September 2008, an almost 40 percent increase over the 3.6 million 
who lost money in phishing attacks in the 12 months ending in August 2007. Although the 
number of consumers who lost money to phishing attacks increased in 2008, the average 
customer loss per incident in 2008 was $351, down 60 percent from 2007.  
 
The definition of phishing is to trick people into providing their personal and financial 
information by pretending to be from a legitimate company, agency, or organization. In this 
type of scam, phishers typically use e-mails to direct Internet users to websites that look like 
legitimate e-commerce sites, such as online banks, retailers, or government agencies. 
Phishers actually control these sites and use them to steal sensitive information, such as bank 
account details and passwords. Phishers can also use the phone to hunt for victims’ personal 
information. Some pose as employers and call people who have listed themselves on job 
search websites; others call pretending to be from a company or government agency, making 
the same kinds of false claims and asking for personal information. Phishers may also 
undertake technical subterfuge schemes to plant crimeware onto PCs to steal information 
directly, such as using key-logging systems to intercept customers’ online account user names 
and passwords. 
 
Opinions vary, but the amount of time it takes for an unprotected personal computer to 
become infected with a virus or malware can range from four to thirty-four minutes. To aid 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1830                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in preventing phishing, computers should be armed with spam filters, anti-virus and anti-
 spyware software, and a firewall, and kept up to date. A spam filter can help reduce the 
number of phishing e-mails received. Anti-virus software, which scans incoming messages 
for troublesome files, and anti-spyware software, which looks for programs that have been 
installed on a computer and tracks a user’s online activities without their knowledge, can 
protect users against pharming and other techniques that phishers use. Firewalls prevent 
hackers and unauthorized communications from entering a user’s computer—which is 
especially important if one has a broadband connection because their computer is open to 
the Internet whenever it’s turned on. Look for programs that offer automatic updates and 
take advantage of free patches that manufacturers offer to fix newly discovered problems. 
 
In order to prevent identity theft through phishing e-mails, computer users should 
completely delete unsolicited e-mails from banks, credit unions, investment firms, and 
government agencies with which they do not have an established relationship. If the 
recipient does have an existing relationship with the supposed originator of the e-mail, the 
Better Business Bureau recommends calling the organization to confirm whether or not the 
e-mail is legitimate before taking any further action. Computer users on the go should be 
wary of entering passwords or sensitive information into a computer that isn’t theirs, such as 
at an Internet café, library, computer lab, or airport kiosk. Wi-Fi networks, either on the road 
or in the consumer’s own home, present even more opportunities for identity thieves. The 
easiest way to protect a Wi-Fi network at home is to not broadcast the Service Set Identifier. 
A safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchanging sensitive information over a Wi-Fi connection 
and wait until a safe network can be accessed.  
 
SPEAR PHISHING 
Spear phishing is a targeted attack generally focused on a corporate entity. The ruse is meant 
to fool the corporate employee into believing that the phishing e-mail originated not from a 
bank or financial institution but from their own IT or HR department. The goal is to obtain 
the employee’s user name and password to access the corporate network. 
 
VISHING 
Voice phishing, or Vishing, is the act of leveraging Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 
technology in using the telephone system to falsely claim to be a legitimate enterprise in an 
attempt to scam users (both consumers and businesses) into disclosing personal information. 
Government, financial institutions, as well as online auctions and their payment services, can 
be targets of voice phishing. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1831 
A vishing scheme is generally transmitted as an incoming recorded telephone message that 
uses a spoofed (fraudulent) caller ID matching the identity of a misrepresented organization. 
The message uses an urgent pretext to direct unsuspecting users to another telephone 
number. The victim is invited to punch their personal information on their telephone 
keypad. The criminals capture the key tones and convert them back to numerical format. 
There are several types of information at risk from this type of scheme. This can include any 
numerical personal information: payment card information (numbers, expiration dates, and 
the last three digits printed on the signature panel), PIN (personal identification number), 
Social Security number, date of birth, bank account numbers, and passport number. 
 
Security experts have seen another variation of vishing where the criminals will leave a 
voicemail message or make telephone calls directing people to the bogus phone number. 
With Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and other Internet-based telephone technology, 
criminals can now make calls inexpensively and can mask their identity and their location 
and even make it look like they are calling from a legitimate company on caller displays. 
 
Some potential uses of the personal information that is gathered from victims includes 
control of the victim’s financial accounts; opening new bank accounts; transferring bank 
balances; applying for loans, credit cards, and other goods/services; making luxury 
purchases; hiding criminal activities; receiving government benefits; and obtaining a 
passport. 
 
Another version of vishing involves the sending of text messages to cell phones claiming the 
recipient’s online bank account has expired. The message instructs the recipient to renew 
their online bank account by using the link provided. 
 
SMISHING OR TISHING 
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message 
via SMS (the protocol used to transmit text messages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take 
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1832                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ROCK PHISHING 
One type of phishing attack has been particularly effective — the rock phish. It’s estimated 
that rock phishing accounts for roughly half of all phishing attacks (as measured by the 
number of unique URLs). Rock phishers have targeted national and regional banks 
throughout the U.S., Europe, and Latin America. Toward the end of 2007 they broadened 
their scope to include online brokerages, information services, treasury management 
companies, and even social networking sites. 
 
Like most phishers, rock phishers use botnets to send massive amounts of phishing e-mails 
to huge volumes of Internet users. The e-mails contain a message from a financial 
institution, hopefully enticing users to click on a fraudulent URL. There is some indication 
that they cycle through multiple e-mail lists and attempt to reach the Internet users most 
likely to use the brands that they are targeting. Unlike most phishers, they don’t compromise 
a Web server and install a phishing site. Instead, an elaborate process is implemented 
whereby multiple domain names are registered at multiple registrars — often with less known 
country-code based top-level domains. Multiple DNS (domain name system) servers are also 
set up, which provide names to IP services for the pool of domain names. The IP addresses 
used — and there may be upwards of 100 at a time — point to multiple compromised servers 
that simply forward Web connections to the real phish sites. These proxy servers typically 
handle connections for multiple targets at a time.  
 
It is interesting to note that before these bogus domains are identified and blocked, 
fraudsters have already done the damage. Looking at a rock phish URL one sees random 
numbers with a few alphabet characters in it — these are alphanumeric figures. These figures 
are used to make the URL string unique, complex, and difficult to differentiate from a 
legitimate one. 
 
Rock phishers have an advanced grasp of technology, using fast flux architecture to change 
name servers and site location in an instant, automating proxy servers to such an extent that 
if one is downed, it automatically switches to the next. Therefore, they are able to lengthen 
the life span of rock phish URLs and make them stealthier. 
 
One of the best ways to combat rock phishing is to implement a sender policy framework 
(SPF) or Domain Keys on your e-mail system. More and more, ISPs are rejecting, or at least 
sending to the spam folder, e-mail that fails SPF or Domain Key authentication.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1833 
Pharming 
Pharming  is an attack in which a user is fooled into entering sensitive data (such as a password 
or credit card number) into a malicious website that impersonates a legitimate website. It is 
different from phishing in that the attacker does not have to rely on having the user click on 
a link in the e-mail to direct him to the fake website. Pharming actually exploits a 
vulnerability in the DNS server software that allows a hacker to acquire the domain name for 
a site and redirect the website traffic from a legitimate site to a false one. So even though the 
user types in the correct website address, the pharming program sends the user to an 
illegitimate site that looks like the real thing. Unknowingly, the user is then providing 
passwords and information directly to the hacker. 
 
Combating Internet Fraud 
Conducting business on the Internet is generally a safe proposition that can be made even 
more so through a few additional safety precautions.  
• Encryption — Any confidential information or credit card numbers should be encrypted in 
their entirety. An encryption system is made up of a cryptographic function, which 
scrambles an electronic transmission, and an inverse decrypt function, which restores the 
transmission to its original state. Encryption hardware and software can be used to 
scramble any communication by utilizing a complex mathematical formula. The only way 
to unscramble an encrypted message is to provide the unique answer key, thus unlocking 
the message. Encryption is the best method to stymie would-be interceptors of company 
transactions. 
• Customer validation — Because the Internet offers users an additional layer of anonymity, 
businesses should install some form of a customer validation safeguard in their Internet 
purchasing system. This may include a customer code or password that the customer can 
identify himself with before purchasing a product. As well, the business should 
distinguish itself to the customer, ensuring that no one else can falsely assume the 
company’s identity. 
• Internal network security — Organizations that conduct business on the Web should never, 
under any circumstances, keep their financial information database on their Web server. 
A knowledgeable computer hacker can sometimes penetrate Internet websites, and 
financial information is the primary target of these hackers, for obvious reasons. 
Therefore, the database that maintains a company’s financial information should be a 
completely internal system, untouchable from the Internet. This safeguard will help 
ensure that sensitive information is not compromised in any way. 
• Firewalls — Firewalls are advanced software programs that effectively “lock up” access to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1834                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an Internet site or e-mail transmission. Firewalls are designed to control the interface 
between a network and the Internet. This technology surveys incoming and outgoing 
transmissions between the network and the Internet, stopping any questionable 
transmission attempt to access a sensitive area. While firewalls are not foolproof, they do 
provide an additional layer of protection against Internet attacks or breaches of security. 
 
More information about scams perpetrated agai nst businesses and individuals can be found 
in the previous chapter, “Consumer Fraud.”  
 
 
Electronic Commerce  
Electronic commerce, or e-commerce, is becoming a major form of retailing, marketing, 
advertising, and inter-personal communications. The hardware infrastructure required for 
high-speed data, voice, and video transmission to and from private homes is being 
introduced to residential streets everywhere.  
 
We have all heard people talk about their fears about putting their credit card numbers, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), street addresses, phone numbers, and other personal 
information out on the Internet. In reality, there is very little difference between securing 
electronic commerce and securing any other kind of information system resource. 
 
In addition to these traditional goals of information systems security, confidentiality, 
integrity, and availability, there are a few that are more directly related to networked 
transactions, which is exactly what e-commerce consists of: 
• Authentication. This requirement addresses the problem of identifying the parties of an 
e-commerce transaction to each other. We want to make sure that we can determine 
with whom we (or our computers) are communicating. 
• Non-repudiation. Non-repudiation can help ensure that no party to an e-commerce 
transaction can later deny that the transaction occurred. We need some way to be able to 
recognize a “signature” between e-commerce parties just as we rely on written signatures 
on paper documents. 
 
While recent years have seen an increase in the number of consumers and businesses willing 
to conduct transactions, online there still exists some hesitancy to fully embrace e-commerce 
technology. It is cases like the one described below that cause consumers to lose confidence 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1835 
in e-commerce. In the following example, a hacker crafted a sophisticated scam that hurt 
millions of consumers. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Albert Gonzales had already been caught hacking into the Indian government’s website 
and trafficking a million credit/debt card numbers before he was caught stealing many 
more credit/debit card numbers from TJX Companies, the company that operates retails 
stores such as TJ Maxx and Marshall’s. After two years worth of sensitive data and 45.6 
million credit card and debit card numbers were compromised, TJX Companies notified the 
authorities of their data leakage.  
Starting in 2005, Albert found non-secure wireless networks on TJX Companies' systems 
and worked with others to identify vulnerable servers to attack, infiltrate, and later use to 
jumpbox into other more secure servers. From there, he and his conspirators were able to 
install malware used to steal data and sniffing software onto the networks of TJX and all 
the stores operating under them, even outside of the United States. TJX discovered the 
breach in December of 2006 and was under the belief that they had only been losing data 
for six to seven months. After further investigation, however, they found that they had been 
losing sensitive data since 2005. But by the time TJX had even started discovering the 
extent of their security breach, Albert had already moved on to bigger and better operations. 
In 2008, Albert was arrested on charges related to hacking into other companies’ 
networks, and he now faces 15–25 years in prison. 
  
ISP messages are also used to sneak Trojan horse programs onto a user’s computer. The 
user is tempted with free pornographic pictures, or software that will boost their computer’s 
performance. When the attached file is opened, it triggers a program that surreptitiously 
collects the subscriber’s account name and password, which are then relayed to the hacker 
who sent the message. 
 
Many experts say that it is currently possible to have secure transactions over the Internet 
because the latest encryption technologies and security protocols allow for this. However, 
fully realized standards are not yet in place for all business-to-business or business-to-customer 
transactions. Some current security protocols do not permit non-repudiation of 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1836                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
data, which is required if firms seriously want to conduct business over the Internet. 
However, the arrival of standards for using smart card technology will transform Internet 
business and commerce as a whole. Smart card technology offers a solution to the major 
secure transactions requirements, namely data integrity, user authentication, and non-
 repudiation of data. Smart card technology also involves the application of third-party trust 
relationships to the Internet. 
 
Applying Encryption to E-Commerce Security 
Generally speaking, the solutions offered by conventional and public-key encryption 
technologies are usually adequate to ensure that e-commerce transactions are as secure as the 
value of transactions requires.  
 
The vast majority of transmissions over the Internet and the World Wide Web are not 
encrypted in any way. If there is no need to hide the contents of a message or 
communication, there is little need to expend resources on the encryption of such traffic and 
the decryption at the other end. Encryption can be an expensive solution, whether in terms 
of actual monetary cost or the cost in increased computational load on the users’ machines. 
The needs of the organization to keep confidential transmissions secret should be weighed 
against the effort and cost of encryption. 
 
Smart Cards 
The cost and inefficiency of manually applying encryption techniques could prevent some 
organizations from fully engaging in e-commerce activities. Fortunately, a relatively 
inexpensive solution is available in the use of smart card technology. 
 
A smart card is a credit-card sized plastic card embedded with an integrated circuit chip that 
makes it “smart.” This marriage between a convenient plastic card and a microprocessor 
allows an immense amount of information to be stored, accessed, and processed either 
online or offline. Smart cards can store several hundred times more data than a conventional 
card with a magnetic stripe. The information or application stored in the IC chip is 
transferred through an electronic module that interconnects with a terminal or a card reader. 
A contactless smart card has an antenna coil that communicates with a receiving antenna to 
transfer information. Depending on the type of the embedded chip, smart cards can be 
either memory cards or processor cards. 
• Memory cards. Any plastic card is made “smart” by including an IC chip. But the chip 
may simply be a memory storage device. Memory cards can hold thousands of times 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1837 
more memory than a magnetic stripe card. Nevertheless, its functions are limited to basic 
applications such as phone cards. 
• Processor cards.  Smart cards with a full-fledged microprocessor on board can function 
as a processor device that offers multiple functions such as encryption, advanced security 
mechanisms, local data processing, complex calculation, and other interactive processes. 
Most stored-value cards integrated with identification, security, and information 
purposes are processor cards. Only processor cards are truly smart enough to offer the 
flexibility and multifunctionality desired in e-commerce. 
 
The top three international markets in smart card production are (1) miniature subscriber 
identity modules (SIMs) that fit inside mobile phones, (2) banking cards, and (3) 
identification cards, specifically those used by governments and large corporations. 
 
Most smart cards issued today are memory cards with limited processing capabilities; 
however, modern technology is constantly making advances toward increasing these 
capabilities. 
 
 
Insider Threats 
By far the greatest threat to information systems in terms of computer crime comes from 
employees inside an organization. It is not uncommon for operators, media librarians, 
hardware technicians, and other staff members to find themselves in positions of 
extraordinary privilege in relation to the key functions and assets of their organizations. A 
consequence of this situation is the probability that such individuals are frequently exposed 
to temptation. 
 
A further complication is the tendency on the part of management to tolerate less stringent 
supervisory controls over information system personnel. The premise is that the work is not 
only highly technical and specialized but difficult to understand and control. As an example, 
systems software support is often entrusted to a single programmer who generates the 
version of the operating system in use, establishes password or other control lists, and 
determines the logging and accounting features to be used. In addition, such personnel are 
often permitted, and sometimes encouraged, to perform these duties during non-prime shift 
periods, when demands on computer time are light. As a result, many of the most critical 
software development and maintenance functions are performed in an unsupervised 
environment. It is also clear that operators, librarians, and technicians often enjoy a degree 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1838                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of freedom quite different from that which would be considered normal in a more 
traditional employment area.  
 
Insiders are typically aware of the holes in the system of internal controls and often exploit 
weaknesses just to see if they can get away with it. The most prevalent method of 
committing computer fraud is probably alteration or falsification of input transactions 
(and/or documents), including: 
• Alteration of input 
• Alteration of output 
• Data file manipulation 
• Communications systems 
• Operating systems 
• Computer operations 
 
Characteristics 
The characteristics of the traditional inside computer fraudster are very similar to those of 
the hacker or other computer criminal: intelligent, hard working, seldom takes time off, 
bored with the routine of the job, and has a very large ego. Many computer technicians have 
demonstrated a greater loyalty to the technology than to the organization for which they 
work. This technology loyalty can create an attitude that any behavior is acceptable if it is in 
the name of technology.  
 
The following are indicators of insider computer fraud: 
• Access privileges beyond those required to perform assigned job functions. 
• Exception reports not reviewed and resolved. 
• Access logs not reviewed. 
• Production programs run at unusual hours. 
• Lack of separation of duties in the data center. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1839 
Computer Security 
 
Effective Security  
Effective computer security ensures the availability of accurate data in time to meet an 
organization’s needs at a cost that is commen surate with the risks involved. Key elements 
are: 
• Protecting data and programs from intentional or inadvertent unauthorized alteration or 
destruction. 
• Maintaining the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data. 
• Protecting the data center from physical threats such as fire, flood, and intentional 
destruction.  
• Having the capability to restore data center operations in case of complete destruction. 
 
The most important step is to obtain management support for effective security. Without 
such support, any security plan will falter. 
 
Securing the Communications Network 
Some communications networks are very large, very complex, and technically demanding. 
The task of effectively securing these networks is demanding and requires the close 
cooperation of both network and security administration. The objective of data and voice 
networks is to provide connectivity with acceptable response times, user-friendly access, and 
a secure mode at an acceptable cost to the organization.  
 
Passwords 
Passwords are the predominant form of authenticating valid users. Effective password 
administration is essential for maintaining security. Passwords should be of sufficient length 
(usually a minimum of eight characters) and a combination of letters, numbers, and other 
characters, such as punctuation marks to avoid guessing. Group passwords and sharing of 
passwords should be prohibited so as to maintain individual accountability. Passwords of all 
terminated employees should be revoked immediately. Security administration often 
coordinates the notification of terminated employees with the personnel function. 
Employees who have changed job functions or transferred should have their old passwords 
canceled and new ones issued, if appropriate.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1840                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Other Network Security 
Securing a computer network by means of logical controls is a difficult but necessary 
requirement for ensuring the safety of a computer system from attacks by outsiders. Logical 
controls include management security policies, user authentication systems, data access 
controls, network firewalls, security awareness training, encryption algorithms, penetration 
testing, intrusion detection software, and incident response plans.  
 
Network security can also be provided by a combination of design, hardware devices, and 
software. Data encryption is carried out by a combination of hardware and software. 
Encrypted data is scrambled by a formula using a unique key and can only be unscrambled 
with the same formula and key at the receiving end. The decision to use encryption should be 
made in light of the risks and after a cost-benefit analysis. Drawbacks to encryption are the 
cost of the hardware and software, the cost of the administration, and the inherent delays 
incurred by the extra steps required for processing. 
 
Digital signatures are becoming more common, in part because Congress and many states 
have passed legislation to legitimize the electronic “signing” of documents. In 2000 the 
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-SIGN Act) became 
effective. This federal statute basically provides a mechanism whereby any document that is 
required to be signed, can be signed “electr onically.” The E-SIGN Act does not require a 
party to use or accept electronic signatures, electronic contracts or electronic records, but 
rather seeks to facilitate the use of electronic signatures and documents by upholding their 
legal effect regardless of the type or method selected by the parties. The E-SIGN Act is also 
technology-neutral and does not require a specific type or method that businesses and 
consumers must use or accept in order to conduct their electronic transaction. The Act 
regulates any transactions involving interstate or foreign commerce. However, many states 
have enacted their own digital signature laws, which regulate purely intrastate transactions. 
Additionally, many state and federal agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, are encouraging the use of electronic filing and digital 
signatures as a means to speed up the collection and processing of information. 
 
Biological access verification, long the favorite stuff of movie makers, is now available.  
This verification technique includes fingerprints, palm prints, voice prints, signatures, and 
retina scans. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1841 
Profiling software authenticates users by monitoring their statistical characteristics, such as 
typing speed and keystroke touch. Smart card access devices are similar to an ATM card; like 
ATM cards, they are susceptible to loss and forgery. 
 
The most effective components of internal security are education, reporting facilities, and 
vigorous disciplinary action for offenders, including prosecution of illegal acts. An 
enterprise-wide employee awareness program should be combined with formal training in 
the area of information security. For employees to fulfill their security responsibilities they 
should know what information needs to be kept confidential, how to recognize threats to 
security, and how to use backups and other aids for their desktop machines. Giving 
employees incentives such as bonuses to follow security guidelines, however, will be the 
most effective motivator. 
 
Protecting the network from external threats requires some additional considerations. The 
less an external perpetrator knows about the technology environment (for example, type of 
hardware and software packages used), the harder it is to obtain fraudulent access. Part of 
the security policy should address how much and what kind of information regarding the 
technology of an organization should be made public.  
 
Organizations should guard against providing too much access to third parties. There is 
pressure to establish connectivity by marketing, purchasing, research, and other branches. 
Connectivity should be granted only after it has been established that the benefits outweigh 
the risks and costs. 
 
The Risk Assessment Process 
As organizations grow, their information technology and data change both in type and 
quantity. Assumptions made about security need to be updated. The vehicle for updating is 
the risk assessment. This is a zero-based process that should be performed periodically. A 
risk assessment is an analysis of the security objectives of confidentiality, integrity,  
and availability. 
 
Each data element should be examined to determine the impact if it is disclosed, lost, or 
entered incorrectly. Once this information is collected, the security measures in place should 
be reviewed to determine whether they provide necessary safeguards. The risk assessment 
process is a time-consuming process to undertake and many organizations employ outside 
security consultants to reduce its impact on day-to-day operations.  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1842                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internal Controls in the Data Center 
In most instances, computer-related crimes are very difficult to detect. An intruder may be 
able to gain unauthorized access to a network or computer system, perpetrate whatever 
criminal activity was planned, and retreat without anyone being aware of the intrusion, much 
less the criminal activity that has taken place. So how does an organization become aware 
that its information resources have been compromised by someone — either inside or outside 
of the organization — with criminal intent? A few possibilities include: 
• A strong set of policies and standards to define for employees and management what the 
company deems as unacceptable or unauthorized activities. 
• Strong physical security to thwart those intent upon the theft of physical assets of the 
organization. 
• Central Systems access control and data object protection. 
• Strong security for the organization’s application programs. 
• Intrusion detection hardware and software for network and communications resources. 
• Auditing of system and violation logs.  
 
All of these mechanisms, if used correctly, will alert the organization of inappropriate 
actions. This all assumes, of course, that someone is keeping an eye out for exceptions and 
violations. All of the security policies and standards, the intrusion detection software, the 
violation logs, and the access controls will mean absolutely nothing if the organization is not 
committed to applying them properly and maintaining them adequately. 
 
General controls over a data center are relevant for all applications. The general control 
categories include system maintenance, implementation of new systems (including 
development), computer operations, system software (including security and 
telecommunications software), and data files. 
 
Systems Maintenance 
All program and system changes should be approved in writing. Programmers should not 
have access to the production library, but only to “test” libraries. All programs that are to be 
modified should be moved into a test library by someone other than a programmer. All 
completed program changes should be tested and the results approved by both data center 
and user personnel before being placed into production. Adequate program documentation 
should be approved for all program changes. User personnel should be notified when 
modified programs will be placed into production. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1843 
Implementation Controls 
Implementation controls are those controls over the development of, or purchase of, a new 
application. All new system requests should be made in writing. A system development life-
 cycle methodology should be used for developing and implementing in-house or purchased 
packages. All new systems requests should be approved by the appropriate management 
level. Users should be involved in the project from design through final testing. All test 
results should be approved by both data center management and user personnel. There 
should be an implementation plan for placing the new system into production. 
 
Computer Operations 
Computer operations controls are controls that govern the day-to-day operation of the 
computer system. There should be an approved schedule for all production runs. All system 
activity should be reviewed by data center management. Any unusual program executions 
should be investigated and resolved. A log of unusual events, such as abends  (abnormal 
terminations of a program execution) or reruns should be kept by operations staff and also 
should be reviewed by data center management. Access to the computer room should be 
restricted to authorized personnel. All third parties, such as technicians, should be 
accompanied by a data center employee. Doors to the data center should be secured. 
 
System Software 
Controls over system software include those that govern the installation of the computer 
system, the communications software, and the security software. Data center management 
should approve the system software selection as well as the chosen options and parameters. 
System software should be tested before implementation in a production environment. 
(Note that this might not be possible for the operating system itself.)  
 
Data Files 
Controls over data files ensure that correct files are used for each production job and that 
adequate backup files exist. Data-file label bypass options should be disabled. A data file 
management system should be used to record and locate all data files. Data file backup 
copies should be made and stored in a secure facility. Off-site backup file copies should be 
maintained in case of a disaster in the data center. Utilities that can modify data files should 
be removed from the system and used only under management supervision. Live data files 
should not be used for testing. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1844                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Access and Telecommunication Controls 
In the 1960s and 1970s, access controls meant ensuring that there was a lock on the 
computer room door. As online systems were implemented, the definition of access evolved 
to include logical access in addition to physical access. Logical access refers to any location 
where someone can sign on to the system. That sign-on access can be a direct connection or 
a dial-up. In today’s, online, real-time, and in terconnected world, it is easy to forget physical 
guards over computer equipment. Computer equipment must be physically secured. This 
should include network servers, telephone system computers, communications controllers, 
and personal computers with sensitive data. 
 
Access and telecommunications controls should achieve the following objectives: 
• Provide physical security over equipment, users, and information. 
• Protect critical data from loss, damage, or unauthorized disclosure. 
• Ensure network reliability by using appropriate hardware and software. 
• Prevent unauthorized access and use of the network. 
• Ensure system availability. 
• Meet user requirements. 
 
Separation of Duties 
Separation of duties is a key element in a well-designed internal control system. It is also 
fundamental to detecting and preventing fraud. Programmers should not operate the 
computer, have unsupervised access to production programs, or have access to production 
data sets (data files). Users should not have access to the production program code. 
Computer operators should not perform computer programming. Adequate supervision 
should be provided by personnel who do not actually perform the work. 
 
Logs and History Files 
Computer systems maintain a variety of history files or logs. These logs record activity in the 
following areas: 
• Mainframe activity 
? Programs executed 
? Data files accessed 
? Date, time, and duration 
? User IDs that initiated a particular action 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1845 
• Communications activity 
? User ID 
? Terminal identifier 
? Dial-in port identifier 
? Date, time, and duration 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
• Security software activity 
? User ID 
? Unsuccessful log-in attempts 
? Modifications to the password files and access capability 
 
These logs were originally designed to help in troubleshooting the system and correcting 
errors. These files contain a very valuable audit and fraud examination trail of system 
activity, and are now used for internal control functions. The logs should be reviewed by a 
responsible data center official and evidence should exist of this review. Many of the history 
files have a limited capacity and can be forced into wrapping if not printed periodically. 
Wrapping forces the software to record at the beginning of the file if the file is full and not 
printed out.  
 
Security Software 
There are a number of good security software packages on the market for all mainframes 
and most minicomputers. Security packages available for PCs are less numerous. Local area 
networks have some security packages available, but still rely primarily on the individual user 
in a stand-alone mode or the mainframe security in a connected mode. The purchase and 
installation of a security package might provide a false sense of security. Most of these 
packages are designed to be installed in a phased approach because of the complexity of  
the task.  
 
These options and decisions about security software should be reviewed by management. 
For example, most mainframe security packages allow a minimum of three levels of security. 
Log mode merely logs all system access to defined programs and data files. Warn mode tells the 
user if he is accessing a program or file that is not authorized for the password he has 
employed. Activity is also logged. Fail mode will not allow a user to access defined data files 
and programs without the proper password. This is the highest level of security and the only 
one that provides adequate protection. Another very important consideration involves the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1846                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
manual supervision of data provided by security packages, usually in the form of access logs. 
A security package needs consistent review to protect against possible violations. 
 
Internal Controls in Computer Applications 
Internal controls establish checks and balances to prevent one person from controlling the 
entire financial transaction. Competent and trustworthy employees are obviously a necessary 
element of a good internal control system. No employee with a known history of dishonesty 
should be hired.  
 
Assets and records, which can be easily appropriated or destroyed, should be physically 
safeguarded. They should be safeguarded by locks, physical security, and other methods to 
ensure that they will not be misappropriated. All accounting systems rely on proper 
documentation. Missing documentation should be  regarded as a red flag of possible fraud. 
Someone independent of the transaction must check the accounting controls. The 
knowledge that all work is checked is a powerful fraud deterrent. The elements of sound 
internal control do not change in a computerized environment. Objectives do not change, 
but techniques do. 
 
Control Techniques 
Control techniques commonly used in computerized systems are listed below. 
• One-for-one checking consists of checking each source document against a detailed list 
processed by the computer. This technique is normally used for low-volume input 
because of the cost and time involved. 
• Batch/control totals involve manually grouping transactions at the input stage and 
manually establishing a control total over the entire group. The methods used include 
document counts, item or line counts, dollar totals, and cash totals. 
• In computer sequence checking, the computer verifies the preassigned serial numbers of 
input transactions and reports missing or duplicate numbers. 
• Computer matching consists of the computer matching the input data to information 
held on the master file or suspense files. Unmatched items are reported for investigation.  
• Programmed edit checks are computer program procedures that edit data. Examples 
include: 
? Reasonableness 
? Dependency 
? Existence 
? Format 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1847 
? Mathematical accuracy 
? Range 
? Digit verification 
? Prior data matching 
• Prerecorded input is used to reduce errors during data entry.  
 
Control Objectives 
Well-designed computer applications have built-in controls for all functions. The major 
control objective is completeness of input. 
  
Input completeness  control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer 
sequence check, and computer matching. Input accuracy controls ensure that data is initially 
recorded correctly and converted correctly to machine-readable form. Input accuracy control 
techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer matching, programmed 
edits, and prerecorded input. 
 
Update accuracy ensures that the correct master file account is updated correctly with the 
correct transaction. Update accuracy control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control 
totals, computer matching, and programmed checks. Update control completeness ensures that all 
data entered and accepted by the system updates the master file once and only once. Update 
control completeness techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer sequence 
checks, and computer matching. 
 
Authorization controls ensure that only valid transactions are processed, that all transactions 
processed are authorized by management, and that transactions represent events that actually 
occurred. Authorization techniques used are one-for-one checking and programmed checks. 
 
Maintenance controls provide that data is kept up-to-date or identify unusual data requiring 
further action. They also ensure that data stored on file is not changed except through the 
normal processing cycle. Maintenance control techniques are used for one-for-one checking, 
batch control totals, and programmed checks. 
 
Evaluating Application Controls 
Evaluating internal controls in an application system requires a thorough understanding of 
the system. The first phase, information gathering, consists of collecting information about 
the industry and the risks associated with that industry; conducting ratio analysis and peer 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1848                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
comparisons to identify aberrations; understanding how management runs the business; and 
determining if there are strong budget-to-actual controls in the organization. 
 
Evaluation is the second phase and consists of the use of questionnaires and/or matrices to 
evaluate the internal controls and to identify internal control weaknesses. Analyzing the 
results is necessary to determine if a weakness exists and/or the extent of any weaknesses. A 
results report should be prepared that includes recommendations. 
 
End-User Computing Internal Control 
End-user computing, or distributed processing, has emerged since the advent of micro-computers 
and provides end-users with equipment (such as PCs) and processing capability. 
Examples include microcomputer development tools such as spreadsheets, database 
programs, and downloading part of an application and its associated files for processing on a 
local area network either connected to the mainframe or in a stand-alone mode. 
 
Several control concerns have been identified as a result of end-user computing. 
• Data center controls over the equipment itself (backups, access controls, local password 
administration, etc.) might not be implemented by the end users. 
• Locally developed spreadsheet or database applications might not have all the controls 
typically found in mainframe systems. 
• Access can be compromised by the end users by installing a modem and phone line 
connected to a local area network or stand-alone PC and not informing data security 
about the arrangement. 
 
 
Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes 
Once an organization has received an indication that a possible criminal violation has 
occurred by means of its information system resources, a preliminary investigation into the 
allegation should be conducted to achieve the following goals: 
 
1. Determine if indeed a crime has been committed. This is the critical step in the 
internal investigation. The organization must be careful to differentiate between 
inadvertent computer misuse and deliberate criminal intent. The company’s internal 
auditors, physical and information security specialists, and senior management 
should be involved in making this type of decision. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1849 
2. Determine the status of the crime. When did the incident begin? Where did the 
intrusion come from? Internal or external? Is the incident still occurring? If not still 
occurring, when did it stop? 
 
3. Review the organization security and audit policies and procedures to determine the 
best method for continuing the investigation. 
 
4. Determine the need for law enforcement assistance. The organization will have to 
decide if the violation is serious enough to call in the police or other law 
enforcement entities. Most computer crimes are not reported to law enforcement 
due to several factors, including the organization’s desire to keep its flaws and 
weaknesses from being exposed to its customers and stockholders. This is a difficult 
decision for the company to make. However, as we also mentioned earlier, if 
companies don’t report computer crimes, then law enforcement will be powerless to 
help prevent and solve them and computer criminals will feel they have a free hand 
to continue their activities. 
 
Handling the Evidence 
One of the major differences between investigating computer-related crimes and 
conventional criminal activities is the volatility of the evidence that resides in the computers 
themselves. Indeed, the evidence of a computer intrusion might be erased or altered as part 
of the intrusion itself. It is therefore very important for the organization and/or law 
enforcement personnel to deal quickly and decisively with evidence of suspected computer-
 related criminal activities. 
 
The admissibility of evidence obtained from computers in a court case is really no different 
from the admissibility of any other type of evidence. The evidence must be: 
• Relevant  
• Supported by a foundation for its introduction into court 
• Legally obtained 
• Properly identified 
• Properly preserved 
 
In the handling of computer data in criminal investigations, the examiner or investigators 
must be aware of some of the vulnerabilities of computer evidence: 
• The investigator must ensure that turning off power to computer equipment will not 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1850                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy or erase evidence that is required for the investigation. 
• The read/write heads of hard disk drives must be parked in a retracted position so that 
powering down the disk drive will not cause the read/write head to contact the surface 
of the disk platter. 
• Be aware that magnetic storage media are vulnerable to magnetic fields and that evidence 
might be erased without the investigator being aware of the erasure if the media are 
brought close to a source of a magnetic field. 
• Be aware that other equipment attached to the computer might be needed to complete 
the investigation into the data that resides in the computer. 
• The investigator should write-protect all diskettes that are being used in the investigation 
so that they cannot be written upon inadvertently. 
 
Integrity of Evidence 
There are certain issues that must be considered when processing computer evidence. These 
areas should be considered regardless of whether the incident will be processed as a criminal 
offense for prosecution or possible civil litigation. Even if the organization decides to take 
no action at all, how a computer fraud examination is conducted might have potential civil 
liability implications for both the organization and/or the fraud examiner.  
 
Should the fraud examiner discover evidence on a computer system, he must be able to state 
unequivocally that the evidence was not changed in any way by their actions. This requires 
that strict forensic methodologies be followed to satisfy the stringent evidentiary standards 
necessary to ensure the integrity of the evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt” for possible 
court presentation. Therefore, fraud examiners must be aware of the following issues that 
relate to the gathering of computer evidence. 
 
Search & Seizure — Expectation of Privacy 
The first question that should be asked in a computer fraud examination pertains to the 
expectation of privacy for any employee or outsider who might be involved in the incident.  
 
For example, in one incident an employee was caught using a company computer for 
personal use. The company had never established computer use policies. The employee had 
never been formally notified that personal use of the computer was prohibited and that the 
company had the right to inspect the contents of the computer at any time. Therefore, when 
a supervisor discovered inappropriate personal files on the employee’s computer, the 
employee protested the act as an invasion of his privacy. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1851 
This demonstrates that appropriate policies can be critical. In the above circumstances the 
company might have created a situation where they would actually need to obtain a court 
order or a search warrant through a law enforcement agency just to examine the contents of 
their own computers. 
 
There is specific wording that should be used in the construction of a search warrant 
involving either computers or telecommunications equipment. How the equipment and 
magnetic media are described will be critical to the success of the court case. 
 
Pre-Search Preparation 
Obtaining as much intelligence as possible regard ing the location of the potential evidence is 
very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Questions that fraud examiners 
should consider might include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search. In one case, 
approximately 17 networked file servers were involved, with multiple routers and dial-up 
modems. A team of only two investigators would need at least four to six hours to 
complete a seizure of this magnitude.  
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant. The time to discover that an “expert 
witness” has a criminal conviction is before the search warrant affidavit has even been 
written, not when the witness takes the stand to testify in a criminal proceeding. 
• Determine the resources that will be required to successfully conduct the search. If a 
great deal of equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported 
from the location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search. In another case, an assistant district attorney 
requested assistance in the execution of a search warrant. When detectives arrived, they 
discovered that the DA wanted them to seize more than 30 computers, including 3 file 
servers. This was at 3 p.m., and the DA then told the detectives that the authority to 
execute the search warrant expired at 5 p.m. Naturally, the detectives could not possibly 
have conducted the seizure within that time frame and in this case, the evidence was lost. 
A better strategy would have been to time the execution of the search warrant for 5 p.m.  
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1852                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
on a Friday afternoon. This would give the entire weekend to conduct the search, if 
necessary. 
 
Search Warrant Affidavit Construction 
The construction of search warrants has been affected by both advancements in technology 
and the evolving nature of criminal law. Fraud examiners must now consider several 
problems not encountered before. For example, the fraud examiner must know how to write 
a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the fraud 
examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (i.e., 
computer storage devices such as disks or CD-ROMs, which contain information that 
cannot be viewed without the aid of some electronic device).  
 
The warrant must allow for such contingencies as the ability to seize data files pertinent to 
the case that are mixed with data files that have nothing to do with the case but reside on the 
same storage device. The warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of 
all computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all 
material that is not. This can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might 
depend on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. 
 
To satisfy the “particularity” requirements of the Fourth Amendment, the fraud examiner 
must be able to justify each and every item that might contain evidence. For example, stating 
that “all printers” should be seized might be considered to be overly broad unless the fraud 
examiner can justify the need for each specific printer. 
 
However, with some thought fraud examiners should be able to justify the search and 
seizure for everything that they need to complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized 
might contain any or all of the following, depending upon the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1853 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? ZIP or JAZ drives 
• Cables, wiring, cords 
• Storage media 
? Floppy disks 
? Hard disks 
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROM 
? Magnetic/Optical disks 
? Digital Audio Tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital camera storage) 
? USB thumb drives 
• Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
• Documents 
• Manuals 
• Printouts 
• File listings 
 
All related documentation should be covered by the wording of the search warrant and 
seized along with the computer system. This documentation could be critical in the analysis 
of the system hardware and software. Documents could indicate changes that have been 
made to the system that will help the fraud examiner avoid damaging the system. The fact 
that access control products have been added to the system might be a helpful piece of 
information for the fraud examiner. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1854                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Processing Evidence for Removal 
The search for and seizure of technical equipment requires specific procedures that must be 
followed by fraud examiners to guarantee the integrity of evidence, and to protect both the 
organization and the individual fraud examiner from civil litigation. These guidelines are 
written to satisfy the evidentiary requirements for criminal prosecution, and each step in the 
process is there for a reason. Fraud examiners who deviate from these guidelines should be 
able to justify their actions if called into question later. 
 
1.  If possible, before executing a search warrant where computer equipment and/or 
magnetic storage media is to be seized, try to make sure that someone will be present 
who is familiar with computer equipment to assist in the identification of the various 
components. 
 
2.  It is critical that anyone not involved in the investigation be kept away from any 
computer equipment, and not be allowed to touch any of the equipment. This 
includes any person not directly involved in handling the computer and related 
equipment. It is possible for a suspect or any person touching only one key of a 
system keyboard (when a computer is operational) to destroy evidence. Limit the 
number of personnel responsible for processing computer-related evidence to 
maintain the integrity of this evidence.  
 
 
3.  If the person seizing the system has the appropriate training and expertise, it might be 
useful to observe the video display of the system. Information might be displayed that 
will be of value in the case. If this occurs, document with a close-up photograph of the 
video screen. (Take care if using a camera with a flash that the flash does not reflect 
back into the camera lens.) 
 
4.  If a computer or peripheral is not covered by the respective search warrant, leave it 
alone until a supplemental warrant can be obtained. 
 
5.  If the computer is to be removed from the location, do not enter anything via the 
system keyboard or attempt to read information from the system or any associated 
magnetic media. 
 
6.  Do not move the computer any more than is necessary until it is properly secured. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1855 
Even then, extreme care should be taken, as sudden motion could cause the 
destruction of data or damage to the equipment itself. 
 
7.  Photograph the overall view of the computer system (wide view). Move the equipment 
as little as possible before taking this photograph to indicate how the equipment was 
originally positioned. Consider videotaping the confiscation procedure for complete 
documentation of all actions performed. However, caution is advised, since the video 
will capture everything that is said and done. Speculative statements or levity should be 
restricted.  
 
8.  Document the state of the computer when first observed (was it operational, what was 
displayed on the monitor screen, etc.). 
 
9.  Depending on the experience of the person seizing the system, it might be advisable to 
unplug the power from the Central Processing Unit (CPU) before taking any further 
action. Unplug the power at the wall outlet, if accessible. Even though this action will 
lose any data in Random Access Memory, it might prevent the computer from deleting 
or changing other data. N O TE: This applies to sta nd alone microcomputers only, 
and does not include computers connected to a Local Area Network (LAN). 
 
10.  Turn off the power to all other components and/or pieces of peripheral equipment 
(such as printers, video display CRTs, or monitors, etc.). Be aware that many 
peripherals utilize Random Access Memory, which can contain evidence that will be 
lost when power is removed. 
 
11.  If possible, photograph all cable connections (usually in the rear of the system), before 
disconnecting. 
 
12.  Disconnect all components that are attached to an external power supply only (e.g., 
from an electrical wall socket, etc.). 
 
13.  Never connect or disconnect any of the cables of the system when the computer is 
operating. This could result in physical damage to the system components and/or 
peripheral equipment. 
 
14.  Label all cable connections, including any telephone cables that are connected to the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1856                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
system so that the system can be reconstructed at a later time for analysis. 
 
15.  Again, photograph all cable connections. Before photographing, try to arrange the 
cable connector labels in such a way that they will be visible in the photographs. 
 
16.  Label each item of equipment that will be confiscated. This includes the CPU, 
monitor, printers, etc. Each item that has a removable exterior case should be sealed 
with a tamperproof evidence tape (especially the CPU case). This will help to prevent 
later allegations that components were removed or altered. 
 
17.  Consideration should be given to separate close-up isolation photographs for each 
item to be seized. These close-up shots will serve the purpose of providing more 
specific identification of seized items, and responding to possible future allegations of 
physical damage to a seized item. 
 
18.  Document the location of all items seized (which room, specific location in the room, 
reference to photographs, the person who seized the item, serial numbers, special 
identification markings, etc.). 
 
19.  Check all disk drives to determine if they contain a disk. If so, remove the disk from 
the drive and place it in a disk sleeve. Write-protect the disk immediately. Label the 
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from, and then label a paper 
bag to indicate that the disk was taken from the labeled drive. Place the disk in the 
paper bag and seal it. 
 
20.  Place a cardboard insert or a “throwaway” disk  into the disk drive and secure the drive 
door shut to secure the drive heads for transportation. Cardboard inserts are specially 
made for this purpose. If none are available, a disk of the particular size that contains 
no data might be used (preferably a new, unused disk). 
 
21.  Check any other removable storage media drives, remove any storage media they 
contain, and label the media for identification purposes. (This includes components 
such as optical drives, external tape drives, IOMEGA drives, CD-ROM, etc.) 
 
22.  If there is any uncertainty as to what a piece of equipment is, do not speculate, just 
label the equipment with a unique identifying number and secure the item for later 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1857 
analysis. However, be prepared to justify the seizure of a component that might or 
might not be covered in the search warrant. 
 
23.  When all components and cables have been labeled and documented, disconnect the 
cables from their respective component and secure the cables.  
 
24.  If covered in the search warrant, confiscate all related manuals and other 
documentation, and all magnetic media. Also confiscate any other items that might be 
evidence in the case and that are covered by the terms of the search warrant. 
 
25.  If at all possible, after all equipment and magnetic media have been labeled and 
inventoried, each item should be stored in a paper bag or a cardboard box and sealed 
(to keep out dust). Large items, such as the CPU and/or printers could be stored in 
large paper bags or large boxes. Smaller items, such as disks and CDs, could be stored 
in sandwich-bag sized paper bags. This practice will protect these items from 
unnecessary exposure to dust. An additional label should be attached to the bag 
identifying the contents of the bag, along with any identifying numbers, such as the 
number of an evidence tag. Note: Plastic bags (such as garbage and sandwich 
bags) should not be used to store evidence.  
 
26.  Ensure that adequate support is given to all items when they are being moved. 
 
27.  Thoroughly document the inventory of everything to be removed from the location. 
This will be required for the search warrant return (if applicable), but also serves to 
provide a measure of liability protection for the person seizing the system.  
 
Basic computer procedures are essential when processing evidence. These precautions must 
be followed explicitly when working with computers: 
• Do not eat, drink, or smoke close to the computer system or near any of the storage 
media (such as disks or CDs). Crumbs, liquid, and/or smoke particles could all 
potentially damage the equipment or stored data. If this happens, it becomes very 
difficult, if not impossible, to recover the data (and evidence). 
• Do not fold or bend disks, or touch the magnetic media inside the disk cover. 
• Do not write on a disk, on a label of a disk, or on a bag that contains a disk. Write on a 
label and then place the label on the disk. If it is necessary to write on a disk, use a soft 
felt-tip pen. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1858                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not  place magnetic media near magnetic fields, as this could cause damage. Magnetic 
fields strong enough to damage data are more common than you might think. 
• Do not expose magnetic media to either extreme heat or cold. Temperatures outside of 
the range from 40-90 degrees Fahrenheit can damage the data. 
• Do not fingerprint magnetic media. The particles of fingerprint powder are almost 
impossible to remove from the media surface, and the drive will not be able to read the 
data contained on the media. Permanent damage to the drive equipment could  
also result. 
 
Evidence Storage 
After a computer system has been seized, most criminal justice agencies have a central 
evidence storage facility where the equipment is transported and stored until it is either 
processed further or needed in court. In the majority of cases, the special storage 
requirements of computer systems are not addressed. 
 
The storage environment should be in a location that is: 
• Relatively dust-free 
• Both temperature and humidity controlled 
• Free of magnetic and electronic fields 
 
Possible Threats to Magnetic Media 
• Telephones 
• Radio speakers 
• Radio transmitters 
• Copy machines 
• Plastic garbage or sandwich bags  
• Degaussing equipment 
• Electric fans 
• Under-shelf lighting (heat) 
• Leaving media in vehicle trunk during ex treme temperatures (either hot or cold) 
• Magnets 
• Proximity to a radiator or an open heating vent 
 
Evidence Analysis 
The primary concern during the analysis of electronic evidence is to maintain the integrity of 
the evidence. This means that procedures must be developed to ensure that no allegations 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1859 
can be raised in court that the methodology used during analysis could have damaged or 
altered the hardware, media, or data that constitutes the evidence. 
 
Currently, there are no specialized evidence analysis laboratories available to most criminal 
justice agencies to analyze computer, electronic, or magnetic evidence. The U.S. Secret 
Service and the FBI both have such capabilities, but unless the case is of critical importance 
these laboratories process only cases investigated by those agencies. 
 
Understanding the Terms 
To effectively analyze the data stored within a computer the fraud examiner must have a 
practical understanding of the basic operations of a computer and how it stores information. 
The fraud examiner must also have the expertise to access the data at the most basic level. 
Without this knowledge, information could be hidden from view or stored within other files 
or locations not usually accessed by the computer. 
 
Each new development in technology brings with it new concepts and a new vocabulary. 
The modern fraud examiner must stay current on the terms used to describe technological 
developments, tools, and practices, as he may be asked to explain such concepts as part of 
the engagement, in the resulting report, or as an expert witness during consequent 
legal proceedings.  
 
Fraud examiners must also be educated in the use of the various software utilities that will 
enable them to analyze the electronic data. Utilities such as Norton Utilities will be of great 
assistance in investigations involving personal computers. There are several utility 
applications that automate a great deal of the evidence analysis process. However, you 
should not use these programs unless you have been properly trained.  
 
Evidence Inventory 
Many times computers seized as evidence are only inventoried according to the information 
available on the outside of the CPU case — namely the make, model, and serial number of 
the particular unit. The components inside the CPU case are never examined. Fraud 
examiners must consider that there could literally be thousands of dollars of equipment 
inside this case. Inadequate inventories of computer equipment leave the organization, and 
possibly the fraud examiner, in a precarious liability position should any of this equipment be 
damaged or lost. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1860                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In analyzing and searching magnetic or optical media for potential evidence, the fraud 
examiner should consider the following: 
• Mirror copies 
• Virus detection 
• Keyword search 
• Hidden and deleted files 
• File slack area 
• File signatures 
• Encrypted files 
 
“Mirror” Copies 
If possible, the fraud examiner should make an exact duplicate, or “mirror” copy, of any 
media that is to be analyzed. This will ensure that no changes or damage occurs to the 
original evidence. This will not be possible in all cases due to a lack of equipment or other 
resources, but should be considered as the “ideal” procedure. 
 
When there is no alternative but to analyze the original of the seized evidence, consideration 
should be given to using utility software to “lock” the disk so that no information can be 
written to the disk. This will protect the integrity of the original evidence, and prevent 
inadvertent alteration of the original data. 
 
Virus Detection 
All data storage media should be examined for computer viruses. This will serve not only to 
protect the fraud examiner’s own equipment, but also will protect the fraud examiner from 
possible allegations that he infected the seized media with a computer virus. 
 
Keyword Search 
Due to the tremendous storage capacity of contemporary computer media, it might be more 
cost effective for the fraud examiner to conduct a “keyword search” of the media, searching 
for key words, names, dates, account numbers, etc. that are material to the fraud case. This 
will minimize the amount of time used to complete the analysis, and also protects the fraud 
examiner from possible allegations that their search was overly broad. 
 
“Hidden” and “Deleted” Files 
Most computer operating systems allow files to be designated as “hidden” files. When so 
designated, the files might not be visible to normal search procedures, such as displaying a 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1861 
disk directory. Utility programs exist to show these “hidden” files. Fraud examiners should 
inspect these files to determine if they were intentionally hidden because they contain 
evidence. 
 
In addition, many computer users do not realize that an initial command to “delete” a file 
does not necessarily mean that the file contents have been destroyed. With the appropriate 
utility programs, erased files can be “unerased” and reviewed by the fraud examiner. 
 
File Slack Area 
There is a difference in most operating systems between the “logical” size of a file and the 
“physical” size of the file. The logical size pertains to the size in the number of “bytes” that 
the file occupies. In a directory listing, this is the number that is displayed for “file size.”   
 
The physical size of a file depends on how the operating system stores files. In most 
operating systems, the disk is organized into designated blocks called clusters. Files occupy a 
whole number of clusters, even if the logical size of the file is smaller than the cluster size. In 
these cases, difference in space between the physical file space and the logical file space is 
called the file slack area. This area might contain data from previously-erased files that could 
contain evidence. Unless the fraud examiner has a special utility to identify and investigate 
the file slack area, potential evidence possibly located there could be missed. 
 
File Signatures 
When reviewing a directory listing in a file manager such as Windows Explorer, the “type” 
of file is one of the options that might display. This information might indicate that the file 
is an “application,” or that it is a “Word Document,” or some other type. However, this 
designation is usually based on the “extension” of the file, and might not be an accurate 
indication of the file contents.  
 
For example, if a file were created in Microsoft Word, and saved with the file name of 
“Murder Confession.doc,” the directory listing would correctly indicate that this file was a 
“Word Document.” However, if the file were renamed as “Angel.exe,” the directory listing 
would mistakenly indicate that the file was an “application,” even though the contents of the 
file itself have not changed. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1862                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inspecting each and every file on seized media would be tremendously tedious and very 
time-consuming. However, there are utility programs that can automate this process and 
report any discrepancies such as the one described above. 
 
Encrypted Files 
Should the fraud examiner come across files that have been encrypted during the analysis of 
seized computer media, several considerations arise. 
 
First of all, utility programs exist to decrypt documents encrypted by many of the more 
common business software applications, such as Microsoft Word and WordPerfect. There 
are also several companies who specialize in this type of decryption. 
 
Secondly, there is precedent for forcing the suspect to divulge the decryption code through a 
court order. Consider once again that the computer is only a container and that the 
encryption is an additional “lock” that is prohibiting the fraud examiner from reviewing the 
contents for potential evidence. If a valid search warrant exists authorizing the examination 
of the data, this would be no different than a court ordering a suspect to unlock a file cabinet 
to allow the inspection of its contents. 
 
 
Computer Crime Laws 
 
International Law 
With a global communications network such as the Internet, the odds have dramatically 
increased that a crime may have been perpetrated in a foreign nation, or that records related 
to a portion of the communications transmission may have passed through another country. 
This can cause tremendous complications for a fraud examiner attempting to pursue his 
investigation. 
 
Victims of scams originating overseas usually find themselves with virtually no recourse. 
Recent computer equipment and software scam operations in former communist nations 
have specifically targeted U.S. users. Language, communication, and distance obstacles are 
nearly insurmountable in working with foreign law enforcement officials to resolve such 
cases. In the future, greater international cooperation will be necessary to combat 
international high tech crime.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1863 
Recently, however, the U.S. has taken two substantial steps to combat the inconsistency in 
international laws pertaining to computer fraud. First, on September 29, 2006, the United 
States became a party to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which “is the 
only legally binding multilateral instrument specifically addressing computer-related crime, 
helping protect citizens against computer hacking and Internet fraud, as well as crimes 
involving electronic evidence.” Parties to the Convention are committed to harmonizing 
national laws, to improving investigative techniques, and to increasing cooperation.  
 
Second, the U.S. is an active participant in the Subgroup on High-Tech Crime at G8’s Lyon 
Group, which was created “to enhance the abilities of G8 countries to prevent, investigate, 
and prosecute crimes involving computers, networked communications, and other new 
technologies.” One significant accomplishment of the Subgroup was the creation of a 
network that allows law enforcement authorities of member nations to receive rapid 
cooperation in investigating computer crime. 
 
Federal Laws 
There are many laws that can be used to prosecute computer crimes and frauds. In the 
United States, the basic laws used to prosecute computer and other high tech crimes are 
divided into the federal laws and state laws.  
 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1030) 
Most computer crimes are prosecuted under traditional fraud, theft, and embezzlement 
statutes. A statute enacted in 1984, Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1030, makes certain 
computer-related activity a specific federal offense. More information on section 1030 is set 
out in the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
In brief, section 1030(a) prohibits seven acts involving “protected computers.”  
 
A protected computer, under this section, includes: 
• A computer that is used exclusively by a financial institution or the United States 
government. 
• Any computer the use of which affects a computer used by a financial institution or the 
federal government. 
• A computer that is used in interstate or foreign commerce or communication. 
 
Briefly, section 1030(a) prohibits using a protected computer:  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1864                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To commit espionage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(1));  
• To obtain, without authorization, certain government, financial institution, or 
commercial information (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2)); 
• To access, without authorization, a government computer (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(3)); 
• To commit fraud ((18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(4));  
• To transmit a program, code, or command to damage a protected computer or to access 
a protected computer that results in damage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(5)) 
• For trafficking in passwords (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(6)); 
• To transmit extortionate threats (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(7).  
 
Sections 1030(a)(5) and 1030(a)(4) are discussed in further detail below.  
 
COMPUTER FRAUD (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 1030(a)(4)) 
As noted above, section 1030(a)(4) outlaws fraud involving protected computers. There are 
three elements of the crime, which include: 
• Knowingly accessing a protected computer without authorization (or exceeding 
authorization); 
• With the intent to defraud; and  
• Thereby obtaining anything of value (more than $5,000 over the course of a year). 
 
CAUSING COMPUTER DAMAGE (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE SECTION 1030(a)(5)) 
Section 1030(a)(5), which applies to computers used in interstate or foreign commerce or 
communication, outlaws causing computer damage. But it contains two categories of 
offense, depending on intent. The first category provides that it is illegal to knowingly 
transmit a program, code, or command that intentionally causes damage a protected 
computer. This offense applies even if the individual had authorization to access the 
computer.  
 
The second category provides that it is illegal to access a protected computer, without 
authorization, that results in damage. Unlike the first category, this offense does not require 
intent to damage, only the intent to access the information.  
 
Unlawful actions under the first category of section 1030(a)(5) violations include 
imprisonment up to one year and/or a fine. Violators under the second category of section 
1030(a)(5) may receive up to five years imprisonment (not more than 10 years for repeat 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1865 
offenders) and/or a fine. Both categories provide a civil remedy for any person who suffers 
damage as a result of a violation of section 1030(a)(5).  
 
To apply, section 1030(a)(5) requires that the defendant’s conduct “cause” damage to a 
computer. Due to its broadness, the definition allows section 1030(a)(5) to apply in various 
situations, including instances where an act causes information to be deleted or changed, 
where an intruder alters the way a computer operates, or where an act makes information 
unavailable. Even if an intruder did not make any alterations and the computer system works 
as it did before, some courts have ruled that accessing and copying private data from 
protected computers may cause damage to the data under section 1035(a)(5).  
 
PENALTIES   
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act provides both criminal and civil liability. Section 1030 
includes criminal punishment provisions; however, it provides different penalties, depending 
on the specific conduct. The Act also provides civil remedies for individuals that suffered 
damages resulting from section 1030 violations. 
 
Can-Spam Act (Title 18, U.S. Code Section 1037) 
The Can-Spam Act, or the Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and 
Marketing Act, attempts to reduce the amount of unsolicited commercial e-mail, which is 
also known as spam, by establishing national standards for sending e-mail solicitations. To 
reduce the amount of spam, the Can-Spam Act provides several provisions that apply to 
individuals or companies sending spam. More specifically, the Act prohibits several 
deceptive and/or fraudulent practices commonly used in spam, including the prohibition of 
using deceptive subject lines, using deceptive header information, and requiring sender 
identification. Penalties under the Can-Spam Act include punishment by a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
Access Device Fraud (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1029) 
Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1029, criminalizes the production, use, trafficking, or possession 
of unauthorized or counterfeit access devices. Access devices are devices that allow access to 
account funds. Most importantly, section 1029 proh ibits the fraudulent use of credit cards. 
However, because Congress broadly defined the term “access devices,” section 1029 also 
applies to crimes using other access device numbers, including debit cards, ATM cards, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), computer passwords, “or any other thing of value, 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1866                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
or that can be used to initiate a transfer of funds (other than a transfer originated solely by 
paper instrument).” 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1028) 
As discussed in the Consumer Fraud section, the growth of identity theft led Congress to 
pass the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act, which makes identity theft a federal 
crime. This Act outlaws the intentional and unauthorized use of another individual’s 
identification, with the intent to commit a crime. The Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act carries a maximum term of 15 years’ imprisonment, a fine, and criminal 
forfeiture of any personal property used or intended to be used to commit the offense. The 
penalty is increased to imprisonment of up to 30 years if the offense is committed to 
facilitate an act of terrorism.  
 
Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property (ITSP) (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 2314) 
The ITSP statute prohibits the transportation, transmittal, or transfer of fraudulently 
received goods, wares, merchandise, securities, or money in interstate or foreign commerce, 
when valued at $5,000 or more. Prosecutors of ten use the ITSP statute in fraud prosecutions 
in conjunction with mail fraud counts, wire fraud counts, or to provide federal jurisdiction in 
their absence. To apply, the ITSP statute requires that an individual transport the proceeds, 
which must value at least $5,000, across state lin es. Defendants also violate the statute if they 
induce their victim(s) to travel in interstate commerce as part of the scheme to defraud. 
Courts may aggregate items valued at less than $5,000 as part of the same scheme to meet 
the value requirement. 
 
Additionally, it is clear that section 2314 applies when defendants steal tangible items, which 
qualify as goods, wares, or merchandise, that contains intellectual property. However, courts 
have had varying opinions on the characterization of intellectual property as “goods, wares, 
merchandise, securities, or money” when an individual steals intangible property through 
intangible means.  
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986  
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, governs the illegal interception of electronic 
communication and the unauthorized access of electronically stored data. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1867 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, the Stored Communications Act, and 
the Pen Register Act, which regulates pen registers and trap and trace devices. This section, 
however, focuses on the Wiretap Act and the Stored Communications Act. 
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTIONS 2510-2521) 
In response to privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, which prohibits anyone 
from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, oral, or electronic 
communication. 
  
Focusing on its applicability to computer fraud, the Wiretap Act prohibits the intentional 
interception of certain electronic communications, including e-mail; it does not govern 
stored communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of 
the contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts 
have held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Additionally, most courts agree that interception does not occur when an individual obtains 
access to an electronically stored copy of the communication, “whether such storage occurs 
pre- or post-delivery, and even if the storage lasts only a few milliseconds.” As a result, the 
Wiretap Act is often inadequate to protect electronic communications sent over the Internet.  
 
The Wiretap Act also contains several exceptions to prosecution, including the consent 
exception, which provides that parties to the communication may authorize others to 
intercept the transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees.  
  
STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 2701) 
As part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Congress enacted the Stored 
Communications Act (SCA) to protect stored electronic communications, such as e-mail, 
and voicemail by prohibiting the unauthorized access of such communications that are in 
storage. More specifically, the SCA prohibits unlawful access to a facility, which provides an 
electronic communication service, and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1868                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
access to a wire or electronic communication while it is electronically stored in such  
a system.  
 
Unlike interception under the Wiretap Act, an electronic communication falls under the SCA 
once a system receives and stores it. However, like the Wiretap Act, the SCA includes a 
consent exception. Under this exception, a service provider may disclose electronic 
communications with the lawful consent of the originator, an addressee, or the intended 
recipient.  
 
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment for 
up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for not more than 10 years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, courts may impose a 
fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all subsequent convictions, 
courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to 10 years. 
 
Mail and Wire Fraud (Title 18, U. S. Code, Sections 1341 and 1343) 
As discussed above, a computer may be the tool used to commit traditional crimes, including 
mail and wire fraud. Due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statutes, prosecutors 
may use these traditional criminal statutes to prosecute computer fraud. In basic terms, the 
laws prohibit the use of mails or wires, including the Internet, in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property.  
 
Several cases have held that the federal mail and wire fraud statues apply to computer fraud. 
Furthermore, prosecutors may use these statutes in addition to or in lieu of cases that 
implicate trade secrets; counterfeit or illicit labels; counterfeit documentation or packaging; 
or counterfeit trademarks, service marks, or certification marks. However, courts disagree on 
whether the mail and wire fraud statutes reach criminal copyright infringement.  
 
Penalties under the mail and wire fraud statues include fines, imprisonment up to five years, 
or both. However, if the violation affects a financial institution, the violator may receive 
fines up to $1,000,000, imprisonment up to thirty years, or both.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1869 
False Statements (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1001) 
Prosecutors most often use section 1001 to prosecute false statements made to law 
enforcement or regulatory officials, not made under oath, in the course of an official 
investigation, or on an application for such things as federal employment, credit, and visa 
applications. Prosecutors may also use section 1001 in lieu of the misdemeanor provisions of 
the IRS Code for filing false documents with tax returns.  
 
Section 1001 violations may implicate other federal laws, including computer fraud (18 
U.S.C. 1030(a)(4) and Internet Fraud (e.g., auction fraud or “phishing”) by making false 
statements in any matter within the jurisdiction of the government. 
 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections 1831-183 9) 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA) makes the theft of trade secrets a federal 
criminal offense. The EEA outlaws two types of trade secret misappropriation: section 1831 
criminalizes economic espionage, which is the theft of a trade secret to benefit a foreign 
government, instrumentality, or agent; and section 1832 criminalizes the theft of commercial 
trade secrets to obtain an economic advantage.  
 
Sections 1831 and 1832 provide significant penalties for trade secret violations. If done to 
benefit a foreign government, the theft of trade secrets is punishable by up to fifteen years 
imprisonment and up to a $500,000 fine. Trade secret theft for commercial benefit is 
punishable by up to 10 years imprisonment and up to a $250,000 fine. The EEA, however, 
does not provide any civil remedies. 
 
Additionally, prosecutors can apply the EEA to a wide variety of misconduct because it 
criminalizes attempts and conspiracies to violate the EEA. The same penalties apply to these 
offenses with increased penalties if the trade secret misappropriation benefits a foreign 
government, foreign instrumentality, or a foreign agent.  
 
Moreover, the EEA authorizes the Attorney General to commence a civil action seeking 
injunctive relief to prevent further disclosure of a trade secret by the defendant or third 
parties.   
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1870                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal Infringement of a Copyright (Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 506 and Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 2319) 
Title 17, U.S. Code, section 506, criminalizes willful copyright infringement and defines what 
conduct is prohibited, while Title 18, U.S. Code, section 2319, imposes the criminal 
punishment for a copyright infringement conviction, which is to be added to any other 
penalties imposed by other provisions or laws. 
 
Copyright law grants copyright holders six exclusive rights to their works, including the right 
to reproduction. Generally, infringement occurs if an individual exercises any one of the 
copyright holder’s exclusive rights without authorization or other legal authority. However, 
not all infringements are criminal offenses. Instead, section 506 provides that copyright 
infringement is criminal if an individual willfully reproduces or distributes, for commercial 
advantage or private financial gain, one or more copies of copyrighted works totaling in 
retail value $1,000 or more.  
 
Section 2319 imposes punishment for both felony and misdemeanor crimes. Felony 
penalties attach when the infringement consists of the reproduction or distribution of 10 or 
more copies of copyrighted works within 180 days that, taken together, are worth more than 
$2,500, or when the violation involves distribution of a “work being prepared for 
commercial distribution” over “a computer network accessible to members of the public.” 
Alternatively, misdemeanor crimes attach when the infringement consisted of any of  
the following: 
• Infringement of reproduction or distribution rights for private financial gain or 
commercial advantage, regardless of the exact volume or value of the infringement;  
• Infringement of reproduction or distribution rights of one or more copies of 
copyrighted works within 180 days that are worth a total retail value of $1,000 or more, 
and it does not involve private financial gain or commercial advantage; or  
• Infringement of rights other than reproduction or distribution for private financial gain 
or commercial advantage 
 
In 1997, President Clinton signed The No Electronic Theft Act into law, which amended the 
copyright laws to prohibit electronic infringements and extended the copyright infringement 
to include acts that do not necessarily give rise to a profit.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1871 
Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Computer Programs (Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 117) 
Although copyright laws provide copyright holders the exclusive right to reproduction, this 
right is subject to a number of limitations, including section 117, which allows the copying of 
copyrighted software in limited circumstances. Under section 117, the owner of a copy of a 
computer program is allowed to make additional copies of such program in two instances. 
First, owners may copy a computer program if it is necessary for the use of the computer 
program. Second, users may make a copy for archival purposes to prevent loss due to hard 
drive failures and the like.  
 
Even though the law authorizes copies made under section 117’s limitations, there are 
restrictions. All copies must be destroyed when the possession of a computer program 
ceases to be deemed rightful. Furthermore, any copies made in accordance with this section 
may be transferred but must be accompanied by the original program from which copies 
were made and with all rights in the program. 
 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (Title 17, U.S. Code, Sections 1201-1205) 
The advent of the Internet and digital media has led to an increase in intellectual copyright 
infringement. In response to this development, Congress enacted the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act of 1998 (DMCA). The DMCA outlaws the use of computers (and other 
electronic devices) to infringe against copyright holders’ exclusive rights. To further this goal, 
the DMCA provides liability limitations for transmitting copyrighted material online. The 
DMCA also provides criminal penalties for circumventing copyright protection systems, 
which are set forth in section 1201, and for compromising the integrity of copyright 
management information pursuant to section 1202.  
 
Violations under either section 1201 or 1202  are subject to a maximum of five years 
imprisonment, up to $500,000 fine, or both. Subsequent offenses are subject to a maximum 
of 10 years, a maximum fine of $1,000,000, or both. 
 
Electronic Fund Transfers: Criminal Liability (Title 15, U.S. Code, Section 1693n) 
Congress designed this legislation to allow consumers the ease and benefit of electronic fund 
transfer, while defining the rights and liabilities of the parties involved in such transactions. 
Section 1693n applies to paperless money transfers between accounts, including ATM 
transactions, debit and credit card transactions, point-of-sale (POS) debit transactions, 
telephone transfers, and, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1872                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
any “other electronic banking transactions that can result in the withdrawal of cash from 
your bank account.” 
 
In particular, this statute attaches criminal liability to the acts of: 
• Giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations; or 
• Failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations. 
 
It also prohibits certain actions affecting commerce, including: 
• Using, attempting to use, or conspiring to use any fraudulently obtained debit 
instrument, with knowledge of fraudulent character, to obtain anything with an 
aggregating value of at least $1,000 within a one-year period; or 
• Transporting, attempting to transport, or conspiring to transport a fraudulent debit 
instrument with unlawful or fraudulent intent, and knowledge; or 
• Selling or transporting in interstate or foreign commerce of any fraudulent debit 
instrument, with knowledge; or 
• Receiving, concealing, using, or transporting anything that is proceeds from a fraudulent 
activity and that has a value exceeding $1,000 within any one-year period; or  
• Receiving, concealing, using, selling, or transporting of one or more tickets for interstate 
or foreign transportation that have a value aggregating $500 or more and were obtained 
by use of a fraudulent debit instrument; or 
• Furnishing money, property, services, or anything else of value, aggregating  
$1,000 or more within a one-year period, in  conjunction with the use of a fraudulent 
debit instrument.  
 
State Laws 
At the state level, statutes that might be of use in prosecuting computer crimes would 
include the penal code violations of larceny (in its many forms), false pretenses, forgery, 
fraud, embezzlement, vandalism, property destruction, malicious mischief, proprietary 
information, theft, commercial bribery, and extortion. But most states now expressly provide 
penalties for crimes perpetrated by use of computers or perpetrated against computers. See 
the Law section for a complete listing of state computer fraud statutes. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1873 
Government Information on Cybercrime 
 
DOJ Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section 
The Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS) of the Criminal Division of 
the U.S. Department of Justice (DOS) provides a number of excellent resources regarding 
computer and Internet fraud. 
 
Their web address is www.cybercrime.gov. On that site, the CCIPS has information about 
computer crimes, encryption, electronic commerce, hacking, legal issues relating to computer 
crimes, privacy issues, and international issues, among others. 
 
They also have some superb information regarding the search and seizure of computers, 
including the CCIPS’s manual entitled, Searching and Seizing Computers and Obtaining Electronic 
Evidence in Criminal Investigations. Additionally, they have set forth the federal criminal code 
sections relating to searches, as well as materials about the Fourth Amendment and the 
Internet. The materials on search and seizure can be accessed directly at the following site: 
www.cybercrime.gov/searching.html. 
 
DHS National Cyber Security Division  
The National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) of the Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) works with public, private, and international entities to ensure the security of 
cyberspace and U.S. cyber assets. The NCSD has the following two primary objectives: 
• Building and maintaining an effective national cyberspace response system 
• Implementing a cyber-risk management program for the protection of critical 
infrastructure 
 
More information about the NCSD can be found at: 
http://www.dhs.gov/xabout/structure/editorial_0839.shtm.   
Financial Transactions  Public Sector Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1901 



:


comput and internet fraud
over the last four decad comput system have improv dramat thei ar more
power smaller cheaper and more userfriendli as thei have advanc comput have
prolifer in our societi our busi and our person live most modern busi
and govern depend on their comput system to support their oper from
personnel to financi manag and everyth in between
initi comput us to support busi and govern process were back up
with hard copi if the comput went down the hard copi were us and everyon went
back to manual form and process howev in todai environ most busi and
govern process could not surviv without the comput there ar few hard
copi backup
comput have becom the mainstai of busi and govern process without
todai comput entir busi and govern oper would almost ceas to
function imagin try to manual process tax return us robot compil budget
build automobil build weapon system check law enforc file or get cash from
autom teller machin atm without the aid of comput
the prolifer of cheap power userfriendli comput ha enabl more and more
peopl to us them and more importantli reli on them as part of their normal wai of life
as busi govern agenc and individu come to increasingli depend on
comput as a necessari tool so do the crimin thei us comput to support their
illeg oper comput crime and fraud ar increas and will no doubt continu to
increas as more comput ar network internation thu give global access to
comput crimin
the follow result were deriv from the 2009 comput crime and secur survei
conduct by the comput secur institut
respond report big jump in incid of password snif financi fraud and
malwar infect
onethird of respond organ were fraudul repres as the sender of a
phish messag
averag loss due to secur incid were down from 289000 per respond to
234244 per respond
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11802 2011 fraud examin manual
twentyf percent of respond felt that over 60 percent of their financi loss
were due to nonmalici action by insid
respond were satisfi though not overjoi with all secur technolog
most respond felt their invest in endus secur awar train wa
inadequ but most felt their invest in other compon of their secur
program were adequ
when ask what action were taken follow a secur incid 22 percent of
respond state that thei notifi individu whose person inform wa
breach and 17 percent state that thei provid new secur servic to user or
custom
when ask what secur solut rank highest on their wishlist mani respond
name tool that would improv their visibl such as better log manag secur
inform and event manag secur data visual and secur dashboard
respond gener said that regulatori complianc effort have had a posit effect
on their organ secur program
the csi figur also includ data about the occurr of threat to cybersecur in 2009
compar to those in 2008
643 percent of respond experienc malwar infect compar to 2008 50
percent
292 percent experienc denialofservic attack compar to 2008 21 percent
173 percent experienc password snif compar to 9 percent in 2008
135 percent experienc web site defac compar to 2008 6 percent
76 percent experienc instant messag abus down from 21 percent in 2008
unlik tradit fraud case comput fraud case can be difficult for the fraud examin
becaus thei
lack a tradit paper audit trail
requir an understand of the technolog us to commit the crime
usual requir an understand of the technolog of the victim comput
veri often requir the us of on or more specialist to assist the fraud examin even
when the fraud examin is comput liter
befor explor the specif of high tech crime howev let us clarifi the comput
function in the commiss of these scheme comput crime is most often thought of as a
crime that is commit with the aid of a comput yet the comput ha variou role in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11803
high tech crime both as tool and target accord to donn b parker a cybercrim
author and author the function of the comput in crime is fourfold in fight
comput crime mr parker describ how the comput serv as an object a subject a tool
and a symbol
the comput as an object comput and network system ar themselv often object or
target of crime subject to physic sabotag theft or destruct of inform
the comput as a subject accord to parker comput ar the direct subject of crime
when thei ar the environ in which technologist commit crime thi categori
includ viru attack
the comput as a tool comput ar us as the mean to commit crime whether
embezzl theft of proprietari inform or hack
the comput as a symbol comput lend fraudster an air of credibl and ar often
us to deceiv victim into invest and pyramid scheme
in these four capac common comput crime includ
data alter
unauthor access and entri to system and inform
read anoth email without permiss
data destruct and sabotag
internet consum fraud
sale of proprietari data
desktop counterfeit
data extort
disclosur of confidenti data
ident theft
electron letter bomb
softwar piraci
pbx fraud
voicemail fraud
cellular telephon fraud
stolen longdist call card
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11804 2011 fraud examin manual
comput fraud versu comput crime
a line that should be drawn is that between comput fraud and comput crime term that
ar commonli us interchang with littl distinct made between the two some
substanti differ exist between them howev as we shall see
comput fraud
a gener definit of comput fraud is
ani defalc or embezzl accomplish by tamper with comput program data
file oper equip or media and result in loss sustain by the organ
whose comput system wa manipul
the distinguish characterist of comput fraud is that access occur with the intent to
execut a fraudul scheme comput fraud statut have establish two veri import
principl
first the statut contain definit of computerrel term these statut allow the
prosecutor to sidestep have to explain to the juri technic comput speak and it
cumbersom fit with common law terminolog
second the statut creat an offens base on proof of access with a particular intent
success in carri awai properti monei doe not have to be proven trace the flow
of proce is like to be difficult without paper record and access might be the onli
provabl event
most state have defin comput fraud as an attempt crime by view the comput as a
protect asset the protect is independ of the actual loss to the owner as a result of
the intrus
comput crime
comput crime differ from comput fraud in two major wai employe who as a part of
their normal duti have access to the comput ar deem to have author access and
thu do not come under the law against access manipul alter or destruct of
data includ comput softwar is independ of fraudul or other scheme such
action doe not fit into the normal vandal crime becaus the data is intang
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11805
computerassist crime
it is sometim said that most comput fraud is not comput crime but involv the us
of comput instead of other mean to break the law in some case these tradition
illeg act can yield more loot by recours to the high speed of the comput these ar in
realiti computerassist crime and the exist crimin statut can be appropri
appli to them howev where detect and proof problem ar exacerb by the
involv of electron media comput fraud law ar invalu for
effect prosecut
inform crime
in some case the comput is an activ weapon these kind of case ar term inform
crime the crime would not be possibl without comput technolog exampl of
inform crime includ the theft of comput time softwar and data
comput hack
as the number of comput and comput user increas so doe the number and type of
hacker a 2007 studi by the univers of ma ryland a jame clark school of engin
report that hacker attack comput with internet connect everi 39 second or about
2244 time a dai in addit a 2007 research report conduct by whitehat a websit
secur servic provid show that as mani as 90 percent of all websit remain
vulner to some form of comput hack
although the term hacker wa origin us to describ a comput enthusiast the term ha
now evolv to mean someon seek unauthor access to comput system and the
inform contain therein it includ organ employe member of hacker
gang and hacker for profit motiv vari accord to the target system inform
desir and the perpetr while hack wa onc commonli thought of as a precoci
teenag hobbi it ha chang dramat in the last twenti year to encompass a larg
and divers group
definit
hack is basic break into comput and telecommun system by learn
the vulner of variou hardwar and softwar and us a comput to systemat
guess the user system identif and password
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11806 2011 fraud examin manual
hacker us variou rogu softwar applic to penetr a system or sometim thei
enlist the help of the user surreptiti by instal a program that is download via an e
mail or by visit a websit these program oper in the background of the infect
comput and can disabl secur set and captur inform that is sent back to
the hacker
but the most direct wai of gain access to a comput is to us someon els password
or gener without author a password of on own password ar design to
keep comput safe if you dont know the password the machin will not run howev
most user choos password that while not easi to crack follow certain pattern peopl
usual pick someth familiar and easi as their password a deepsea fisherman us
marlin the man secretari who receiv a mug about soar with the eagl and
work with turkei from her boss last christma us turkei as her password there
ar list circul among hacker of the most like password
if the hacker know or can learn someth about hi target hi job is even easier that
fisherman for exampl probabl ha a huge marlin mount on hi wall it locat directli
in the man line of sight as he log on each morn it a good guess thi gui will have
marlin or reel or someth els fishi in hi password a simpl lesson here realword
password even in variat ar not secur the safest password combin letter number
and other special charact such as punctuat
social engin
anoth mean of gain access to a system involv simpl decept the hacker us hi
verbal skill to deceiv victim into disclos inform thei ought not to divulg or
convinc victim to commit act that facilit the hacker scheme often pose as an
employe or someon hire by the organ the hacker easili deceiv real employe
into reveal inform in order to research hi scheme he mai avail himself of
document in the compani dumpster such as intern telephon directori and
correspond
the hacker mai assum a number of differ guis to accomplish thi decept he mai
pose as a new or temporari worker and ask inform system employe for a password
so that he can begin work he mai also pose as someon in a posit of author and
intimid employe into reveal confidenti inform
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11807
sometim overt decept is not requir in larg corpor hacker can take advantag
of the anonym among employe by don offic attir thei can blend into the crowd
and thu perus the premis perhap gain a password written down at an employe
desk in the process
hacker comput manipul
trojan hors
a trojan hors is the covert placement of instruct in a program that caus the
comput to perform unauthor function but usual still allow the program to perform
it intend purpos thi method is on of the most commonli us techniqu in
computerbas fraud and sabotag
spywar
spywar is a type of malwar short for malici softwar that is instal on comput and
collect littl bit of inform at a time about user without their knowledg the presenc
of spywar is typic hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect the most
common us of spywar for fraud is the theft of person inform includ financi
inform such as credit card number
trap door
when develop larg program programm insert instruct for addit code and
intermedi output capabl the design of comput oper system attempt to
prevent thi from happen therefor programm insert instruct that allow them to
circumv these control hacker take advantag of these trap door
salami techniqu
salami techniqu involv the execut of unauthor program us to steal small
amount of asset from a larg number of sourc without notic reduc the whole
for exampl in a bank system the amount of interest to be credit to an account is
typic round off a fraudster might set up the system so that instead of round off the
number that fraction of it is credit to a special account own by the perpetr
logic bomb
a logic bomb is a comput program execut at a specif time period or when a specif
event occur for exampl a programm can write a program to instruct the comput to
delet all personnel and payrol file if hi name were ever remov from the file
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11808 2011 fraud examin manual
data diddl
data diddl is the chang of data befor or dure entri into the comput system
exampl includ forg or counterfeit document us for data entri and exchang
valid disk and tape with modifi replac
scaveng and dumpster dive
scaveng involv obtain inform left around a comput system in the comput
room trash can and so on dumpster dive refer to glean sensit inform from
an organ trash receptacl and dumpster
data leakag
data leakag is the remov of inform by smuggl it out as part of a print
document encod the inform to look like someth differ and remov it from
the facil
piggybackingimperson
piggyback and imperson ar frequent us to gain access to restrict area
exampl includ follow someon in through a door with a badg reader electron
us anoth user identif and password to gain comput access and tap into
the termin link of a user to caus the comput to believ that both termin ar the same
person
simul and model
simul and model is a comput manipul techniqu us the comput as a tool
or instrument to plan or control a crimin act
wire tap
wire tap into a comput commun link is anoth techniqu us by hacker
thi method enabl perpetr to read the inform be transmit between
comput or between comput and termin
network weav
thi techniqu more commonli known as loop involv us numer network in an
attempt to avoid detect for exampl a hacker might dial into compani as pbx system
to obtain an outsid line that can be us to dial into compani bs network if compani b
can track the origin of the hacker call it w ill lead them to compani a not to the hacker
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11809
the abov is a rel simpl exampl hacker have been known to loop through 15 or
20 differ network befor arriv at their final destin network weav can make it
extrem difficult for an investig or fraud examin to trace the point of origin for a
specif telephon call or data transmiss
alter the wai a system gener password
not all password ar suppli by user some ar gener by a comput system
random function for exampl mani internet servic provid isp give firsttim
user a randomli gener password and sometim a random user name as well which
get the person onlin then the user chang the login inform to their
own prefer
by learn how a certain system random work the hacker can imit the gener
of valid password or alter how the system oper for exampl with some tinker the
random can be set to give everi new user the same seemingli random password
evbdcl8 but that wont work for long it better to have the machin make a password
built off some inform about the user that is publicli avail us a rel simpl
set of algorithm a hacker can convert a user name such as halbfish into an obscur
look string like rueavzhr letter ar read as number by comput speak ascii
code so the algorithm ar us sine valu to convert the ascii valu into a new set
of number
here a good exampl of how manipul a random work denni ritchi who
help develop unix technolog report how a hacker attack on compani system
comput offici at the compani had their system gener password each eight
charact long mix letter and digit in a brute forc attack it should have taken 112
year to crack the nearli 3 trillion possibl howev the random on the compani
system could onli take 32768 seed for password the hacker us hi own machin to
gener and test each of those combin us accord to ritchi a total of onli
about on minut of machin time in less time than the averag commerci break run on
televis the hacker breach a seemingli impenetr system
buffer overflow exploit
buffer overflow exploit ar on of the largest problem in comput secur todai in all
applic program there ar buffer that hold data these buffer have a fix size if an
attack send too much data into on of these buffer the buffer overflow the server
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11810 2011 fraud examin manual
then execut the data that overflow as a program thi program mai do ani number of
thing like send password to russia alter system file or instal
backdoor depend on what data the attack sent to the buffer
privileg escal exploit
privileg escal exploit grant administr or rootlevel access to user who previous
did not have such access for exampl an account exist on all window nt and 2000
server call guest thi account by default ha no password anyon can login to the
server us thi guest account and then us a common privileg escal exploit call
getadmin to gain administratorlevel access to the system mani other privileg escal
exploit exist such as hackdll and other these exploit ar veri us sinc thei allow
anyon who ha ani level of access to a system to easili elev their privileg level and
perform ani activ thei desir
backdoor
when attack obtain rootlevel access to a server us a buffer overflow exploit or a
privileg escal exploit for exampl thei will want to do two thing
instal a backdoor
cover their track
backdoor allow attack to remot access a system again in the futur for exampl the
attack mai have us a particular secur hole to get rootlevel access to a comput
howev over time that particular secur hole mai be close prevent the attack from
access the system again in order to avoid be shut out in the futur attack instal
backdoor these backdoor take differ form but all allow an attack to access the
server again without go through the standard login procedur and without have to
repeat the attack that gave them access in the first place mani worm instal backdoor as a
part of their malici payload code red ii for exampl instal a backdoor that provid
access to the c and d drive of the compromis web server from anywher on the
internet other common backdoor program ar netbu and backorific which allow
attack to remot control a compromis server onc a backdoor is establish the
hacker retreat and cover hi track to keep the initi attack unnot
http exploit
http exploit involv us the web server applic to perform malici activ
these attack ar veri common and ar grow in popular becaus firewal typic
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11811
block most traffic from the internet to keep it awai from corpor server howev
http traffic us for web brows is almost alwai allow to pass through firewal
unhind thu attack have a direct line to the web server if thei can coerc the web
server into perform malici activ thei can access resourc that would otherwis
be unavail
antihack measur
becaus hacker requir dialin capabl to gain access the best prevent strategi is to
elimin as mani dialin port as possibl unfortun the trend todai is to instal more
not fewer dialin capabl becaus telecommut and custom connect ar drive
the demand for more dialin capabl the follow ar some prevent measur that can
be implement
welcom screen ar usual proudli displai at signin with a messag such as
welcom to the xyz corpor comput network
to discourag unauthor us such a screen might be replac with on that inform
the user that he is about to access a proprietari network addition the screen should
warn that unauthor access is prohibit and will be prosecut under the law the
screen should not identifi either the organ or the network
secur polici should be establish and dissemin throughout the organ
these polici should includ train for all employe custom who will appreci
the addit secur and other who have a need to access the network
callback modem should be us wherev practic these modem will answer an
incom call and requir the sender to enter a password onc the caller ha identifi
himself the modem will termin the connect and dial a previous establish
phone number when the prearrang number is call the sender must again perform
the signon procedur
secur softwar packag should be secur to the highest level possibl most major
softwar compani todai have to releas updat and patch to their softwar everi so
often check your softwar vendor websit on a regular basi for new secur patch
or us the new autom patch featur that some compani offer
password should be us in accord with sound secur practic for exampl
password should be chang period everi 90 dai is suggest
password should be of suffici length to deter guess a minimum of 8
charact is suggest
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11812 2011 fraud examin manual
password of transfer or termin employe should be chang immedi
most purchas softwar come with a ve ndor suppli password that is us for
instal and then delet all packag should be audit to ensur that these default
password which ar wide known have been chang
encrypt should be consid for sensit data file password file and sensit
comput program
commun softwar should termin ani connect whether dialin or direct
connect after
a reason number of unsuccess attempt to enter a valid password usual no
more than three
a termin direct connect or dialin ha been connect for a period of time with
no activ thi is call timingout
the termin connect will requir redial into the network andor reperform
the login and verif process some compani requir the data secur offic to
issu a new password befor the user can login again
hacker public and commun should be review to learn the current jargon
and hacker handl which ar the name that hacker us for their onlin persona
hacker have us the internet quit effici to commun with each other while
produc a signific amount of hack document and program almost ani
hacker websit will contain a larg number of text file that explain how to hack or
how variou system oper mani of these file will also explain the standard
vulner of the system and the best method to penetr their secur
hacker detect measur
an adequ hacker detect program contain three primari compon
almost all commun system maintain a log file that record all success and
unsuccess system access attempt these also allow for the print of report
contain signon and signoff activ these report should be print out regularli and
review by the data secur offic where possibl special report should be print
on the number of unsuccess access attempt these attempt at log into the
system should be follow up by data secur to determin their caus
the data secur function should have suffici resourc and staff to administ
password maintain the secur softwar review system activ report and follow up
on all potenti secur violat
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11813
final period review of telecommun secur should be perform by
consult andor intern or extern auditor if the latter have the necessari
experi and qualif
hack insur
dure the past three year a hand of cyberinsur have begun offer coverag
specif design to address new form of inform ag exposur these ecommerc
risk can includ theft damag or disclosur of data denial of servic attack theft of
intellectu properti unauthor access loss of revenu infring of copyright and
trademark and the consequ damag to busi reput these type of ecommerc
risk ar cover by what is known as firstparti coverag
thirdparti coverag cover the compani if it is be su for problem caus by
technolog product error and omiss the pilfer public releas or misus of sensit
or confidenti inform the unwit spread of disrupt virus hacker tamper to
the inform and advertis carri on websit emailfacilit sexual harass and
privaci infring
mani busi believ that their tradit busi coverag will suffic or fail that
their web host or isp will cover damag caus by ani of the abov in both case thei ar
probabl wrong unless your busi insur polici or internet servic level agreement
specif includ languag address ecommerc liabil ani damag will probabl not
be cover
electron mail
email ha revolution the abil of busi to interact swiftli and inde global
busi ha embrac the email system wholeheartedli few organ do not provid
some form of intern electron commun due to the speed at which busi can
now interact and conduct busi as well as the rel cost advantag email enjoi over
other mean of commun the number of new email user will no doubt continu
to boom
email doe howev also give organ a degre of vulner asid from
employe us it for person correspond email can be us to sabotag and crash
organ network forward virus or even simpl viru hoax ar often enough to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11814 2011 fraud examin manual
overload a system us email through such system as the internet endow sender with
ident protectionth origin sender of the messag can be disguis or obscur
therefor becaus a sender ident can be conceal sensit busi inform can
be safe forward to an unauthor address
consid
compani employe now possess the abil to quickli disclos sensit compani
materi to outsid parti increas the opportun for corpor espionag
compani that emploi a companywid email system can now be held respons for
ani uneth or illeg activ conduct by employe on the email system
compani must now be concern with the repercuss of the action of ani
disgruntl or rash employe the speed with which an email can be fire off creat
the opportun for illadvis commun
onc an email messag ha left a compani system it mai travel through ani number
of foreign email system befor reach it destin an email transmiss can
quit easili be intercept or compromis without the us of encrypt softwar
without a securityenhanc email system the receiv of an email messag ha littl
assur that the email is authent email address can be easili spoof or clone
by a knowledg user
email can be deliv almost instantan anywher the network comput and
softwar exist to handl it transmiss and recept in fact on of the emerg secur
problem concern email is the huge volum of space requir to archiv old messag in
some organ peopl ar regularli ask to cull through their old email messag and
delet those no longer need in addit some organ will delet ani old email
messag left on the mail server machin after a certain amount of time eg on or two
month
email secur concern
sinc email ha becom a fact of life for most organ it is appropri to discuss
some email secur concern from both a userbas and an organiz perspect
organ often fail to set boundari for employe regard email and mai later face
legal ramif as a result
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11815
email ownership
who own email messag on an organ system thi is the common question but
it is not necessarili the right question an email messag that an employe wrote himself is a
work of authorship and as such the rule of copyright appli in gener if the employe
wrote the messag as part of hi duti for hi employ ie in the scope of your
employ the employ own the copyright if the email wa not part of the employe
duti someth person or relat to anoth activ whether permit by the employ
or not then the user ha copyright but the employ as owner of the system on which it
wa creat or pass through mai have some right to the copi on the system if an
employe is forward a messag written by someon els the issu get even more
complic for instanc doe the origin author have the right or the intent to
author ani forward
organiz liabil
as with ani commun media legal issu of the internet ar emerg at a rapid rate
with a lot of discuss but ar of limit consensu so far it can be said that employ do
have some liabil for how employe us a compani email system the issu ar similar
to an employe us of the compani telephon the compani postag meter the compani
vehicl and so on
the best gener advic is to exercis some caution when deal with an email system
within the compani email can becom a vehicl for sexual harass for creat a
hostil work environ or set up gambl pool outsid the compani employe
can us email to oper their own busi or to send out fabric messag in the
name of other employe or their employ some employ monitor their email system
which present legal issu such as invas of privaci email ha also been us to gather
evid against employ or employe of cours there ar no more danger and pitfal
of email than there ar of ani form of commun whether insid or outsid the
organ the telephon and postal system ar just as capabl of such problem
as with ani potenti liabil issu employ must set guidelin for the proper intern and
extern us of email just as thei would for the proper us of the compani telephon
stationeri and postag vehicl and so on for instanc the organ should have a
polici remind employe in write that email must not be us to send inappropri
and unprofession messag includ
harass other user of the system
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11816 2011 fraud examin manual
consum unreason amount of avail resourc
intention send other user virus
evad softwar licens or copi mechan
crashingdisrupt system servic
imperson anoth user anywher on the internet
bypass system secur mechan
translat encrypt materi without author
eavesdrop on other email interact
us the system for ani person gain either monetarili or polit unless permit
by the organ
a number of promin liabil law firm recommend some monitor of email but thi
decis should not be taken lightli and not just becaus of employe privaci concern
for instanc the fact that the compani doe try to monitor email mai be us against the
compani when someth slip through that monitor
due to rapid growth of the internet and email there is a great deal of uncertainti in the law
organ mai want to seek legal counsel in establish proper us guidelin and
befor take disciplinari action against employe becaus of alleg abus
comput virus
virus ar hidden comput program that us all the comput resourc therebi
shut down the system or slow it down significantli comput virus typic us
the infect comput resourc to replic itself and spread the infect to other
comput system on a network or through the internet via email comput virus rang
from the rel harmless displai a messag or greet to shutdown of entir
comput network for extend period
a comput viru is a program that contain instruct code to attack softwar the attack
might eras data or displai a messag on the screen the comput viru can copi itself to
other program thi copi abil can affect larg network in recent year virus have
disrupt larg network and caus the expenditur of million of dollar in staff and
machin hour to remov these virus and restor normal oper
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11817
hoax
a massiv amount of media attent in recent year ha focus on comput virus mani
of the viru scare that occur howev ar hoax while that is on on hand fortun
these phoni warn caus harm of their own thei slow down transmiss of
inform and have been known to caus overload of organiz email network
most of these fraudul warn urg recipi to forward thi to everyon you know
befor forward a question warn it is wise to consult a few of the author who
track virus the follow site can be access to confirm or debunk viru notif
wwwsymanteccomavcenterhoaxhtml
wwwvmythscom
wwwfsecurecomvirusinfohoax
wwwsnopescom
type and terminolog of comput virus
macro viru
a macro is an instruct that carri out program command automat mani common
applic eg word process spreadsheet and slide present applic make
us of macro macro virus ar macro that selfrepl if a user access a document
contain a viral macro and unwittingli execut thi macro viru it can then copi itself
into that applic startup file the comput is now infect a copi of the macro
viru resid on the machin
ani document on that machin that us the same applic can then becom infect if
the infect comput is on a network the infect is like to spread rapidli to other
machin on the network moreov if a copi of an infect file is pass to anyon els
for exampl by email or cd the viru can spread to the recipi comput thi
process of infect will end onli when the viru is notic and all viral macro ar
erad
macro virus ar the most common type of virus and ar usual spread via email
messag contain infect attach macro virus can be written with veri littl
specialist knowledg and these virus can spread to ani platform on which the applic
is run howev the main reason for their success is that document ar exchang far
more frequent than execut or disk a direct result of email popular and web us
open the email attach infect your ma chine the viru overwrit certain file on
your hard drive and send itself out to everyon in your email address book thi
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11818 2011 fraud examin manual
attach will most like come from someon you know consequ the best
protect against such virus is to simpli not open ani attach unless you ar sure that
it is viru free if your unsur ask for the sender to confirm that the attach wa
intend for you
boot sector virus
the boot sector is the first logic sector of a hard disk or floppi disk seventyf to 90
percent of virus have been boot sector virus these virus us system bio replac the
boot sector and move the boot sector to anoth locat it then write a copi of it own
program code that will run everi time the system is boot or when program ar be run
a boot sector cannot infect a comput if it is introduc after the machin is run the
oper system an exampl of a boot sector viru is pariti boot thi viruss payload
displai the messag pariti check and fr eez the oper system render the
comput useless thi viru messag is taken from an actual error messag that is displai
to user when a comput memori is faulti as a result a user whose comput is infect
with the pariti boot viru is led to believ that the machin ha a memori fault rather than a
disrupt viru infect
parasit virus
parasit virus attach themselv to program known as execut when a user launch
a program that ha a parasit viru the viru is surreptiti launch first to cloak it
presenc from the user the viru then trigger the origin program to open the parasit
viru becaus the oper system understand it to be part of the program is given the
same right as the program to which the viru is attach these right allow the viru to
replic instal itself into memori or releas it payload in the absenc of antiviru
softwar onli the payload might rais the normal user suspicion a famou parasit viru
call jerusalem ha a payload of slow down the sy stem and eventu delet everi
program the user launch
tsram virus
termin and stai resid tsr virus usual hide in memori and caus system crash
depend on their memori locat the tsr take control of the oper system by
pass it request to do each time do is execut the viru cascad b is a tsr viru
that sometim caus the system to crash it also caus charact to fall down the screen
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11819
applic softwar virus
these type of virus copi their viru code to a program file and modifi the program so the
viru code get execut first the viru doe thi by write over the exist code or
attach itself to the program file the more sophist type replic themselv with a
com extens each time the user access an execut program file the viru vienna is a
type of applic viru it increas infect file by 648 byte and destroi the system by
make it reboot when run certain program
multipartit virus
multipartit virus share some of the characterist of boot sector virus and file virus
which increas it abil to spread thei can infect com and ex file and the boot sector
of the comput hard drive
on a comput boot up with an infect diskett a typic multipartit viru will first
resid in memori and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive from there the viru can
infect a pc entir environ thi type of viru account for a larg number of
infect
the tequila viru is a type of multipartit viru tequila is a memori resid master boot
sector partit tabl and ex file infector it us a complex encrypt method and
garbl to avoid detect when a program infect with tequila is execut the viru will
modifi the hard disk master boot sector if it is not alreadi infect the viru also copi
itself to the last six sector of the system hard disk when the workstat is later reboot
from the system hard disk tequila will becom memori resid onc tequila is memori
resid it infect ex file when thei ar execut
the chkdsk command will indic the system ha 3072 fewer byte of memori than
what is instal infect ex program increas in size by 2468 byte though the file
length increas cannot be seen in the disk directori list becaus the viru hide it
tequila activ four month after the initi date of infect at thi time and everi
month thereaft the viru will displai a graphic and the follow messag execut mov
ax fe03 int 21 kei to go on
polymorph virus
polymorph virus creat vari though fulli function copi of themselv as a wai to
avoid detect by antiviru softwar some polymorph virus us differ encrypt
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11820 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme and requir differ decrypt routin thu the same viru mai look
complet differ on differ system or even within differ file other polymorph
virus vari instruct sequenc and us fals command in the attempt to thwart antiviru
softwar on of the most advanc polymorph virus us a mutat engin and
randomnumb gener to chang the viru code and it decrypt routin
spanska4250 is a type of polymorph viru thi viru infect program file file with ex
and com extens when on of the program is infect the viru hide in the
comput memori spanska4250 remain in memori on the lookout to infect program
execut by user onc spanska4250 carri out it infect the size of the infect
program will increas by 4250 byte the viru size moreov the follow messag will
be displai c spanska 97 thi viru us an antitrac techniqu to make it more
difficult to detect in addit it us the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possibl to
find up to 366 differ variant of thi viru
stealth virus
stealth virus ar more sophist virus thei constantli chang their pattern in an
effort to blend into the system thei attempt to avoid detect by bypass do interrupt
call when thei ar instal and remov their code from the infect file befor the file is
access by the request program
the 4096 viru is a type of stealth viru it increas the file size by 4096 byte and decreas
the memori by approxim 6kb the messag frodo live might appear in the
middl of the screen if the infect file is run on septemb 21 it caus the system
to crash
mutat engin virus
thi modern dai viru us a special languagedriven algorithm gener that enabl it to
creat an infinit varieti of origin encrypt algorithm it avoid the checksum detect
method like stealth virus by not chang the infect file size each time thei replic
thei produc a new and differ code
network virus
it wa just a matter of time befor networkspecif virus were develop to attack the
increas number of local area network lan and other type of network come
onlin these virus ar gener develop to attack the file server
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11821
the boot sector and partit tabl virus infect the boot oper of the file server thi
viru doe not spread from the workstat to the file server howev if you ar us
netwar it can caus the softwar to lose the locat of it partit tabl on the file server
if the file server is boot with an infect disk
virus that infect program seem to be limit to infect file on the server howev
becaus the file ar continu be access by workstat thi type of viru is
difficult to contain
at least two netwarespecif virus have been discov in europ on is the gp1 get
password 1 viru it wa allegedli creat to penetr novel secur featur and then
spread throughout the network the second cz2986 viru in czechoslovakia thi viru
place itself in memori and intercept netwar function call when the workstat log in to
the server after it collect 15 user namepassword combin it save them in an infect
file and us them to gain access to the network
worm
a worm is a selfrepl program that resid as a file on a system execut an
autonom process and deliber move from system to system it look for other
node on the network copi itself to them and caus the selfcopi to execut on other
node these program find network util show node name monitor network traffic
and randomli select network identif code as well as other mischief
an exampl of a worm is the sql slammer which race across the globe and wreak havoc
on the internet in januari 2003 thi worm doubl the number of comput it infect
everi 85 second in the first minut of it appear the worm which exploit a flaw in
microsoft corpor sql server databas softwar caus damag by rapidli replic
itself and clog the pipelin of the global data network the worm did not eras or caus
damag to desktop comput but wa design to replic itself so fast and so effect
that no other traffic could get through network
viru carrier
virus can infect comput system from mani sourc some of the more common viru
carrier ar
unknown or uncheck applic softwar
softwar or media brought in by employe
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11822 2011 fraud examin manual
program download from modem bulletin board
unsolicit email
vendor and supplier with infect softwar
uncontrol and share program applic
demonstr softwar
freewar and sharewar
viru indic
the follow ar some of the indic that a comput might exhibit suggest that it
might be infect
a sudden and sometim dramat decreas of free space on your media
the system suddenli and for no appar reason slow down it commandrespons
time
an increas in the size of some file
there ha been a chang in the length of execut file a chang in their content or a
chang in their file datetim stamp
an unexpect number of disk access especi to particular file
the oper system andor other program suddenli begin behav in unpredict
wai sometim disk file that should be there cannot be access or ar suddenli
eras with no warn
unusu messag and graphic
unabl to bootup the system
unabl to access file
unexplain and repeat mainten repair
system or data file disappear or becom fragment
unexplain chang in memori
unexplain chang in program size
resid antivir softwar program displai messag that a viru ha been encount
note that until the sourc of the viru ha been identifi and remov from the system
antivir system might continu inform the oper that a viru is be encount
and remov
viru protect
comput user should take measur to protect their comput against virus some of
the step that can be taken ar
do not us a disk to boot your system
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11823
if you must boot your system from a disk make sure it is properli label and
continu protect
dont instal sharewar or other untest program on your system but if you do dont
put them in the root directori
in a network environ dont place untest program on the server
if you ar share inform on disk ensur thei onli contain inform and no
execut file
us current antiviru softwar to detect potenti virus
back up all program and file
write virusfre warranti and indemn into your purchas order and contract
alwai writeprotect your system and program disk
teach comput user about comput virus so that thei can recogn them
alwai us caution when open email attach
antiviru softwar oper
convent disk scanner
thi is the standard viru check program it is run when the user request it and it scan the
content of the disk directori or file that the user want for ani boot sector andor file
that contain virus that it recogn base on the viru descript inform in it viru
definit file usual run manual by the user either as a prevent mainten activ
or when a viru is suspect scan can also be autom through the us of a program
schedul
heurist scanner
these scanner inspect execut file for code us algorithm to identifi oper that
would indic an unknown viru thei might also examin macro to detect viruslik
behavior
behaviorbas detect scanner
these applic run continu look for behavior that might indic viru activ
for exampl instruct to format a hard drive
chang detect scanner
chang detect scanner gener a databas of characterist for execut file and
check for chang to these file that might signifi a viru attack
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11824 2011 fraud examin manual
inocul
thi is a total differ approach to viru detect instead of look for the virus
themselv thi techniqu look for the chang that the virus make to file and boot
sector start with a clean system the softwar inocul each boot sector and
program file by store a snapshot of inform about it base on it content and size
then period it reexamin these file to see if anyth ha chang if it ha then the
util will inform the user if the user hasnt made the chang the viru mai have
the main advantag of thi type of viru detect is that sinc it is look at the effect of
the viru it doesnt need to know what the viru itself is thi mean it will detect even new
virus without requir updat viru definit file all of the time the disadvantag and
why it is not us that often is that it gener a substanti amount of fals posit
investig viru infect
viru infect can be investig by take the follow action
isol the system and all media
run antiviru softwar
document find
interview the system custodian and all user and determin
symptom
damag
prior cleanup conduct
access control in place and work
system malfunct
person media us
unauthor media us
viru identif
follow the audit trail of the infect
determin the sourc of the virusperson system or media
make user awar of protect polici and procedur
ensur countermeasur ar in place and work
track cost of viru problem
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11825
internet fraud
a boom segment of comput fraud internet fraud ha becom a grow concern to the
law enforc commun thi type of fraud ha prolifer and will continu to
prolifer becaus of the ripe condit that exist on the world wide web for fraudul
activ the internet is still a develop technolog for much of intern busi
and thu ha not been subject to much litig or polic the law that do current
appli to the internet ar difficult to enforc sinc the internet cross virtual everi
intern border on the planet the lack of intern law and the difficulti enforc
those law give internet fraudster a better than averag chanc of avoid captur
and punish
for consum to retain their confid in internet transact the percept that the
internet is a safe wai to shop and do busi must be foster consum awar of
onlin fraud must be rais without caus a loss of consum confid thi difficult
endeavor mai requir an unpreced effort by the privat sector in conjunct with law
enforc consequ privat investig resourc mai be call upon in greater
number than ever given law enforc defici in the area of comput fraud
internet fraud scheme
accord to the 2009 internet crime report the internet crime complaint center ic3
receiv 336665 complaint relat to fraudul and nonfraudul issu on the internet
the total dollar loss from all refer case of fraud wa 5597 million with a median dollar
loss of 575 per complaint all complaint receiv by ic3 ar access to feder state
and local law enforc to support activ investig trend analysi and public
outreach and awar effort
the top ten 2009 ic3 complaint categori ar as follow
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11826 2011 fraud examin manual
internet scheme percentag of complaint
fbi scam 166
nondeliverymerchandis scam 119
advanc fee 98
ident theft 82
overpay fraud 73
miscellan fraud 63
spam 62
credit card fraud 60
auction fraud 57
comput damag 45
the internet present fraudster with myriad opportun to multipli the devic at their
dispos some fraudster have even us reput of charit organ to exploit
the most benevol of human impuls perhap the best wai to guard against internet
facilit scam is to simpli stai inform keep inform of the latest scam on the
internet mai enabl internet user to recogn and report these scam instead of lose
monei to on of them
modem hijack
accord to the feder trade commiss thi scheme is design to exploit internet
user while user ar onlin their comput modem ar secretli disconnect from their
isp and reconnect to the internet onli thi time through an expens intern line
victim have usual download a special viewer program from a websit offer free
comput imag onc activ the download materi began the hijack
disconnect and reconnect process longdist charg continu to mount until
victim shut down their comput even if their internet connect had alreadi been
termin
internet commerc
much ha been made in the nation media about the danger of provid credit card
number to compani on the internet and it is understand that mani busi and
individu have apprehens concern internet commerc the internet is the most
imperson form of commun and it is also the least well known to most user thi
concern the feel that a crimin might be lurk in the shadow of the internet scare
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11827
mani potenti custom from make that initi transact there ar some precaut
to be taken befor purchas onlin item but conduct busi transact on the
internet is ultim as safe as make an order from a compani via the telephon
get rich quick
enter the phrase get rich quick in an internet search engin result in site with name like
50000 first 10 month secret of the millionair and best busi resourc center these type
of site hawk everyth from home busi to invest opportun some push
home and internetbas busi other sell point is that telemarket close all sale
the common denomin in these type of scheme is that consum who spend monei
on them find themselv with worthless materi and inform
the medium through which victim ar snare lend the scam a fals appear of
credibl glossi websit give the oper an offici air but as with all getrichquick
scheme victim ar suck in through their desir to make easi monei
pyramid scheme
the triedandtru pyramid ha found a hightech home on the internet as in most pyramid
scheme the initi particip of the scheme ar reward handsom while the
particip who join the scheme later ar bilk out of their invest monei
foreign trust
inform on thi scheme is easili found on the internet the setup cater to the desir to
avoid tax for a fee the compani purport to be abl to creat a foreign trust to which
taxpay can transfer their asset sinc the trust is not within the taxpay countri the
logic goe the asset ar not subject to taxat
the logic is faulti for sever reason first if the taxpay deriv us from the fund in the
trust accord to law those fund ar consid taxabl incom thu consum who fall
for thi scam subject themselv to prosecut for tax evas
that is of cours onli if the trust is set up at all some of the oper of thi scheme
simpli take consum monei and disappear and sadli those ar the consum who get
off lightli other who have fallen for thi pitch find that thei have transfer all of their
asset to a trust of which thei ar not the beneficiari their asset then legal belong to
anoth entiti and get them transfer back to their control is virtual imposs
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11828 2011 fraud examin manual
chain letter
thi fraud ha onc again becom popular due to the internet email capabl instead
of send numer letter through the mail as fraudster were forc to do in the past e
mail capabl allow the fraudster to compos on letter and send thousand of copi to
potenti victim the letter sent to unsuspect target gener forewarn of the grave
danger that await the target should he not repli to the letter the letter ask for a small cash
donat in exchang for the target piec of mind that no bad tide will be spread
provid exampl of some of the unfortun who did not heed the letter the monei
should be sent to a po box the email often instruct
invest and secur fraud
websit that offer invest or secur advic ar not in short suppli mani of these
site ar reput but an illicit cottag industri ha been born on mani of these site a
fraudul websit will claim to have insid inform about the valu of a given stock
suggest that someth unexpect will soon happen to that compani when the
unknow stock investor take the advic of the supposedli knowledg invest
advisor the advisor manipul the stock price to hi advantag
spam
spam involv send email to subscrib whose name appear on electron version
of the phone list and post ad to the plethora of discuss and chat group us the
internet these post ar often disguis to look like tip from individu citizen who
ar supposedli engag in a law enterpris when in fact thei ar part of an internet
boiler room
counterfeit check scam
thi scam ha sever variat but usual start with the victim offer someth for sale
on the internet usual it is a big ticket item somehow the fraudster ha obtain a
legitim check from a person or compani scan it and alter it to support the scheme
the fraudster then contract with the victim to bui the item but must suppli a down
payment first the check is deliv by a highli recogn intern carrier such as
fedex further ad to the fals impress that thi is a legitim deal the victim
deposit the check but befor it clear the fraudster request a refund and back out of the
deal offer to let the victim keep a portion of the fund for hi troubl the victim
forward part of the monei back of cours the victim later learn that hi bank ha revers
the deposit amount becaus the check wa no good the fraudster usual claim to be in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11829
anoth countri and must therefor us a middl man such as a lawyer to facilit the
transact on their behalf thi is design to creat a sens of fals secur for the victim
anoth variat on thi scheme involv a seemingli chanc meet in a harmless chat
room onc the chat relationship develop the fr audster explain that thei ar in a foreign
countri and need some help it seem that thei ar unabl to cash certain travel check in
their countri and ask for the victim help to cash the check for them in the unit state
and then send them a monei order less a small token of their appreci thei usual
invent some unfortun circumst or urgenc for the request the first time it occur the
check ar good and everyth work out in a second request thei ask for the victim help
again thi time it a much larger amount and thi time the check ar counterfeit the
victim unknowingli particip in a forgeri by pass the counterfeit check
phish
phish scam ar some of the fastestgrow threat on the internet accord to the
gartner research firm more than 5 million us consum lost monei to phish attack in
the 12 month end in septemb 2008 an almost 40 percent increas over the 36 million
who lost monei in phish attack in the 12 month end in august 2007 although the
number of consum who lost monei to phish attack increas in 2008 the averag
custom loss per incid in 2008 wa 351 down 60 percent from 2007
the definit of phish is to trick peopl into provid their person and financi
inform by pretend to be from a legitim compani agenc or organ in thi
type of scam phisher typic us email to direct internet user to websit that look like
legitim ecommerc site such as onlin bank retail or govern agenc
phisher actual control these site and us them to steal sensit inform such as bank
account detail and password phisher can also us the phone to hunt for victim person
inform some pose as employ and call peopl who have list themselv on job
search websit other call pretend to be from a compani or govern agenc make
the same kind of fals claim and ask for person inform phisher mai also
undertak technic subterfug scheme to plant crimewar onto pc to steal inform
directli such as us keylog system to intercept custom onlin account user name
and password
opinion vari but the amount of time it take for an unprotect person comput to
becom infect with a viru or malwar can rang from four to thirtyfour minut to aid
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11830 2011 fraud examin manual
in prevent phish comput should be arm with spam filter antiviru and anti
spywar softwar and a firewal and kept up to date a spam filter can help reduc the
number of phish email receiv antiviru softwar which scan incom messag
for troublesom file and antispywar softwar which look for program that have been
instal on a comput and track a user onlin activ without their knowledg can
protect user against pharm and other techniqu that phisher us firewal prevent
hacker and unauthor commun from enter a user computerwhich is
especi import if on ha a broadband connect becaus their comput is open to
the internet whenev it turn on look for program that offer automat updat and
take advantag of free patch that manufactur offer to fix newli discov problem
in order to prevent ident theft through phish email comput user should
complet delet unsolicit email from bank credit union invest firm and
govern agenc with which thei do not have an establish relationship if the
recipi doe have an exist relationship with the suppos origin of the email the
better busi bureau recommend call the organ to confirm whether or not the
email is legitim befor take ani further action comput user on the go should be
wari of enter password or sensit inform into a comput that isnt their such as
at an internet caf librari comput lab or airport kiosk wifi network either on the road
or in the consum own home present even more opportun for ident thiev the
easiest wai to protect a wifi network at home is to not broadcast the servic set identifi
a safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchang sensit inform over a wifi connect
and wait until a safe network can be access
spear phish
spear phish is a target attack gener focus on a corpor entiti the ruse is meant
to fool the corpor employe into believ that the phish email origin not from a
bank or financi institut but from their own it or hr depart the goal is to obtain
the employe user name and password to access the corpor network
vish
voic phish or vish is the act of leverag voic over internet protocol voip
technolog in us the telephon system to fals claim to be a legitim enterpris in an
attempt to scam user both consum and busi into disclos person inform
govern financi institut as well as onlin auction and their payment servic can
be target of voic phish
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11831
a vish scheme is gener transmit as an incom record telephon messag that
us a spoof fraudul caller id match the ident of a misrepres organ
the messag us an urgent pretext to direct unsuspect user to anoth telephon
number the victim is invit to punch their person inform on their telephon
keypad the crimin captur the kei tone and convert them back to numer format
there ar sever type of inform at risk from thi type of scheme thi can includ ani
numer person inform payment card inform number expir date and
the last three digit print on the signatur panel pin person identif number
social secur number date of birth bank account number and passport number
secur expert have seen anoth variat of vish where the crimin will leav a
voicemail messag or make telephon call direct peopl to the bogu phone number
with voic over internet protocol voip and other internetbas telephon technolog
crimin can now make call inexpens and can mask their ident and their locat
and even make it look like thei ar call from a legitim compani on caller displai
some potenti us of the person inform that is gather from victim includ
control of the victim financi account open new bank account transfer bank
balanc appli for loan credit card and other goodsservic make luxuri
purchas hide crimin activ receiv govern benefit and obtain a
passport
anoth version of vish involv the send of text messag to cell phone claim the
recipi onlin bank account ha expir the messag instruct the recipi to renew
their onlin bank account by us the link provid
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag
via sm the protocol us to transmit text messag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11832 2011 fraud examin manual
rock phish
on type of phish attack ha been particularli effect the rock phish it estim
that rock phish account for roughli half of all phish attack as measur by the
number of uniqu url rock phisher have target nation and region bank
throughout the us europ and latin america toward the end of 2007 thei broaden
their scope to includ onlin brokerag inform servic treasuri manag
compani and even social network site
like most phisher rock phisher us botnet to send massiv amount of phish email
to huge volum of internet user the email contain a messag from a financi
institut hopefulli entic user to click on a fraudul url there is some indic
that thei cycl through multipl email list and attempt to reach the internet user most
like to us the brand that thei ar target unlik most phisher thei dont compromis
a web server and instal a phish site instead an elabor process is implement
wherebi multipl domain name ar regist at multipl registrar often with less known
countrycod base toplevel domain multipl dn domain name system server ar also
set up which provid name to ip servic for the pool of domain name the ip address
us and there mai be upward of 100 at a time point to multipl compromis server
that simpli forward web connect to the real phish site these proxi server typic
handl connect for multipl target at a time
it is interest to note that befor these bogu domain ar identifi and block
fraudster have alreadi done the damag look at a rock phish url on see random
number with a few alphabet charact in it these ar alphanumer figur these figur
ar us to make the url string uniqu complex and difficult to differenti from a
legitim on
rock phisher have an advanc grasp of technolog us fast flux architectur to chang
name server and site locat in an instant autom proxi server to such an extent that
if on is down it automat switch to the next therefor thei ar abl to lengthen
the life span of rock phish url and make them stealthier
on of the best wai to combat rock phish is to implement a sender polici framework
spf or domain kei on your email system more and more isp ar reject or at least
send to the spam folder email that fail spf or domain kei authent
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11833
pharm
pharm is an attack in which a user is fool into enter sensit data such as a password
or credit card number into a malici websit that imperson a legitim websit it is
differ from phish in that the attack doe not have to reli on have the user click on
a link in the email to direct him to the fake websit pharm actual exploit a
vulner in the dn server softwar that allow a hacker to acquir the domain name for
a site and redirect the websit traffic from a legitim site to a fals on so even though the
user type in the correct websit address the pharm program send the user to an
illegitim site that look like the real thing unknowingli the user is then provid
password and inform directli to the hacker
combat internet fraud
conduct busi on the internet is gener a safe proposit that can be made even
more so through a few addit safeti precaut
encrypt ani confidenti inform or credit card number should be encrypt in
their entireti an encrypt system is made up of a cryptograph function which
scrambl an electron transmiss and an invers decrypt function which restor the
transmiss to it origin state encrypt hardwar and softwar can be us to
scrambl ani commun by util a complex mathemat formula the onli wai
to unscrambl an encrypt messag is to provid the uniqu answer kei thu unlock
the messag encrypt is the best method to stymi wouldb interceptor of compani
transact
custom valid becaus the internet offer user an addit layer of anonym
busi should instal some form of a custom valid safeguard in their internet
purchas system thi mai includ a custom code or password that the custom can
identifi himself with befor purchas a product as well the busi should
distinguish itself to the custom ensur that no on els can fals assum the
compani ident
intern network secur organ that conduct busi on the web should never
under ani circumst keep their financi inform databas on their web server
a knowledg comput hacker can sometim penetr internet websit and
financi inform is the primari target of these hacker for obviou reason
therefor the databas that maintain a compani financi inform should be a
complet intern system untouch from the internet thi safeguard will help
ensur that sensit inform is not compromis in ani wai
firewal firewal ar advanc softwar program that effect lock up access to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11834 2011 fraud examin manual
an internet site or email transmiss firewal ar design to control the interfac
between a network and the internet thi technolog survei incom and outgo
transmiss between the network and the internet stop ani question
transmiss attempt to access a sensit area while firewal ar not foolproof thei do
provid an addit layer of protect against internet attack or breach of secur
more inform about scam perpetr agai nst busi and individu can be found
in the previou chapter consum fraud
electron commerc
electron commerc or ecommerc is becom a major form of retail market
advertis and interperson commun the hardwar infrastructur requir for
highspe data voic and video transmiss to and from privat home is be
introduc to residenti street everywher
we have all heard peopl talk about their fear about put their credit card number
person identif number pin street address phone number and other person
inform out on the internet in realiti there is veri littl differ between secur
electron commerc and secur ani other kind of inform system resourc
in addit to these tradit goal of inform system secur confidenti
integr and avail there ar a few that ar more directli relat to network
transact which is exactli what ecommerc consist of
authent thi requir address the problem of identifi the parti of an
ecommerc transact to each other we want to make sure that we can determin
with whom we or our comput ar commun
nonrepudi nonrepudi can help ensur that no parti to an ecommerc
transact can later deni that the transact occur we need some wai to be abl to
recogn a signatur between ecommerc parti just as we reli on written signatur
on paper document
while recent year have seen an increas in the number of consum and busi will
to conduct transact onlin there still exist some hesit to fulli embrac ecommerc
technolog it is case like the on describ below that caus consum to lose confid
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11835
in ecommerc in the follow exampl a hacker craft a sophist scam that hurt
million of consum
exampl
albert gonzal had alreadi been caught hack into the indian govern websit
and traffick a million creditdebt card number befor he wa caught steal mani
more creditdebit card number from tjx compani the compani that oper retail
store such as tj maxx and marshal after two year worth of sensit data and 456
million credit card and debit card number were compromis tjx compani notifi the
author of their data leakag
start in 2005 albert found nonsecur wireless network on tjx compani system
and work with other to identifi vulner server to attack infiltr and later us to
jumpbox into other more secur server from there he and hi conspir were abl to
instal malwar us to steal data and snif softwar onto the network of tjx and all
the store oper under them even outsid of the unit state tjx discov the
breach in decemb of 2006 and wa under the belief that thei had onli been lose data
for six to seven month after further investig howev thei found that thei had been
lose sensit data sinc 2005 but by the time tjx had even start discov the
extent of their secur breach albert had alreadi move on to bigger and better oper
in 2008 albert wa arrest on charg relat to hack into other compani
network and he now face 1525 year in prison
isp messag ar also us to sneak trojan hors program onto a user comput the
user is tempt with free pornograph pictur or softwar that will boost their comput
perform when the attach file is open it trigger a program that surreptiti
collect the subscrib account name and password which ar then relai to the hacker
who sent the messag
mani expert sai that it is current possibl to have secur transact over the internet
becaus the latest encrypt technolog and secur protocol allow for thi howev
fulli realiz standard ar not yet in place for all businesstobusi or businesstocustom
transact some current secur protocol do not permit nonrepudi of
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11836 2011 fraud examin manual
data which is requir if firm serious want to conduct busi over the internet
howev the arriv of standard for us smart card technolog will transform internet
busi and commerc as a whole smart card technolog offer a solut to the major
secur transact requir name data integr user authent and non
repudi of data smart card technolog also involv the applic of thirdparti trust
relationship to the internet
appli encrypt to ecommerc secur
gener speak the solut offer by convent and publickei encrypt
technolog ar usual adequ to ensur that ecommerc transact ar as secur as the
valu of transact requir
the vast major of transmiss over the internet and the world wide web ar not
encrypt in ani wai if there is no need to hide the content of a messag or
commun there is littl need to expend resourc on the encrypt of such traffic and
the decrypt at the other end encrypt can be an expens solut whether in term
of actual monetari cost or the cost in increas comput load on the user machin
the need of the organ to keep confidenti transmiss secret should be weigh
against the effort and cost of encrypt
smart card
the cost and ineffici of manual appli encrypt techniqu could prevent some
organ from fulli engag in ecommerc activ fortun a rel
inexpens solut is avail in the us of smart card technolog
a smart card is a creditcard size plastic card embed with an integr circuit chip that
make it smart thi marriag between a conveni plastic card and a microprocessor
allow an immens amount of inform to be store access and process either
onlin or offlin smart card can store sever hundr time more data than a convent
card with a magnet stripe the inform or applic store in the ic chip is
transfer through an electron modul that interconnect with a termin or a card reader
a contactless smart card ha an antenna coil that commun with a receiv antenna to
transfer inform depend on the type of the embed chip smart card can be
either memori card or processor card
memori card ani plastic card is made smart by includ an ic chip but the chip
mai simpli be a memori storag devic memori card can hold thousand of time
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11837
more memori than a magnet stripe card nevertheless it function ar limit to basic
applic such as phone card
processor card smart card with a fullfledg microprocessor on board can function
as a processor devic that offer multipl function such as encrypt advanc secur
mechan local data process complex calcul and other interact process
most storedvalu card integr with identif secur and inform
purpos ar processor card onli processor card ar truli smart enough to offer the
flexibl and multifunction desir in ecommerc
the top three intern market in smart card product ar 1 miniatur subscrib
ident modul sim that fit insid mobil phone 2 bank card and 3
identif card specif those us by govern and larg corpor
most smart card issu todai ar memori card with limit process capabl
howev modern technolog is constantli make advanc toward increas these
capabl
insid threat
by far the greatest threat to inform system in term of comput crime come from
employe insid an organ it is not uncommon for oper media librarian
hardwar technician and other staff member to find themselv in posit of
extraordinari privileg in relat to the kei function and asset of their organ a
consequ of thi situat is the probabl that such individu ar frequent expos
to temptat
a further complic is the tendenc on the part of manag to toler less stringent
supervisori control over inform system personnel the premis is that the work is not
onli highli technic and special but difficult to understand and control as an exampl
system softwar support is often entrust to a singl programm who gener the
version of the oper system in us establish password or other control list and
determin the log and account featur to be us in addit such personnel ar
often permit and sometim encourag to perform these duti dure nonprim shift
period when demand on comput time ar light as a result mani of the most critic
softwar develop and mainten function ar perform in an unsupervis
environ it is also clear that oper librarian and technician often enjoi a degre
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11838 2011 fraud examin manual
of freedom quit differ from that which would be consid normal in a more
tradit employ area
insid ar typic awar of the hole in the system of intern control and often exploit
weak just to see if thei can get awai with it the most preval method of
commit comput fraud is probabl alter or falsif of input transact
andor document includ
alter of input
alter of output
data file manipul
commun system
oper system
comput oper
characterist
the characterist of the tradit insid comput fraudster ar veri similar to those of
the hacker or other comput crimin intellig hard work seldom take time off
bore with the routin of the job and ha a veri larg ego mani comput technician have
demonstr a greater loyalti to the technolog than to the organ for which thei
work thi technolog loyalti can creat an attitud that ani behavior is accept if it is in
the name of technolog
the follow ar indic of insid comput fraud
access privileg beyond those requir to perform assign job function
except report not review and resolv
access log not review
product program run at unusu hour
lack of separ of duti in the data center
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11839
comput secur
effect secur
effect comput secur ensur the avail of accur data in time to meet an
organ need at a cost that is commen surat with the risk involv kei element
ar
protect data and program from intent or inadvert unauthor alter or
destruct
maintain the confidenti integr and avail of data
protect the data center from physic threat such as fire flood and intent
destruct
have the capabl to restor data center oper in case of complet destruct
the most import step is to obtain manag support for effect secur without
such support ani secur plan will falter
secur the commun network
some commun network ar veri larg veri complex and technic demand
the task of effect secur these network is demand and requir the close
cooper of both network and secur administr the object of data and voic
network is to provid connect with accept respons time userfriendli access and
a secur mode at an accept cost to the organ
password
password ar the predomin form of authent valid user effect password
administr is essenti for maintain secur password should be of suffici length
usual a minimum of eight charact and a combin of letter number and other
charact such as punctuat mark to avoid guess group password and share of
password should be prohibit so as to maintain individu account password of all
termin employe should be revok immedi secur administr often
coordin the notif of termin employe with the personnel function
employe who have chang job function or transfer should have their old password
cancel and new on issu if appropri
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11840 2011 fraud examin manual
other network secur
secur a comput network by mean of logic control is a difficult but necessari
requir for ensur the safeti of a comput system from attack by outsid logic
control includ manag secur polici user authent system data access
control network firewal secur awar train encrypt algorithm penetr
test intrus detect softwar and incid respons plan
network secur can also be provid by a combin of design hardwar devic and
softwar data encrypt is carri out by a combin of hardwar and softwar
encrypt data is scrambl by a formula us a uniqu kei and can onli be unscrambl
with the same formula and kei at the receiv end the decis to us encrypt should be
made in light of the risk and after a costbenefit analysi drawback to encrypt ar the
cost of the hardwar and softwar the cost of the administr and the inher delai
incur by the extra step requir for process
digit signatur ar becom more common in part becaus congress and mani state
have pass legisl to legitim the electron sign of document in 2000 the
electron signatur in global and nation commerc act esign act becam
effect thi feder statut basic provid a mechan wherebi ani document that is
requir to be sign can be sign electr onic the esign act doe not requir a
parti to us or accept electron signatur electron contract or electron record but
rather seek to facilit the us of electron signatur and document by uphold their
legal effect regardless of the type or method select by the parti the esign act is also
technologyneutr and doe not requir a specif type or method that busi and
consum must us or accept in order to conduct their electron transact the act
regul ani transact involv interst or foreign commerc howev mani state
have enact their own digit signatur law which regul pure intrast transact
addition mani state and feder agenc includ the intern revenu servic and the
secur and exchang commiss ar encourag the us of electron file and digit
signatur as a mean to speed up the collect and process of inform
biolog access verif long the favorit stuff of movi maker is now avail
thi verif techniqu includ fingerprint palm print voic print signatur and
retina scan
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11841
profil softwar authent user by monitor their statist characterist such as
type speed and keystrok touch smart card access devic ar similar to an atm card like
atm card thei ar suscept to loss and forgeri
the most effect compon of intern secur ar educ report facil and
vigor disciplinari action for offend includ prosecut of illeg act an
enterprisewid employe awar program should be combin with formal train in
the area of inform secur for employe to fulfil their secur respons thei
should know what inform need to be kept confidenti how to recogn threat to
secur and how to us backup and other aid for their desktop machin give
employe incent such as bonus to follow secur guidelin howev will be the
most effect motiv
protect the network from extern threat requir some addit consider the
less an extern perpetr know about the technolog environ for exampl type of
hardwar and softwar packag us the harder it is to obtain fraudul access part of
the secur polici should address how much and what kind of inform regard the
technolog of an organ should be made public
organ should guard against provid too much access to third parti there is
pressur to establish connect by market purchas research and other branch
connect should be grant onli after it ha been establish that the benefit outweigh
the risk and cost
the risk assess process
as organ grow their inform technolog and data chang both in type and
quantiti assumpt made about secur need to be updat the vehicl for updat is
the risk assess thi is a zerobas process that should be perform period a
risk assess is an analysi of the secur object of confidenti integr
and avail
each data element should be examin to determin the impact if it is disclos lost or
enter incorrectli onc thi inform is collect the secur measur in place should
be review to determin whether thei provid necessari safeguard the risk assess
process is a timeconsum process to undertak and mani organ emploi outsid
secur consult to reduc it impact on daytodai oper
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11842 2011 fraud examin manual
intern control in the data center
in most instanc computerrel crime ar veri difficult to detect an intrud mai be
abl to gain unauthor access to a network or comput system perpetr whatev
crimin activ wa plan and retreat without anyon be awar of the intrus much
less the crimin activ that ha taken place so how doe an organ becom awar
that it inform resourc have been compromis by someon either insid or outsid
of the organ with crimin intent a few possibl includ
a strong set of polici and standard to defin for employe and manag what the
compani deem as unaccept or unauthor activ
strong physic secur to thwart those intent upon the theft of physic asset of the
organ
central system access control and data object protect
strong secur for the organ applic program
intrus detect hardwar and softwar for network and commun resourc
audit of system and violat log
all of these mechan if us correctli will alert the organ of inappropri
action thi all assum of cours that someon is keep an ey out for except and
violat all of the secur polici and standard the intrus detect softwar the
violat log and the access control will mean absolut noth if the organ is not
commit to appli them properli and maintain them adequ
gener control over a data center ar relev for all applic the gener control
categori includ system mainten implement of new system includ
develop comput oper system softwar includ secur and
telecommun softwar and data file
system mainten
all program and system chang should be approv in write programm should not
have access to the product librari but onli to test librari all program that ar to be
modifi should be move into a test librari by someon other than a programm all
complet program chang should be test and the result approv by both data center
and user personnel befor be place into product adequ program document
should be approv for all program chang user personnel should be notifi when
modifi program will be place into product
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11843
implement control
implement control ar those control over the develop of or purchas of a new
applic all new system request should be made in write a system develop life
cycl methodolog should be us for develop and implement inhous or purchas
packag all new system request should be approv by the appropri manag
level user should be involv in the project from design through final test all test
result should be approv by both data center manag and user personnel there
should be an implement plan for place the new system into product
comput oper
comput oper control ar control that govern the daytodai oper of the
comput system there should be an approv schedul for all product run all system
activ should be review by data center manag ani unusu program execut
should be investig and resolv a log of unusu event such as abend abnorm
termin of a program execut or rerun should be kept by oper staff and also
should be review by data center manag access to the comput room should be
restrict to author personnel all third parti such as technician should be
accompani by a data center employe door to the data center should be secur
system softwar
control over system softwar includ those that govern the instal of the comput
system the commun softwar and the secur softwar data center manag
should approv the system softwar select as well as the chosen option and paramet
system softwar should be test befor implement in a product environ
note that thi might not be possibl for the oper system itself
data file
control over data file ensur that correct file ar us for each product job and that
adequ backup file exist datafil label bypass option should be disabl a data file
manag system should be us to record and locat all data file data file backup
copi should be made and store in a secur facil offsit backup file copi should be
maintain in case of a disast in the data center util that can modifi data file should
be remov from the system and us onli under manag supervis live data file
should not be us for test
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11844 2011 fraud examin manual
access and telecommun control
in the 1960 and 1970 access control meant ensur that there wa a lock on the
comput room door as onlin system were implement the definit of access evolv
to includ logic access in addit to physic access logic access refer to ani locat
where someon can sign on to the system that signon access can be a direct connect or
a dialup in todai onlin realtim and in terconnect world it is easi to forget physic
guard over comput equip comput equip must be physic secur thi
should includ network server telephon system comput commun control
and person comput with sensit data
access and telecommun control should achiev the follow object
provid physic secur over equip user and inform
protect critic data from loss damag or unauthor disclosur
ensur network reliabl by us appropri hardwar and softwar
prevent unauthor access and us of the network
ensur system avail
meet user requir
separ of duti
separ of duti is a kei element in a welldesign intern control system it is also
fundament to detect and prevent fraud programm should not oper the
comput have unsupervis access to product program or have access to product
data set data file user should not have access to the product program code
comput oper should not perform comput program adequ supervis
should be provid by personnel who do not actual perform the work
log and histori file
comput system maintain a varieti of histori file or log these log record activ in the
follow area
mainfram activ
program execut
data file access
date time and durat
user id that initi a particular action
error messag
equip malfunct
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11845
commun activ
user id
termin identifi
dialin port identifi
date time and durat
error messag
equip malfunct
secur softwar activ
user id
unsuccess login attempt
modif to the password file and access capabl
these log were origin design to help in troubleshoot the system and correct
error these file contain a veri valuabl audit and fraud examin trail of system
activ and ar now us for intern control function the log should be review by a
respons data center offici and evid should exist of thi review mani of the histori
file have a limit capac and can be forc into wrap if not print period
wrap forc the softwar to record at the begin of the file if the file is full and not
print out
secur softwar
there ar a number of good secur softwar packag on the market for all mainfram
and most minicomput secur packag avail for pc ar less numer local area
network have some secur packag avail but still reli primarili on the individu user
in a standalon mode or the mainfram secur in a connect mode the purchas and
instal of a secur packag might provid a fals sens of secur most of these
packag ar design to be instal in a phase approach becaus of the complex of
the task
these option and decis about secur softwar should be review by manag
for exampl most mainfram secur packag allow a minimum of three level of secur
log mode mere log all system access to defin program and data file warn mode tell the
user if he is access a program or file that is not author for the password he ha
emploi activ is also log fail mode will not allow a user to access defin data file
and program without the proper password thi is the highest level of secur and the onli
on that provid adequ protect anoth veri import consider involv the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11846 2011 fraud examin manual
manual supervis of data provid by secur packag usual in the form of access log
a secur packag need consist review to protect against possibl violat
intern control in comput applic
intern control establish check and balanc to prevent on person from control the
entir financi transact compet and trustworthi employe ar obvious a necessari
element of a good intern control system no employe with a known histori of dishonesti
should be hire
asset and record which can be easili appropri or destroi should be physic
safeguard thei should be safeguard by lock physic secur and other method to
ensur that thei will not be misappropri all account system reli on proper
document miss document should be regard as a red flag of possibl fraud
someon independ of the transact must check the account control the
knowledg that all work is check is a power fraud deterr the element of sound
intern control do not chang in a computer environ object do not chang
but techniqu do
control techniqu
control techniqu commonli us in computer system ar list below
oneforon check consist of check each sourc document against a detail list
process by the comput thi techniqu is normal us for lowvolum input
becaus of the cost and time involv
batchcontrol total involv manual group transact at the input stage and
manual establish a control total over the entir group the method us includ
document count item or line count dollar total and cash total
in comput sequenc check the comput verifi the preassign serial number of
input transact and report miss or duplic number
comput match consist of the comput match the input data to inform
held on the master file or suspens file unmatch item ar report for investig
program edit check ar comput program procedur that edit data exampl
includ
reason
depend
exist
format
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11847
mathemat accuraci
rang
digit verif
prior data match
prerecord input is us to reduc error dure data entri
control object
welldesign comput applic have builtin control for all function the major
control object is complet of input
input complet control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput
sequenc check and comput match input accuraci control ensur that data is initi
record correctli and convert correctli to machineread form input accuraci control
techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput match program
edit and prerecord input
updat accuraci ensur that the correct master file account is updat correctli with the
correct transact updat accuraci control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control
total comput match and program check updat control complet ensur that all
data enter and accept by the system updat the master file onc and onli onc updat
control complet techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput sequenc
check and comput match
author control ensur that onli valid transact ar process that all transact
process ar author by manag and that transact repres event that actual
occur author techniqu us ar oneforon check and program check
mainten control provid that data is kept uptod or identifi unusu data requir
further action thei also ensur that data store on file is not chang except through the
normal process cycl mainten control techniqu ar us for oneforon check
batch control total and program check
evalu applic control
evalu intern control in an applic system requir a thorough understand of
the system the first phase inform gather consist of collect inform about
the industri and the risk associ with that industri conduct ratio analysi and peer
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11848 2011 fraud examin manual
comparison to identifi aberr understand how manag run the busi and
determin if there ar strong budgettoactu control in the organ
evalu is the second phase and consist of the us of questionnair andor matric to
evalu the intern control and to identifi intern control weak analyz the
result is necessari to determin if a weak exist andor the extent of ani weak a
result report should be prepar that includ recommend
endus comput intern control
endus comput or distribut process ha emerg sinc the advent of microcomput
and provid endus with equip such as pc and process capabl
exampl includ microcomput develop tool such as spreadsheet databas
program and download part of an applic and it associ file for process on a
local area network either connect to the mainfram or in a standalon mode
sever control concern have been identifi as a result of endus comput
data center control over the equip itself backup access control local password
administr etc might not be implement by the end user
local develop spreadsheet or databas applic might not have all the control
typic found in mainfram system
access can be compromis by the end user by instal a modem and phone line
connect to a local area network or standalon pc and not inform data secur
about the arrang
conduct an investig regard comput crime
onc an organ ha receiv an indic that a possibl crimin violat ha
occur by mean of it inform system resourc a preliminari investig into the
alleg should be conduct to achiev the follow goal
1 determin if inde a crime ha been commit thi is the critic step in the
intern investig the organ must be care to differenti between
inadvert comput misus and deliber crimin intent the compani intern
auditor physic and inform secur specialist and senior manag
should be involv in make thi type of decis
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11849
2 determin the statu of the crime when did the incid begin where did the
intrus come from intern or extern is the incid still occur if not still
occur when did it stop
3 review the organ secur and audit polici and procedur to determin the
best method for continu the investig
4 determin the need for law enforc assist the organ will have to
decid if the violat is seriou enough to call in the polic or other law
enforc entiti most comput crime ar not report to law enforc
due to sever factor includ the organ desir to keep it flaw and
weak from be expos to it custom and stockhold thi is a difficult
decis for the compani to make howev as we also mention earlier if
compani dont report comput crime then law enforc will be powerless to
help prevent and solv them and comput crimin will feel thei have a free hand
to continu their activ
handl the evid
on of the major differ between investig computerrel crime and
convent crimin activ is the volatil of the evid that resid in the comput
themselv inde the evid of a comput intrus might be eras or alter as part
of the intrus itself it is therefor veri import for the organ andor law
enforc personnel to deal quickli and decis with evid of suspect comput
relat crimin activ
the admiss of evid obtain from comput in a court case is realli no differ
from the admiss of ani other type of evid the evid must be
relev
support by a foundat for it introduct into court
legal obtain
properli identifi
properli preserv
in the handl of comput data in crimin investig the examin or investig
must be awar of some of the vulner of comput evid
the investig must ensur that turn off power to comput equip will not
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11850 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi or eras evid that is requir for the investig
the readwrit head of hard disk drive must be park in a retract posit so that
power down the disk drive will not caus the readwrit head to contact the surfac
of the disk platter
be awar that magnet storag media ar vulner to magnet field and that evid
might be eras without the investig be awar of the erasur if the media ar
brought close to a sourc of a magnet field
be awar that other equip attach to the comput might be need to complet
the investig into the data that resid in the comput
the investig should writeprotect all diskett that ar be us in the investig
so that thei cannot be written upon inadvert
integr of evid
there ar certain issu that must be consid when process comput evid these
area should be consid regardless of whether the incid will be process as a crimin
offens for prosecut or possibl civil litig even if the organ decid to take
no action at all how a comput fraud examin is conduct might have potenti civil
liabil implic for both the organ andor the fraud examin
should the fraud examin discov evid on a comput system he must be abl to state
unequivoc that the evid wa not chang in ani wai by their action thi requir
that strict forens methodolog be follow to satisfi the stringent evidentiari standard
necessari to ensur the integr of the evid beyond a reason doubt for possibl
court present therefor fraud examin must be awar of the follow issu that
relat to the gather of comput evid
search seizur expect of privaci
the first question that should be ask in a comput fraud examin pertain to the
expect of privaci for ani employe or outsid who might be involv in the incid
for exampl in on incid an employe wa caught us a compani comput for
person us the compani had never establish comput us polici the employe had
never been formal notifi that person us of the comput wa prohibit and that the
compani had the right to inspect the content of the comput at ani time therefor when
a supervisor discov inappropri person file on the employe comput the
employe protest the act as an invas of hi privaci
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11851
thi demonstr that appropri polici can be critic in the abov circumst the
compani might have creat a situat where thei would actual need to obtain a court
order or a search warrant through a law enforc agenc just to examin the content of
their own comput
there is specif word that should be us in the construct of a search warrant
involv either comput or telecommun equip how the equip and
magnet media ar describ will be critic to the success of the court case
presearch prepar
obtain as much intellig as possibl regard ing the locat of the potenti evid is
veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit question that fraud examin
should consid might includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search in on case
approxim 17 network file server were involv with multipl router and dialup
modem a team of onli two investig would need at least four to six hour to
complet a seizur of thi magnitud
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant the time to discov that an expert
wit ha a crimin convict is befor the search warrant affidavit ha even been
written not when the wit take the stand to testifi in a crimin proceed
determin the resourc that will be requir to successfulli conduct the search if a
great deal of equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport
from the locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search in anoth case an assist district attornei
request assist in the execut of a search warrant when detect arriv thei
discov that the da want them to seiz more than 30 comput includ 3 file
server thi wa at 3 pm and the da then told the detect that the author to
execut the search warrant expir at 5 pm natur the detect could not possibl
have conduct the seizur within that time frame and in thi case the evid wa lost
a better strategi would have been to time the execut of the search warrant for 5 pm
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11852 2011 fraud examin manual
on a fridai afternoon thi would give the entir weekend to conduct the search if
necessari
search warrant affidavit construct
the construct of search warrant ha been affect by both advanc in technolog
and the evolv natur of crimin law fraud examin must now consid sever
problem not encount befor for exampl the fraud examin must know how to write
a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the fraud
examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form ie
comput storag devic such as disk or cdrom which contain inform that
cannot be view without the aid of some electron devic
the warrant must allow for such conting as the abil to seiz data file pertin to
the case that ar mix with data file that have noth to do with the case but resid on the
same storag devic the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of
all comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all
materi that is not thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might
depend on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present
to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the fraud examin
must be abl to justifi each and everi item that might contain evid for exampl state
that all printer should be seiz might be consid to be overli broad unless the fraud
examin can justifi the need for each specif printer
howev with some thought fraud examin should be abl to justifi the search and
seizur for everyth that thei need to complet the search for evid item to be seiz
might contain ani or all of the follow depend upon the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
word process equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11853
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
zip or jaz drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
floppi disk
hard disk
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digit camera storag
usb thumb drive
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
all relat document should be cover by the word of the search warrant and
seiz along with the comput system thi document could be critic in the analysi
of the system hardwar and softwar document could indic chang that have been
made to the system that will help the fraud examin avoid damag the system the fact
that access control product have been ad to the system might be a help piec of
inform for the fraud examin
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11854 2011 fraud examin manual
process evid for remov
the search for and seizur of technic equip requir specif procedur that must be
follow by fraud examin to guarante the integr of evid and to protect both the
organ and the individu fraud examin from civil litig these guidelin ar
written to satisfi the evidentiari requir for crimin prosecut and each step in the
process is there for a reason fraud examin who deviat from these guidelin should be
abl to justifi their action if call into question later
1 if possibl befor execut a search warrant where comput equip andor
magnet storag media is to be seiz try to make sure that someon will be present
who is familiar with comput equip to assist in the identif of the variou
compon
2 it is critic that anyon not involv in the investig be kept awai from ani
comput equip and not be allow to touch ani of the equip thi
includ ani person not directli involv in handl the comput and relat
equip it is possibl for a suspect or ani person touch onli on kei of a
system keyboard when a comput is oper to destroi evid limit the
number of personnel respons for process computerrel evid to
maintain the integr of thi evid
3 if the person seiz the system ha the appropri train and expertis it might be
us to observ the video displai of the system inform might be displai that
will be of valu in the case if thi occur document with a closeup photograph of the
video screen take care if us a camera with a flash that the flash doe not reflect
back into the camera len
4 if a comput or peripher is not cover by the respect search warrant leav it
alon until a supplement warrant can be obtain
5 if the comput is to be remov from the locat do not enter anyth via the
system keyboard or attempt to read inform from the system or ani associ
magnet media
6 do not move the comput ani more than is necessari until it is properli secur
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11855
even then extrem care should be taken as sudden motion could caus the
destruct of data or damag to the equip itself
7 photograph the overal view of the comput system wide view move the equip
as littl as possibl befor take thi photograph to indic how the equip wa
origin posit consid videotap the confisc procedur for complet
document of all action perform howev caution is advis sinc the video
will captur everyth that is said and done specul statement or leviti should be
restrict
8 document the state of the comput when first observ wa it oper what wa
displai on the monitor screen etc
9 depend on the experi of the person seiz the system it might be advis to
unplug the power from the central process unit cpu befor take ani further
action unplug the power at the wall outlet if access even though thi action will
lose ani data in random access memori it might prevent the comput from delet
or chang other data n o te thi appli to sta nd alon microcomput onli
and doe not includ comput connect to a local area network lan
10 turn off the power to all other compon andor piec of peripher equip
such as printer video displai crt or monitor etc be awar that mani
peripher util random access memori which can contain evid that will be
lost when power is remov
11 if possibl photograph all cabl connect usual in the rear of the system befor
disconnect
12 disconnect all compon that ar attach to an extern power suppli onli eg
from an electr wall socket etc
13 never connect or disconnect ani of the cabl of the system when the comput is
oper thi could result in physic damag to the system compon andor
peripher equip
14 label all cabl connect includ ani telephon cabl that ar connect to the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11856 2011 fraud examin manual
system so that the system can be reconstruct at a later time for analysi
15 again photograph all cabl connect befor photograph try to arrang the
cabl connector label in such a wai that thei will be visibl in the photograph
16 label each item of equip that will be confisc thi includ the cpu
monitor printer etc each item that ha a remov exterior case should be seal
with a tamperproof evid tape especi the cpu case thi will help to prevent
later alleg that compon were remov or alter
17 consider should be given to separ closeup isol photograph for each
item to be seiz these closeup shot will serv the purpos of provid more
specif identif of seiz item and respond to possibl futur alleg of
physic damag to a seiz item
18 document the locat of all item seiz which room specif locat in the room
refer to photograph the person who seiz the item serial number special
identif mark etc
19 check all disk drive to determin if thei contain a disk if so remov the disk from
the drive and place it in a disk sleev writeprotect the disk immedi label the
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from and then label a paper
bag to indic that the disk wa taken from the label drive place the disk in the
paper bag and seal it
20 place a cardboard insert or a throwawai disk into the disk drive and secur the drive
door shut to secur the drive head for transport cardboard insert ar special
made for thi purpos if none ar avail a disk of the particular size that contain
no data might be us prefer a new unus disk
21 check ani other remov storag media drive remov ani storag media thei
contain and label the media for identif purpos thi includ compon
such as optic drive extern tape drive iomega drive cdrom etc
22 if there is ani uncertainti as to what a piec of equip is do not specul just
label the equip with a uniqu identifi number and secur the item for later
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11857
analysi howev be prepar to justifi the seizur of a compon that might or
might not be cover in the search warrant
23 when all compon and cabl have been label and document disconnect the
cabl from their respect compon and secur the cabl
24 if cover in the search warrant confisc all relat manual and other
document and all magnet media also confisc ani other item that might be
evid in the case and that ar cover by the term of the search warrant
25 if at all possibl after all equip and magnet media have been label and
inventori each item should be store in a paper bag or a cardboard box and seal
to keep out dust larg item such as the cpu andor printer could be store in
larg paper bag or larg box smaller item such as disk and cd could be store
in sandwichbag size paper bag thi practic will protect these item from
unnecessari exposur to dust an addit label should be attach to the bag
identifi the content of the bag along with ani identifi number such as the
number of an evid tag note plastic bag such as garbag and sandwich
bag should not be us to store evid
26 ensur that adequ support is given to all item when thei ar be move
27 thoroughli document the inventori of everyth to be remov from the locat
thi will be requir for the search warrant return if applic but also serv to
provid a measur of liabil protect for the person seiz the system
basic comput procedur ar essenti when process evid these precaut must
be follow explicitli when work with comput
do not eat drink or smoke close to the comput system or near ani of the storag
media such as disk or cd crumb liquid andor smoke particl could all
potenti damag the equip or store data if thi happen it becom veri
difficult if not imposs to recov the data and evid
do not fold or bend disk or touch the magnet media insid the disk cover
do not write on a disk on a label of a disk or on a bag that contain a disk write on a
label and then place the label on the disk if it is necessari to write on a disk us a soft
felttip pen
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11858 2011 fraud examin manual
do not place magnet media near magnet field as thi could caus damag magnet
field strong enough to damag data ar more common than you might think
do not expos magnet media to either extrem heat or cold temperatur outsid of
the rang from 4090 degre fahrenheit can damag the data
do not fingerprint magnet media the particl of fingerprint powder ar almost
imposs to remov from the media surfac and the drive will not be abl to read the
data contain on the media perman damag to the drive equip could
also result
evid storag
after a comput system ha been seiz most crimin justic agenc have a central
evid storag facil where the equip is transport and store until it is either
process further or need in court in the major of case the special storag
requir of comput system ar not address
the storag environ should be in a locat that is
rel dustfre
both temperatur and humid control
free of magnet and electron field
possibl threat to magnet media
telephon
radio speaker
radio transmitt
copi machin
plastic garbag or sandwich bag
degauss equip
electr fan
undershelf light heat
leav media in vehicl trunk dure ex treme temperatur either hot or cold
magnet
proxim to a radiat or an open heat vent
evid analysi
the primari concern dure the analysi of electron evid is to maintain the integr of
the evid thi mean that procedur must be develop to ensur that no alleg
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11859
can be rais in court that the methodolog us dure analysi could have damag or
alter the hardwar media or data that constitut the evid
current there ar no special evid analysi laboratori avail to most crimin
justic agenc to analyz comput electron or magnet evid the us secret
servic and the fbi both have such capabl but unless the case is of critic import
these laboratori process onli case investig by those agenc
understand the term
to effect analyz the data store within a comput the fraud examin must have a
practic understand of the basic oper of a comput and how it store inform
the fraud examin must also have the expertis to access the data at the most basic level
without thi knowledg inform could be hidden from view or store within other file
or locat not usual access by the comput
each new develop in technolog bring with it new concept and a new vocabulari
the modern fraud examin must stai current on the term us to describ technolog
develop tool and practic as he mai be ask to explain such concept as part of
the engag in the result report or as an expert wit dure consequ
legal proceed
fraud examin must also be educ in the us of the variou softwar util that will
enabl them to analyz the electron data util such as norton util will be of great
assist in investig involv person comput there ar sever util
applic that autom a great deal of the evid analysi process howev you
should not us these program unless you have been properli train
evid inventori
mani time comput seiz as evid ar onli inventori accord to the inform
avail on the outsid of the cpu case name the make model and serial number of
the particular unit the compon insid the cpu case ar never examin fraud
examin must consid that there could liter be thousand of dollar of equip
insid thi case inadequ inventori of comput equip leav the organ and
possibl the fraud examin in a precari liabil posit should ani of thi equip be
damag or lost
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11860 2011 fraud examin manual
in analyz and search magnet or optic media for potenti evid the fraud
examin should consid the follow
mirror copi
viru detect
keyword search
hidden and delet file
file slack area
file signatur
encrypt file
mirror copi
if possibl the fraud examin should make an exact duplic or mirror copi of ani
media that is to be analyz thi will ensur that no chang or damag occur to the
origin evid thi will not be possibl in all case due to a lack of equip or other
resourc but should be consid as the ideal procedur
when there is no altern but to analyz the origin of the seiz evid consider
should be given to us util softwar to lock the disk so that no inform can be
written to the disk thi will protect the integr of the origin evid and prevent
inadvert alter of the origin data
viru detect
all data storag media should be examin for comput virus thi will serv not onli to
protect the fraud examin own equip but also will protect the fraud examin from
possibl alleg that he infect the seiz media with a comput viru
keyword search
due to the tremend storag capac of contemporari comput media it might be more
cost effect for the fraud examin to conduct a keyword search of the media search
for kei word name date account number etc that ar materi to the fraud case thi
will minim the amount of time us to complet the analysi and also protect the fraud
examin from possibl alleg that their search wa overli broad
hidden and delet file
most comput oper system allow file to be design as hidden file when so
design the file might not be visibl to normal search procedur such as displai a
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11861
disk directori util program exist to show these hidden file fraud examin should
inspect these file to determin if thei were intention hidden becaus thei contain
evid
in addit mani comput user do not realiz that an initi command to delet a file
doe not necessarili mean that the file content have been destroi with the appropri
util program eras file can be uneras and review by the fraud examin
file slack area
there is a differ in most oper system between the logic size of a file and the
physic size of the file the logic size pertain to the size in the number of byte that
the file occupi in a directori list thi is the number that is displai for file size
the physic size of a file depend on how the oper system store file in most
oper system the disk is organ into design block call cluster file occupi a
whole number of cluster even if the logic size of the file is smaller than the cluster size in
these case differ in space between the physic file space and the logic file space is
call the file slack area thi area might contain data from previouslyeras file that could
contain evid unless the fraud examin ha a special util to identifi and investig
the file slack area potenti evid possibl locat there could be miss
file signatur
when review a directori list in a file manag such as window explor the type
of file is on of the option that might displai thi inform might indic that the file
is an applic or that it is a word document or some other type howev thi
design is usual base on the extens of the file and might not be an accur
indic of the file content
for exampl if a file were creat in microsoft word and save with the file name of
murder confessiondoc the directori list would correctli indic that thi file wa a
word document howev if the file were renam as angelex the directori list
would mistakenli indic that the file wa an applic even though the content of the
file itself have not chang
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11862 2011 fraud examin manual
inspect each and everi file on seiz media would be tremend tediou and veri
timeconsum howev there ar util program that can autom thi process and
report ani discrep such as the on describ abov
encrypt file
should the fraud examin come across file that have been encrypt dure the analysi of
seiz comput media sever consider aris
first of all util program exist to decrypt document encrypt by mani of the more
common busi softwar applic such as microsoft word and wordperfect there
ar also sever compani who special in thi type of decrypt
secondli there is preced for forc the suspect to divulg the decrypt code through a
court order consid onc again that the comput is onli a contain and that the
encrypt is an addit lock that is prohibit the fraud examin from review the
content for potenti evid if a valid search warrant exist author the examin
of the data thi would be no differ than a court order a suspect to unlock a file cabinet
to allow the inspect of it content
comput crime law
intern law
with a global commun network such as the internet the odd have dramat
increas that a crime mai have been perpetr in a foreign nation or that record relat
to a portion of the commun transmiss mai have pass through anoth countri
thi can caus tremend complic for a fraud examin attempt to pursu hi
investig
victim of scam origin oversea usual find themselv with virtual no recours
recent comput equip and softwar scam oper in former communist nation
have specif target us user languag commun and distanc obstacl ar
nearli insurmount in work with foreign law enforc offici to resolv such
case in the futur greater intern cooper will be necessari to combat
intern high tech crime
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11863
recent howev the us ha taken two substanti step to combat the inconsist in
intern law pertain to comput fraud first on septemb 29 2006 the unit
state becam a parti to the council of europ convent on cybercrim which is the
onli legal bind multilater instrument specif address computerrel crime
help protect citizen against comput hack and internet fraud as well as crime
involv electron evid parti to the convent ar commit to harmon
nation law to improv investig techniqu and to increas cooper
second the us is an activ particip in the subgroup on hightech crime at g8 lyon
group which wa creat to enhanc the abil of g8 countri to prevent investig
and prosecut crime involv comput network commun and other new
technolog on signific accomplish of the subgroup wa the creation of a
network that allow law enforc author of member nation to receiv rapid
cooper in investig comput crime
feder law
there ar mani law that can be us to prosecut comput crime and fraud in the
unit state the basic law us to prosecut comput and other high tech crime ar
divid into the feder law and state law
comput fraud and abus act titl 18 us code section 1030
most comput crime ar prosecut under tradit fraud theft and embezzl
statut a statut enact in 1984 titl 18 us code section 1030 make certain
computerrel activ a specif feder offens more inform on section 1030 is set
out in the law relat to fraud chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
in brief section 1030a prohibit seven act involv protect comput
a protect comput under thi section includ
a comput that is us exclus by a financi institut or the unit state
govern
ani comput the us of which affect a comput us by a financi institut or the
feder govern
a comput that is us in interst or foreign commerc or commun
briefli section 1030a prohibit us a protect comput
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11864 2011 fraud examin manual
to commit espionag 18 usc 1030a1
to obtain without author certain govern financi institut or
commerci inform 18 usc 1030a2
to access without author a govern comput 18 usc 1030a3
to commit fraud 18 usc 1030a4
to transmit a program code or command to damag a protect comput or to access
a protect comput that result in damag 18 usc 1030a5
for traffick in password 18 usc 1030a6
to transmit extortion threat 18 usc 1030a7
section 1030a5 and 1030a4 ar discuss in further detail below
comput fraud titl 18 us code section 1030a4
as note abov section 1030a4 outlaw fraud involv protect comput there ar
three element of the crime which includ
knowingli access a protect comput without author or exceed
author
with the intent to defraud and
therebi obtain anyth of valu more than 5000 over the cours of a year
caus comput damag titl 18 us code section 1030a5
section 1030a5 which appli to comput us in interst or foreign commerc or
commun outlaw caus comput damag but it contain two categori of
offens depend on intent the first categori provid that it is illeg to knowingli
transmit a program code or command that intention caus damag a protect
comput thi offens appli even if the individu had author to access the
comput
the second categori provid that it is illeg to access a protect comput without
author that result in damag unlik the first categori thi offens doe not requir
intent to damag onli the intent to access the inform
unlaw action under the first categori of section 1030a5 violat includ
imprison up to on year andor a fine violat under the second categori of section
1030a5 mai receiv up to five year imprison not more than 10 year for repeat
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11865
offend andor a fine both categori provid a civil remedi for ani person who suffer
damag as a result of a violat of section 1030a5
to appli section 1030a5 requir that the defend conduct caus damag to a
comput due to it broad the definit allow section 1030a5 to appli in variou
situat includ instanc where an act caus inform to be delet or chang
where an intrud alter the wai a comput oper or where an act make inform
unavail even if an intrud did not make ani alter and the comput system work
as it did befor some court have rule that access and copi privat data from
protect comput mai caus damag to the data under section 1035a5
penalti
the comput fraud and abus act provid both crimin and civil liabil section 1030
includ crimin punish provis howev it provid differ penalti depend
on the specif conduct the act also provid civil remedi for individu that suffer
damag result from section 1030 violat
canspam act titl 18 us code section 1037
the canspam act or the control the assault of nonsolicit pornographi and
market act attempt to reduc the amount of unsolicit commerci email which is
also known as spam by establish nation standard for send email solicit to
reduc the amount of spam the canspam act provid sever provis that appli to
individu or compani send spam more specif the act prohibit sever
decept andor fraudul practic commonli us in spam includ the prohibit of
us decept subject line us decept header inform and requir sender
identif penalti under the canspam act includ punish by a fine andor
imprison for not more than five year
access devic fraud titl 18 us code section 1029
titl 18 us code section 1029 crimin the product us traffick or possess
of unauthor or counterfeit access devic access devic ar devic that allow access to
account fund most importantli section 1029 proh ibit the fraudul us of credit card
howev becaus congress broadli defin the term access devic section 1029 also
appli to crime us other access devic number includ debit card atm card
person identif number pin comput password or ani other thing of valu
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11866 2011 fraud examin manual
or that can be us to initi a transfer of fund other than a transfer origin sole by
paper instrument
ident theft and assumpt deterr act of 1998 titl 18 us code section 1028
as discuss in the consum fraud section the growth of ident theft led congress to
pass the ident theft and assumpt deterr act which make ident theft a feder
crime thi act outlaw the intent and unauthor us of anoth individu
identif with the intent to commit a crime the ident theft and assumpt
deterr act carri a maximum term of 15 year imprison a fine and crimin
forfeitur of ani person properti us or intend to be us to commit the offens the
penalti is increas to imprison of up to 30 year if the offens is commit to
facilit an act of terror
interst transport of stolen properti itsp titl 18 us code section 2314
the itsp statut prohibit the transport transmitt or transfer of fraudul
receiv good ware merchandis secur or monei in interst or foreign commerc
when valu at 5000 or more prosecutor of ten us the itsp statut in fraud prosecut
in conjunct with mail fraud count wire fraud count or to provid feder jurisdict in
their absenc to appli the itsp statut requir that an individu transport the proce
which must valu at least 5000 across state lin es defend also violat the statut if thei
induc their victim to travel in interst commerc as part of the scheme to defraud
court mai aggreg item valu at less than 5000 as part of the same scheme to meet
the valu requir
addition it is clear that section 2314 appli when defend steal tangibl item which
qualifi as good ware or merchandis that contain intellectu properti howev court
have had vari opinion on the character of intellectu properti as good ware
merchandis secur or monei when an individu steal intang properti through
intang mean
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 govern the illeg intercept of electron
commun and the unauthor access of electron store data
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11867
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act the store commun act and
the pen regist act which regul pen regist and trap and trace devic thi section
howev focus on the wiretap act and the store commun act
the wiretap act titl 18 us code section 25102521
in respons to privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act which prohibit anyon
from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire oral or electron
commun
focus on it applic to comput fraud the wiretap act prohibit the intent
intercept of certain electron commun includ email it doe not govern
store commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of
the content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court
have held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
addition most court agre that intercept doe not occur when an individu obtain
access to an electron store copi of the commun whether such storag occur
pre or postdeliveri and even if the storag last onli a few millisecond as a result the
wiretap act is often inadequ to protect electron commun sent over the internet
the wiretap act also contain sever except to prosecut includ the consent
except which provid that parti to the commun mai author other to
intercept the transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
store commun act titl 18 us code section 2701
as part of the electron commun privaci act congress enact the store
commun act sca to protect store electron commun such as email
and voicemail by prohibit the unauthor access of such commun that ar in
storag more specif the sca prohibit unlaw access to a facil which provid an
electron commun servic and then obtain alter or prevent author
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11868 2011 fraud examin manual
access to a wire or electron commun while it is electron store in such
a system
unlik intercept under the wiretap act an electron commun fall under the sca
onc a system receiv and store it howev like the wiretap act the sca includ a
consent except under thi except a servic provid mai disclos electron
commun with the law consent of the origin an addresse or the intend
recipi
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison for
up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor imprison
for not more than 10 year in ani other case where it is a first offens court mai impos a
fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all subsequ convict
court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to 10 year
mail and wire fraud titl 18 u s code section 1341 and 1343
as discuss abov a comput mai be the tool us to commit tradit crime includ
mail and wire fraud due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statut prosecutor
mai us these tradit crimin statut to prosecut comput fraud in basic term the
law prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti
sever case have held that the feder mail and wire fraud statu appli to comput fraud
furthermor prosecutor mai us these statut in addit to or in lieu of case that
implic trade secret counterfeit or illicit label counterfeit document or packag
or counterfeit trademark servic mark or certif mark howev court disagre on
whether the mail and wire fraud statut reach crimin copyright infring
penalti under the mail and wire fraud statu includ fine imprison up to five year
or both howev if the violat affect a financi institut the violat mai receiv
fine up to 1000000 imprison up to thirti year or both
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11869
fals statement titl 18 us code section 1001
prosecutor most often us section 1001 to prosecut fals statement made to law
enforc or regulatori offici not made under oath in the cours of an offici
investig or on an applic for such thing as feder employ credit and visa
applic prosecutor mai also us section 1001 in lieu of the misdemeanor provis of
the ir code for file fals document with tax return
section 1001 violat mai implic other feder law includ comput fraud 18
usc 1030a4 and internet fraud eg auction fraud or phish by make fals
statement in ani matter within the jurisdict of the govern
the econom espionag act of 1996 titl 18 us code section 1831183 9
the econom espionag act of 1996 eea make the theft of trade secret a feder
crimin offens the eea outlaw two type of trade secret misappropri section 1831
crimin econom espionag which is the theft of a trade secret to benefit a foreign
govern instrument or agent and section 1832 crimin the theft of commerci
trade secret to obtain an econom advantag
section 1831 and 1832 provid signific penalti for trade secret violat if done to
benefit a foreign govern the theft of trade secret is punish by up to fifteen year
imprison and up to a 500000 fine trade secret theft for commerci benefit is
punish by up to 10 year imprison and up to a 250000 fine the eea howev
doe not provid ani civil remedi
addition prosecutor can appli the eea to a wide varieti of misconduct becaus it
crimin attempt and conspiraci to violat the eea the same penalti appli to these
offens with increas penalti if the trade secret misappropri benefit a foreign
govern foreign instrument or a foreign agent
moreov the eea author the attornei gener to commenc a civil action seek
injunct relief to prevent further disclosur of a trade secret by the defend or third
parti
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11870 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin infring of a copyright titl 17 us code section 506 and titl 18 us code section 2319
titl 17 us code section 506 crimin will copyright infring and defin what
conduct is prohibit while titl 18 us code section 2319 impos the crimin
punish for a copyright infring convict which is to be ad to ani other
penalti impos by other provis or law
copyright law grant copyright holder six exclus right to their work includ the right
to reproduct gener infring occur if an individu exercis ani on of the
copyright holder exclus right without author or other legal author howev
not all infring ar crimin offens instead section 506 provid that copyright
infring is crimin if an individu willfulli reproduc or distribut for commerci
advantag or privat financi gain on or more copi of copyright work total in
retail valu 1000 or more
section 2319 impos punish for both feloni and misdemeanor crime feloni
penalti attach when the infring consist of the reproduct or distribut of 10 or
more copi of copyright work within 180 dai that taken togeth ar worth more than
2500 or when the violat involv distribut of a work be prepar for
commerci distribut over a comput network access to member of the public
altern misdemeanor crime attach when the infring consist of ani of
the follow
infring of reproduct or distribut right for privat financi gain or
commerci advantag regardless of the exact volum or valu of the infring
infring of reproduct or distribut right of on or more copi of
copyright work within 180 dai that ar worth a total retail valu of 1000 or more
and it doe not involv privat financi gain or commerci advantag or
infring of right other than reproduct or distribut for privat financi gain
or commerci advantag
in 1997 presid clinton sign the no electron theft act into law which amend the
copyright law to prohibit electron infring and extend the copyright infring
to includ act that do not necessarili give rise to a profit
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11871
limit on exclus right comput program titl 17 us code section 117
although copyright law provid copyright holder the exclus right to reproduct thi
right is subject to a number of limit includ section 117 which allow the copi of
copyright softwar in limit circumst under section 117 the owner of a copi of a
comput program is allow to make addit copi of such program in two instanc
first owner mai copi a comput program if it is necessari for the us of the comput
program second user mai make a copi for archiv purpos to prevent loss due to hard
drive failur and the like
even though the law author copi made under section 117 limit there ar
restrict all copi must be destroi when the possess of a comput program
ceas to be deem right furthermor ani copi made in accord with thi section
mai be transfer but must be accompani by the origin program from which copi
were made and with all right in the program
digit millennium copyright act titl 17 us code section 12011205
the advent of the internet and digit media ha led to an increas in intellectu copyright
infring in respons to thi develop congress enact the digit millennium
copyright act of 1998 dmca the dmca outlaw the us of comput and other
electron devic to infring against copyright holder exclus right to further thi goal
the dmca provid liabil limit for transmit copyright materi onlin the
dmca also provid crimin penalti for circumv copyright protect system
which ar set forth in section 1201 and for compromis the integr of copyright
manag inform pursuant to section 1202
violat under either section 1201 or 1202 ar subject to a maximum of five year
imprison up to 500000 fine or both subsequ offens ar subject to a maximum
of 10 year a maximum fine of 1000000 or both
electron fund transfer crimin liabil titl 15 us code section 1693n
congress design thi legisl to allow consum the eas and benefit of electron fund
transfer while defin the right and liabil of the parti involv in such transact
section 1693n appli to paperless monei transfer between account includ atm
transact debit and credit card transact pointofsal po debit transact
telephon transfer and accord to the feder deposit insur corpor fdic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11872 2011 fraud examin manual
ani other electron bank transact that can result in the withdraw of cash from
your bank account
in particular thi statut attach crimin liabil to the act of
give fals or inaccur inform under the bank law and regul or
fail to provid inform requir under the bank law and regul
it also prohibit certain action affect commerc includ
us attempt to us or conspir to us ani fraudul obtain debit
instrument with knowledg of fraudul charact to obtain anyth with an
aggreg valu of at least 1000 within a oneyear period or
transport attempt to transport or conspir to transport a fraudul debit
instrument with unlaw or fraudul intent and knowledg or
sell or transport in interst or foreign commerc of ani fraudul debit
instrument with knowledg or
receiv conceal us or transport anyth that is proce from a fraudul
activ and that ha a valu exceed 1000 within ani oneyear period or
receiv conceal us sell or transport of on or more ticket for interst
or foreign transport that have a valu aggreg 500 or more and were obtain
by us of a fraudul debit instrument or
furnish monei properti servic or anyth els of valu aggreg
1000 or more within a oneyear period in conjunct with the us of a fraudul
debit instrument
state law
at the state level statut that might be of us in prosecut comput crime would
includ the penal code violat of larceni in it mani form fals pretens forgeri
fraud embezzl vandal properti destruct malici mischief proprietari
inform theft commerci briberi and extort but most state now expressli provid
penalti for crime perpetr by us of comput or perpetr against comput see
the law section for a complet list of state comput fraud statut
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11873
govern inform on cybercrim
doj comput crime and intellectu properti section
the comput crime and intellectu properti section ccip of the crimin divis of
the us depart of justic do provid a number of excel resourc regard
comput and internet fraud
their web address is wwwcybercrimegov on that site the ccip ha inform about
comput crime encrypt electron commerc hack legal issu relat to comput
crime privaci issu and intern issu among other
thei also have some superb inform regard the search and seizur of comput
includ the ccipss manual entitl search and seiz comput and obtain electron
evid in crimin investig addition thei have set forth the feder crimin code
section relat to search as well as materi about the fourth amend and the
internet the materi on search and seizur can be access directli at the follow site
wwwcybercrimegovsearchinghtml
dh nation cyber secur divis
the nation cyber secur divis ncsd of the depart of homeland secur
dh work with public privat and intern entiti to ensur the secur of
cyberspac and us cyber asset the ncsd ha the follow two primari object
build and maintain an effect nation cyberspac respons system
implement a cyberrisk manag program for the protect of critic
infrastructur
more inform about the ncsd can be found at
httpwwwdhsgovxaboutstructureeditorial0839shtm
financi transact public sector fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11901
