2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Hacking


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Computer Hacking 
As the number of computers and computer users increases, so does the number and types of 
hackers. A 2007 study by the University of Ma ryland’s A. James Clark School of Engineering 
reported that hackers attack computers with Internet connections every 39 seconds, or about 
2,244 times a day. In addition, a 2007 research report conducted by WhiteHat, a website 
security services provider, showed that as many as 90 percent of all websites remain 
vulnerable to some form of computer hack.  
 
Although the term hacker was originally used to describe a computer enthusiast, the term has 
now evolved to mean someone seeking unauthorized access to computer systems and the 
information contained therein. It includes organizations’ employees, members of hacker 
gangs, and hackers for profit. Motives vary according to the targeted system, information 
desired, and the perpetrator. While hacking was once commonly thought of as a precocious 
teenager’s hobby, it has changed dramatically in the last twenty years to encompass a large 
and diverse group. 
 
Definition 
Hacking is basically breaking into computers and telecommunications systems by learning 
the vulnerabilities of various hardware and software, and using a computer to systematically 
“guess” the user’s system identification and password.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1806                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Hackers use various “rogue” software applications to penetrate a system, or sometimes they 
enlist the help of the user surreptitiously by installing a program that is downloaded via an e-
 mail or by visiting a website. These programs operate in the background of the infected 
computer and can disable security settings and capture information that is sent back to  
the hacker. 
 
But, the most direct way of gaining access to a computer is to use someone else’s password 
or generate (without authorization) a password of one’s own. Passwords are designed to 
keep computers safe. If you don’t know the password, the machine will not run. However, 
most users choose passwords that, while not easy to crack, follow certain patterns. People 
usually pick something familiar and easy as their password. A deep-sea fisherman uses 
“marlin”; the man’s secretary, who received a mug about “soaring with the eagles and 
working with turkeys” from her boss last Christmas, uses “turkey” as her password. There 
are lists circulated among hackers of the most likely passwords.  
 
If the hacker knows or can learn something about his target, his job is even easier. That 
fisherman, for example, probably has a huge marlin mounted on his wall. It’s located directly 
in the man’s line of sight as he logs on each morning; it’s a good guess this guy will have 
“marlin” or “reel” or something else fishy in his password. A simple lesson here: real-word 
passwords, even in variation, are not secure. The safest passwords combine letters, numbers, 
and other special characters, such as punctuation. 
 
Social Engineering 
Another means of gaining access to a system involves simple deception. The hacker uses his 
verbal skills to deceive victims into disclosing information they ought not to divulge, or 
convinces victims to commit acts that facilitate the hacker’s scheme. Often posing as an 
employee or someone hired by the organization, the hacker easily deceives real employees 
into revealing information. In order to research his scheme, he may avail himself of 
documents in the company dumpster, such as internal telephone directories and 
correspondence. 
 
The hacker may assume a number of different guises to accomplish this deception. He may 
pose as a new or temporary worker and ask information systems employees for a password 
so that he can begin work. He may also pose as someone in a position of authority and 
intimidate employees into revealing confidential information.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1807 
Sometimes overt deception is not required. In large corporations, hackers can take advantage 
of the anonymity among employees. By donning office attire, they can blend into the crowd 
and thus peruse the premises, perhaps gaining a password written down at an employee’s 
desk in the process. 
 
Hacker Computer Manipulation  
Trojan Horse 
A Trojan horse is the covert placement of instructions in a program that causes the 
computer to perform unauthorized functions but usually still allows the program to perform 
its intended purpose. This method is one of the most commonly used techniques in 
computer-based frauds and sabotage. 
 
Spyware 
Spyware is a type of malware (short for malicious software) that is installed on computers and 
collects little bits of information at a time about users without their knowledge. The presence 
of spyware is typically hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect. The most 
common use of spyware for fraud is the theft of personal information (including financial 
information such as credit card numbers), 
 
Trap Doors 
When developing large programs, programmers insert instructions for additional code and 
intermediate output capabilities. The design of computer operating systems attempts to 
prevent this from happening. Therefore, programmers insert instructions that allow them to 
circumvent these controls. Hackers take advantage of these trap doors. 
 
Salami Techniques 
Salami techniques involve the execution of unauthorized programs used to steal small 
amounts of assets from a large number of sources without noticeably reducing the whole. 
For example, in a banking system, the amount of interest to be credited to an account is 
typically rounded off. A fraudster might set up the system so that instead of rounding off the 
number, that fraction of it is credited to a special account owned by the perpetrator. 
 
Logic Bombs 
A logic bomb is a computer program executed at a specific time period or when a specific 
event occurs. For example, a programmer can write a program to instruct the computer to 
delete all personnel and payroll files if his name were ever removed from the file. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1808                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data Diddling 
Data diddling is the changing of data before or during entry into the computer system. 
Examples include forging or counterfeiting documents used for data entry and exchanging 
valid disks and tapes with modified replacements. 
 
Scavenging and Dumpster Diving 
Scavenging involves obtaining information left around a computer system, in the computer 
room trash cans, and so on. Dumpster diving refers to gleaning sensitive information from 
an organization’s trash receptacles and dumpsters.  
 
Data Leakage 
Data leakage is the removing of information by smuggling it out as part of a printed 
document, encoding the information to look like something different, and removing it from 
the facility. 
 
Piggybacking/Impersonation 
Piggybacking and impersonation are frequently used to gain access to restricted areas. 
Examples include following someone in through a door with a badge reader, electronically 
using another’s user identification and password to gain computer access, and tapping into 
the terminal link of a user to cause the computer to believe that both terminals are the same 
person. 
 
Simulation and Modeling 
Simulation and modeling is a computer manipulation technique using the computer as a tool 
or instrument to plan or control a criminal act. 
 
Wire Tapping 
Wire tapping into a computer’s communications  links is another technique used by hackers. 
This method enables perpetrators to read the information being transmitted between 
computers, or between computers and terminals. 
 
Network Weaving 
This technique, more commonly known as looping, involves using numerous networks in an 
attempt to avoid detection. For example, a hacker might dial into Company A’s PBX system 
to obtain an outside line that can be used to dial into Company B’s network. If Company B 
can track the origin of the hacker’s call, it w ill lead them to Company A, not to the hacker. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1809 
The above is a relatively simple example. Hackers have been known to “loop” through 15 or 
20 different networks before arriving at their final destination. Network weaving can make it 
extremely difficult for an investigator or fraud examiner to trace the point of origin for a 
specific telephone call or data transmission. 
 
Altering the Way a System Generates Passwords 
Not all passwords are supplied by users. Some are generated by a computer system’s 
“randomizer” function. For example, many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) give first-time 
users a randomly generated password (and sometimes a random user name as well), which 
gets the person online. Then the user changes the log-in information to their  
own preference.  
 
By learning how a certain system’s randomizer works, the hacker can imitate the generation 
of valid passwords, or alter how the system operates. For example, with some tinkering, the 
randomizer can be set to give every new user the same, seemingly random, password: 
EVBDCL8. But that won’t work for long. It’s better to have the machine make a password 
built off some information about the user that is publicly available. Using a relatively simple 
set of algorithms, a hacker can convert a user name, such as “halbfish” into an obscure 
looking string like “rueavzhr” (letters are read as numbers by computers speaking ASCII 
code, so the algorithms are using sine values to convert the ASCII values into a new set  
of numbers).  
 
Here’s a good example of how manipulating a randomizer works. Dennis Ritchie, who 
helped develop UNIX technology, reported how a hacker attacked one company’s system. 
Computer officials at the company had their system generate passwords, each eight 
characters long, mixing letters and digits. In a brute force attack, it should have taken 112 
years to crack the nearly 3 trillion possibilities. However, the randomizer on the company 
system could only take 32,768 seeds for passwords. The hacker used his own machine to 
generate and test each of those combinations, using, according to Ritchie, “a total of only 
about one minute of machine time.” In less time than the average commercial break runs on 
television, the hacker breached a seemingly impenetrable system. 
 
Buffer Overflow Exploits 
Buffer overflow exploits are one of the largest problems in computer security today. In all 
application programs, there are buffers that hold data. These buffers have a fixed size. If an 
attacker sends too much data into one of these buffers, the buffer overflows. The server 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1810                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
then executes the data that “overflowed” as a program. This program may do any number of 
things, like sending passwords to Russia, altering system files, or installing 
backdoors, depending on what data the attacker sent to the buffer. 
 
Privilege Escalation Exploits 
Privilege escalation exploits grant administrator or root-level access to users who previously 
did not have such access. For example, an account exists on all Windows NT and 2000 
servers called “Guest.” This account, by default, has no password. Anyone can log-in to the 
server using this “Guest” account and then use a common privilege escalation exploit called 
“GetAdmin” to gain administrator-level access to the system. Many other privilege escalation 
exploits exist, such as HackDLL and others. These exploits are very useful, since they allow 
anyone who has any level of access to a system to easily elevate their privilege level and 
perform any activities they desire. 
 
Backdoors 
When attackers obtain root-level access to a server (using a buffer overflow exploit or a 
privilege escalation exploit, for example) they will want to do two things: 
• Install a backdoor  
• Cover their tracks  
 
Backdoors allow attackers to remotely access a system again in the future. For example, the 
attacker may have used a particular security hole to get root-level access to a computer. 
However, over time, that particular security hole may be closed, preventing the attacker from 
accessing the system again. In order to avoid being shut out in the future, attackers install 
backdoors. These backdoors take different forms, but all allow an attacker to access the 
server again without going through the standard log-in procedures and without having to 
repeat the attack that gave them access in the first place. Many worms install backdoors as a 
part of their malicious payload. Code Red II, for example, installed a backdoor that provided 
access to the C and D drives of the compromised Web server from anywhere on the 
Internet. Other common backdoor programs are Netbus and BackOrifice, which allow 
attackers to remotely control a compromised server. Once a backdoor is established, the 
hacker retreats and covers his tracks to keep the initial attack unnoticed.  
 
HTTP Exploits 
HTTP exploits involve using the Web server application to perform malicious activities. 
These attacks are very common and are growing in popularity because firewalls typically 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1811 
block most traffic from the Internet to keep it away from corporate servers. However, 
HTTP traffic, used for Web browsing, is almost always allowed to pass through firewalls 
unhindered. Thus, attackers have a direct line to the Web server. If they can coerce the Web 
server into performing malicious activities, they can access resources that would otherwise 
be unavailable. 
 
Anti-Hacker Measures 
Because hackers require dial-in capability to gain access, the best prevention strategy is to 
eliminate as many dial-in ports as possible. Unfortunately, the trend today is to install more, 
not fewer, dial-in capabilities because telecommuting and customer connectivity are driving 
the demand for more dial-in capability. The following are some preventive measures that can 
be implemented: 
• Welcome screens are usually proudly displayed at sign-in with a message such as: 
 
Welcome to the XYZ Corporation Computer network. 
 
To discourage unauthorized use, such a screen might be replaced with one that informs 
the user that he is about to access a proprietary network. Additionally, the screen should 
warn that unauthorized access is prohibited and will be prosecuted under the law. The 
screen should not identify either the organization or the network. 
• Security policies should be established and disseminated throughout the organization. 
These policies should include training for all employees, customers (who will appreciate 
the additional security), and others who have a need to access the network. 
• Call-back modems should be used wherever practical. These modems will answer an 
incoming call and require the sender to enter a password. Once the caller has identified 
himself, the modem will terminate the connection, and dial a previously established 
phone number. When the prearranged number is called, the sender must again perform 
the sign-on procedure.  
• Security software packages should be secured to the highest level possible. Most major 
software companies today have to release updates and patches to their software every so 
often. Check your software vendor’s websites on a regular basis for new security patches 
or use the new automated patching features that some companies offer. 
• Passwords should be used in accordance with sound security practices. For example: 
? Passwords should be changed periodically (every 90 days is suggested). 
? Passwords should be of sufficient length to deter guessing (a minimum of 8 
characters is suggested). 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1812                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Passwords of transferred or terminated employees should be changed immediately. 
• Most purchased software comes with a ve ndor supplied password that is used for 
installation and then deleted. All packages should be audited to ensure that these default 
passwords (which are widely known) have been changed. 
• Encryption should be considered for sensitive data files, password files, and sensitive 
computer programs. 
• Communications software should terminate any connection (whether dial-in or direct 
connect) after: 
? A reasonable number of unsuccessful attempts to enter a valid password (usually no 
more than three). 
? A terminal (direct connect or dial-in) has been connected for a period of time with 
no activity. This is called “timing-out.”  
The terminated connection will require redialing into the network and/or re-performing 
the log-in and verification process. Some companies require the data security officer to 
issue a new password before the user can log-in again. 
• Hacker publications and communications should be reviewed to learn the current jargon 
and hacker “handles,” which are the names that hackers use for their online personas. 
Hackers have used the Internet quite efficiently to communicate with each other, while 
producing a significant amount of hacking documentation and programs. Almost any 
hacker website will contain a large number of text files that explain “how to hack,” or 
how various systems operate. Many of these files will also explain the standard 
vulnerabilities of the systems, and the best methods to penetrate their security. 
 
Hacker Detection Measures 
An adequate hacker detection program contains three primary components: 
• Almost all communication systems maintain a log file that records all successful and 
unsuccessful system access attempts. These also allow for the printing of reports 
containing sign-on and sign-off activity. These reports should be printed out regularly and 
reviewed by the data security officer. Where possible, special reports should be printed 
on the number of unsuccessful access attempts. These attempts at logging into the 
system should be followed up by data security to determine their cause.  
• The data security function should have sufficient resources and staff to administer 
passwords, maintain the security software, review system activity reports, and follow up 
on all potential security violations.  
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1813 
• Finally, periodic reviews of telecommunications security should be performed by 
consultants and/or internal or external auditors, if the latter have the necessary 
experience and qualifications. 
 
Hacking Insurance 
During the past three years, a handful of cyber-insurers have begun offering coverage 
specifically designed to address new forms of information age exposure. These e-commerce 
risks can include theft, damage or disclosure of data, denial of service attacks, theft of 
intellectual property, unauthorized access, loss of revenue, infringement of copyright and 
trademark, and the consequent damage to business reputation. These types of e-commerce 
risks are covered by what is known as first-party coverage. 
 
Third-party coverage covers the company if it is being sued for problems caused by 
technology product errors and omissions; the pilfering, public release, or misuse of sensitive 
or confidential information; the unwitting spread of disruptive viruses; hacker tampering to 
the information and advertising carried on websites; e-mail-facilitated sexual harassment; and 
privacy infringement. 
 
Many businesses believe that their traditional business coverage will suffice, or failing that, 
their Web host or ISP will cover damages caused by any of the above. In both cases, they are 
probably wrong. Unless your business insurance policy or Internet service level agreement 
specifically includes language addressing e-commerce liability, any damages will probably not 
be covered. 
 
 



:


comput hack
as the number of comput and comput user increas so doe the number and type of
hacker a 2007 studi by the univers of ma ryland a jame clark school of engin
report that hacker attack comput with internet connect everi 39 second or about
2244 time a dai in addit a 2007 research report conduct by whitehat a websit
secur servic provid show that as mani as 90 percent of all websit remain
vulner to some form of comput hack
although the term hacker wa origin us to describ a comput enthusiast the term ha
now evolv to mean someon seek unauthor access to comput system and the
inform contain therein it includ organ employe member of hacker
gang and hacker for profit motiv vari accord to the target system inform
desir and the perpetr while hack wa onc commonli thought of as a precoci
teenag hobbi it ha chang dramat in the last twenti year to encompass a larg
and divers group
definit
hack is basic break into comput and telecommun system by learn
the vulner of variou hardwar and softwar and us a comput to systemat
guess the user system identif and password
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11806 2011 fraud examin manual
hacker us variou rogu softwar applic to penetr a system or sometim thei
enlist the help of the user surreptiti by instal a program that is download via an e
mail or by visit a websit these program oper in the background of the infect
comput and can disabl secur set and captur inform that is sent back to
the hacker
but the most direct wai of gain access to a comput is to us someon els password
or gener without author a password of on own password ar design to
keep comput safe if you dont know the password the machin will not run howev
most user choos password that while not easi to crack follow certain pattern peopl
usual pick someth familiar and easi as their password a deepsea fisherman us
marlin the man secretari who receiv a mug about soar with the eagl and
work with turkei from her boss last christma us turkei as her password there
ar list circul among hacker of the most like password
if the hacker know or can learn someth about hi target hi job is even easier that
fisherman for exampl probabl ha a huge marlin mount on hi wall it locat directli
in the man line of sight as he log on each morn it a good guess thi gui will have
marlin or reel or someth els fishi in hi password a simpl lesson here realword
password even in variat ar not secur the safest password combin letter number
and other special charact such as punctuat
social engin
anoth mean of gain access to a system involv simpl decept the hacker us hi
verbal skill to deceiv victim into disclos inform thei ought not to divulg or
convinc victim to commit act that facilit the hacker scheme often pose as an
employe or someon hire by the organ the hacker easili deceiv real employe
into reveal inform in order to research hi scheme he mai avail himself of
document in the compani dumpster such as intern telephon directori and
correspond
the hacker mai assum a number of differ guis to accomplish thi decept he mai
pose as a new or temporari worker and ask inform system employe for a password
so that he can begin work he mai also pose as someon in a posit of author and
intimid employe into reveal confidenti inform
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11807
sometim overt decept is not requir in larg corpor hacker can take advantag
of the anonym among employe by don offic attir thei can blend into the crowd
and thu perus the premis perhap gain a password written down at an employe
desk in the process
hacker comput manipul
trojan hors
a trojan hors is the covert placement of instruct in a program that caus the
comput to perform unauthor function but usual still allow the program to perform
it intend purpos thi method is on of the most commonli us techniqu in
computerbas fraud and sabotag
spywar
spywar is a type of malwar short for malici softwar that is instal on comput and
collect littl bit of inform at a time about user without their knowledg the presenc
of spywar is typic hidden from the user and can be difficult to detect the most
common us of spywar for fraud is the theft of person inform includ financi
inform such as credit card number
trap door
when develop larg program programm insert instruct for addit code and
intermedi output capabl the design of comput oper system attempt to
prevent thi from happen therefor programm insert instruct that allow them to
circumv these control hacker take advantag of these trap door
salami techniqu
salami techniqu involv the execut of unauthor program us to steal small
amount of asset from a larg number of sourc without notic reduc the whole
for exampl in a bank system the amount of interest to be credit to an account is
typic round off a fraudster might set up the system so that instead of round off the
number that fraction of it is credit to a special account own by the perpetr
logic bomb
a logic bomb is a comput program execut at a specif time period or when a specif
event occur for exampl a programm can write a program to instruct the comput to
delet all personnel and payrol file if hi name were ever remov from the file
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11808 2011 fraud examin manual
data diddl
data diddl is the chang of data befor or dure entri into the comput system
exampl includ forg or counterfeit document us for data entri and exchang
valid disk and tape with modifi replac
scaveng and dumpster dive
scaveng involv obtain inform left around a comput system in the comput
room trash can and so on dumpster dive refer to glean sensit inform from
an organ trash receptacl and dumpster
data leakag
data leakag is the remov of inform by smuggl it out as part of a print
document encod the inform to look like someth differ and remov it from
the facil
piggybackingimperson
piggyback and imperson ar frequent us to gain access to restrict area
exampl includ follow someon in through a door with a badg reader electron
us anoth user identif and password to gain comput access and tap into
the termin link of a user to caus the comput to believ that both termin ar the same
person
simul and model
simul and model is a comput manipul techniqu us the comput as a tool
or instrument to plan or control a crimin act
wire tap
wire tap into a comput commun link is anoth techniqu us by hacker
thi method enabl perpetr to read the inform be transmit between
comput or between comput and termin
network weav
thi techniqu more commonli known as loop involv us numer network in an
attempt to avoid detect for exampl a hacker might dial into compani as pbx system
to obtain an outsid line that can be us to dial into compani bs network if compani b
can track the origin of the hacker call it w ill lead them to compani a not to the hacker
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11809
the abov is a rel simpl exampl hacker have been known to loop through 15 or
20 differ network befor arriv at their final destin network weav can make it
extrem difficult for an investig or fraud examin to trace the point of origin for a
specif telephon call or data transmiss
alter the wai a system gener password
not all password ar suppli by user some ar gener by a comput system
random function for exampl mani internet servic provid isp give firsttim
user a randomli gener password and sometim a random user name as well which
get the person onlin then the user chang the login inform to their
own prefer
by learn how a certain system random work the hacker can imit the gener
of valid password or alter how the system oper for exampl with some tinker the
random can be set to give everi new user the same seemingli random password
evbdcl8 but that wont work for long it better to have the machin make a password
built off some inform about the user that is publicli avail us a rel simpl
set of algorithm a hacker can convert a user name such as halbfish into an obscur
look string like rueavzhr letter ar read as number by comput speak ascii
code so the algorithm ar us sine valu to convert the ascii valu into a new set
of number
here a good exampl of how manipul a random work denni ritchi who
help develop unix technolog report how a hacker attack on compani system
comput offici at the compani had their system gener password each eight
charact long mix letter and digit in a brute forc attack it should have taken 112
year to crack the nearli 3 trillion possibl howev the random on the compani
system could onli take 32768 seed for password the hacker us hi own machin to
gener and test each of those combin us accord to ritchi a total of onli
about on minut of machin time in less time than the averag commerci break run on
televis the hacker breach a seemingli impenetr system
buffer overflow exploit
buffer overflow exploit ar on of the largest problem in comput secur todai in all
applic program there ar buffer that hold data these buffer have a fix size if an
attack send too much data into on of these buffer the buffer overflow the server
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11810 2011 fraud examin manual
then execut the data that overflow as a program thi program mai do ani number of
thing like send password to russia alter system file or instal
backdoor depend on what data the attack sent to the buffer
privileg escal exploit
privileg escal exploit grant administr or rootlevel access to user who previous
did not have such access for exampl an account exist on all window nt and 2000
server call guest thi account by default ha no password anyon can login to the
server us thi guest account and then us a common privileg escal exploit call
getadmin to gain administratorlevel access to the system mani other privileg escal
exploit exist such as hackdll and other these exploit ar veri us sinc thei allow
anyon who ha ani level of access to a system to easili elev their privileg level and
perform ani activ thei desir
backdoor
when attack obtain rootlevel access to a server us a buffer overflow exploit or a
privileg escal exploit for exampl thei will want to do two thing
instal a backdoor
cover their track
backdoor allow attack to remot access a system again in the futur for exampl the
attack mai have us a particular secur hole to get rootlevel access to a comput
howev over time that particular secur hole mai be close prevent the attack from
access the system again in order to avoid be shut out in the futur attack instal
backdoor these backdoor take differ form but all allow an attack to access the
server again without go through the standard login procedur and without have to
repeat the attack that gave them access in the first place mani worm instal backdoor as a
part of their malici payload code red ii for exampl instal a backdoor that provid
access to the c and d drive of the compromis web server from anywher on the
internet other common backdoor program ar netbu and backorific which allow
attack to remot control a compromis server onc a backdoor is establish the
hacker retreat and cover hi track to keep the initi attack unnot
http exploit
http exploit involv us the web server applic to perform malici activ
these attack ar veri common and ar grow in popular becaus firewal typic
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11811
block most traffic from the internet to keep it awai from corpor server howev
http traffic us for web brows is almost alwai allow to pass through firewal
unhind thu attack have a direct line to the web server if thei can coerc the web
server into perform malici activ thei can access resourc that would otherwis
be unavail
antihack measur
becaus hacker requir dialin capabl to gain access the best prevent strategi is to
elimin as mani dialin port as possibl unfortun the trend todai is to instal more
not fewer dialin capabl becaus telecommut and custom connect ar drive
the demand for more dialin capabl the follow ar some prevent measur that can
be implement
welcom screen ar usual proudli displai at signin with a messag such as
welcom to the xyz corpor comput network
to discourag unauthor us such a screen might be replac with on that inform
the user that he is about to access a proprietari network addition the screen should
warn that unauthor access is prohibit and will be prosecut under the law the
screen should not identifi either the organ or the network
secur polici should be establish and dissemin throughout the organ
these polici should includ train for all employe custom who will appreci
the addit secur and other who have a need to access the network
callback modem should be us wherev practic these modem will answer an
incom call and requir the sender to enter a password onc the caller ha identifi
himself the modem will termin the connect and dial a previous establish
phone number when the prearrang number is call the sender must again perform
the signon procedur
secur softwar packag should be secur to the highest level possibl most major
softwar compani todai have to releas updat and patch to their softwar everi so
often check your softwar vendor websit on a regular basi for new secur patch
or us the new autom patch featur that some compani offer
password should be us in accord with sound secur practic for exampl
password should be chang period everi 90 dai is suggest
password should be of suffici length to deter guess a minimum of 8
charact is suggest
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11812 2011 fraud examin manual
password of transfer or termin employe should be chang immedi
most purchas softwar come with a ve ndor suppli password that is us for
instal and then delet all packag should be audit to ensur that these default
password which ar wide known have been chang
encrypt should be consid for sensit data file password file and sensit
comput program
commun softwar should termin ani connect whether dialin or direct
connect after
a reason number of unsuccess attempt to enter a valid password usual no
more than three
a termin direct connect or dialin ha been connect for a period of time with
no activ thi is call timingout
the termin connect will requir redial into the network andor reperform
the login and verif process some compani requir the data secur offic to
issu a new password befor the user can login again
hacker public and commun should be review to learn the current jargon
and hacker handl which ar the name that hacker us for their onlin persona
hacker have us the internet quit effici to commun with each other while
produc a signific amount of hack document and program almost ani
hacker websit will contain a larg number of text file that explain how to hack or
how variou system oper mani of these file will also explain the standard
vulner of the system and the best method to penetr their secur
hacker detect measur
an adequ hacker detect program contain three primari compon
almost all commun system maintain a log file that record all success and
unsuccess system access attempt these also allow for the print of report
contain signon and signoff activ these report should be print out regularli and
review by the data secur offic where possibl special report should be print
on the number of unsuccess access attempt these attempt at log into the
system should be follow up by data secur to determin their caus
the data secur function should have suffici resourc and staff to administ
password maintain the secur softwar review system activ report and follow up
on all potenti secur violat
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11813
final period review of telecommun secur should be perform by
consult andor intern or extern auditor if the latter have the necessari
experi and qualif
hack insur
dure the past three year a hand of cyberinsur have begun offer coverag
specif design to address new form of inform ag exposur these ecommerc
risk can includ theft damag or disclosur of data denial of servic attack theft of
intellectu properti unauthor access loss of revenu infring of copyright and
trademark and the consequ damag to busi reput these type of ecommerc
risk ar cover by what is known as firstparti coverag
thirdparti coverag cover the compani if it is be su for problem caus by
technolog product error and omiss the pilfer public releas or misus of sensit
or confidenti inform the unwit spread of disrupt virus hacker tamper to
the inform and advertis carri on websit emailfacilit sexual harass and
privaci infring
mani busi believ that their tradit busi coverag will suffic or fail that
their web host or isp will cover damag caus by ani of the abov in both case thei ar
probabl wrong unless your busi insur polici or internet servic level agreement
specif includ languag address ecommerc liabil ani damag will probabl not
be cover
