2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Electronic Mail


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Electronic Mail  
E-mail has revolutionized the ability of businesses to interact swiftly and, indeed, global 
business has embraced the e-mail system wholeheartedly. Few organizations do not provide 
some form of internal electronic communications. Due to the speed at which businesses can 
now interact and conduct business, as well as the relative cost advantage e-mail enjoys over 
other means of communication, the number of new e-mail users will no doubt continue  
to boom.  
 
E-mail does, however, also give organizations a degree of vulnerability. Aside from 
employees using it for personal correspondence, e-mail can be used to sabotage and crash 
organizations’ networks. Forwarding viruses or even simple virus hoaxes are often enough to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1814                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
overload a system. Using e-mail through such systems as the Internet endows senders with 
identity protection—the original sender of the message can be disguised or obscured. 
Therefore, because a sender’s identity can be concealed, sensitive business information can 
be safely forwarded to an unauthorized address. 
 
Consider: 
• Company employees now possess the ability to quickly disclose sensitive company 
materials to outside parties, increasing the opportunity for corporate espionage. 
• Companies that employ a company-wide e-mail system can now be held responsible for 
any unethical or illegal activities conducted by employees on the e-mail system. 
• Companies must now be concerned with the repercussions of the actions of any 
disgruntled or rash employees. The speed with which an e-mail can be “fired off” creates 
the opportunity for ill-advised communications. 
• Once an e-mail message has left a company’s system, it may travel through any number 
of “foreign” e-mail systems before reaching its destination. An e-mail transmission can 
quite easily be intercepted or compromised without the use of encryption software.  
• Without a security-enhanced e-mail system, the receiver of an e-mail message has little 
assurance that the e-mail is authentic. E-mail addresses can be easily “spoofed” or cloned 
by a knowledgeable user. 
 
E-mail can be delivered almost instantaneously anywhere the networks, computers, and 
software exist to handle its transmission and reception. In fact, one of the emerging security 
problems concerning e-mail is the huge volume of space required to archive old messages. In 
some organizations, people are regularly asked to cull through their old e-mail messages and 
delete those no longer needed. In addition, some organizations will delete any old e-mail 
messages left on the mail server machines after a certain amount of time (e.g., one or two 
months). 
 
E-Mail Security Concerns 
Since e-mail has become a fact of life for most organizations, it is appropriate to discuss 
some e-mail security concerns from both a user-based and an organizational perspective. 
Organizations often fail to set boundaries for employees regarding e-mail and may later face 
legal ramifications as a result.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1815 
E-Mail Ownership 
Who owns e-mail messages on an organization’s system? This is the common question, but 
it is not necessarily the right question. An e-mail message that an employee wrote himself is a 
work of authorship and as such the rules of copyright apply. In general, if the employee 
wrote the message as part of his duties for his employer (i.e., “in the scope of your 
employment”) the employer owns the copyright. If the e-mail was not part of the employee’s 
duties (something personal or related to another activity, whether permitted by the employer 
or not), then the user has copyright, but the employer, as owner of the system on which it 
was created or passed through, may have some rights to the copy on the system. If an 
employee is forwarding a message written by someone else, the issue gets even more 
complicated. For instance, does the original author have the right or the intention to 
authorize any forwarding? 
 
Organizational Liability 
As with any communications media, legal issues of the Internet are emerging at a rapid rate, 
with a lot of discussion, but are of limited consensus so far. It can be said that employers do 
have some liability for how employees use a company’s e-mail system. The issues are similar 
to an employee’s use of the company telephone, the company postage meter, the company 
vehicle, and so on.  
 
The best general advice is to exercise some caution when dealing with an e-mail system. 
Within the company, e-mail can become a vehicle for sexual harassment, for creating a 
hostile work environment, or setting up gambling pools. Outside the company, employees 
can use e-mail to operate their own businesses or to send out fabricated messages in the 
name of other employees or their employer. Some employers monitor their e-mail systems, 
which presents legal issues, such as invasion of privacy. E-mail has also been used to gather 
evidence against employers or employees. Of course, there are no more dangers and pitfalls 
of e-mail than there are of any form of communications, whether inside or outside the 
organization. The telephone and postal systems are just as capable of such problems. 
 
As with any potential liability issue, employers must set guidelines for the proper internal and 
external use of e-mail, just as they would for the proper use of the company telephone, 
stationery and postage, vehicles, and so on. For instance, the organization should have a 
policy reminding employees in writing that e-mail must not be used to send inappropriate 
and unprofessional messages, including: 
• Harassing other users of the system. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1816                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consuming unreasonable amounts of available resources. 
• Intentionally sending other users viruses. 
• Evading software licensing or copying mechanisms. 
• Crashing/disrupting system services. 
• Impersonating another user anywhere on the Internet. 
• Bypassing system security mechanisms. 
• Translating encrypted material without authorization. 
• Eavesdropping on other e-mail interactions. 
• Using the system for any personal gain either monetarily or politically unless permitted 
by the organization. 
 
A number of prominent liability law firms recommend some monitoring of e-mail, but this 
decision should not be taken lightly and not just because of employee’s privacy concerns. 
For instance, the fact that the company does try to monitor e-mail may be used against the 
company when something slips through that monitoring. 
 
Due to rapid growth of the Internet and e-mail, there is a great deal of uncertainty in the law. 
Organizations may want to seek legal counsel in establishing proper use guidelines and 
before taking disciplinary action against employees because of alleged abuses. 
 
 



:


electron mail
email ha revolution the abil of busi to interact swiftli and inde global
busi ha embrac the email system wholeheartedli few organ do not provid
some form of intern electron commun due to the speed at which busi can
now interact and conduct busi as well as the rel cost advantag email enjoi over
other mean of commun the number of new email user will no doubt continu
to boom
email doe howev also give organ a degre of vulner asid from
employe us it for person correspond email can be us to sabotag and crash
organ network forward virus or even simpl viru hoax ar often enough to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11814 2011 fraud examin manual
overload a system us email through such system as the internet endow sender with
ident protectionth origin sender of the messag can be disguis or obscur
therefor becaus a sender ident can be conceal sensit busi inform can
be safe forward to an unauthor address
consid
compani employe now possess the abil to quickli disclos sensit compani
materi to outsid parti increas the opportun for corpor espionag
compani that emploi a companywid email system can now be held respons for
ani uneth or illeg activ conduct by employe on the email system
compani must now be concern with the repercuss of the action of ani
disgruntl or rash employe the speed with which an email can be fire off creat
the opportun for illadvis commun
onc an email messag ha left a compani system it mai travel through ani number
of foreign email system befor reach it destin an email transmiss can
quit easili be intercept or compromis without the us of encrypt softwar
without a securityenhanc email system the receiv of an email messag ha littl
assur that the email is authent email address can be easili spoof or clone
by a knowledg user
email can be deliv almost instantan anywher the network comput and
softwar exist to handl it transmiss and recept in fact on of the emerg secur
problem concern email is the huge volum of space requir to archiv old messag in
some organ peopl ar regularli ask to cull through their old email messag and
delet those no longer need in addit some organ will delet ani old email
messag left on the mail server machin after a certain amount of time eg on or two
month
email secur concern
sinc email ha becom a fact of life for most organ it is appropri to discuss
some email secur concern from both a userbas and an organiz perspect
organ often fail to set boundari for employe regard email and mai later face
legal ramif as a result
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11815
email ownership
who own email messag on an organ system thi is the common question but
it is not necessarili the right question an email messag that an employe wrote himself is a
work of authorship and as such the rule of copyright appli in gener if the employe
wrote the messag as part of hi duti for hi employ ie in the scope of your
employ the employ own the copyright if the email wa not part of the employe
duti someth person or relat to anoth activ whether permit by the employ
or not then the user ha copyright but the employ as owner of the system on which it
wa creat or pass through mai have some right to the copi on the system if an
employe is forward a messag written by someon els the issu get even more
complic for instanc doe the origin author have the right or the intent to
author ani forward
organiz liabil
as with ani commun media legal issu of the internet ar emerg at a rapid rate
with a lot of discuss but ar of limit consensu so far it can be said that employ do
have some liabil for how employe us a compani email system the issu ar similar
to an employe us of the compani telephon the compani postag meter the compani
vehicl and so on
the best gener advic is to exercis some caution when deal with an email system
within the compani email can becom a vehicl for sexual harass for creat a
hostil work environ or set up gambl pool outsid the compani employe
can us email to oper their own busi or to send out fabric messag in the
name of other employe or their employ some employ monitor their email system
which present legal issu such as invas of privaci email ha also been us to gather
evid against employ or employe of cours there ar no more danger and pitfal
of email than there ar of ani form of commun whether insid or outsid the
organ the telephon and postal system ar just as capabl of such problem
as with ani potenti liabil issu employ must set guidelin for the proper intern and
extern us of email just as thei would for the proper us of the compani telephon
stationeri and postag vehicl and so on for instanc the organ should have a
polici remind employe in write that email must not be us to send inappropri
and unprofession messag includ
harass other user of the system
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11816 2011 fraud examin manual
consum unreason amount of avail resourc
intention send other user virus
evad softwar licens or copi mechan
crashingdisrupt system servic
imperson anoth user anywher on the internet
bypass system secur mechan
translat encrypt materi without author
eavesdrop on other email interact
us the system for ani person gain either monetarili or polit unless permit
by the organ
a number of promin liabil law firm recommend some monitor of email but thi
decis should not be taken lightli and not just becaus of employe privaci concern
for instanc the fact that the compani doe try to monitor email mai be us against the
compani when someth slip through that monitor
due to rapid growth of the internet and email there is a great deal of uncertainti in the law
organ mai want to seek legal counsel in establish proper us guidelin and
befor take disciplinari action against employe becaus of alleg abus
