2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Computer Viruses 
Viruses are hidden computer programs that use all the computer’s resources, thereby 
shutting down the system or slowing it down significantly. Computer viruses typically use 
the infected computer’s resources to replicate itself and spread the infection to other 
computer systems on a network or through the Internet via e-mail. Computer viruses range 
from the relatively harmless (displaying a message or greeting) to shut-downs of entire 
computer networks for extended periods. 
 
A computer virus is a program that contains instruction codes to attack software. The attack 
might erase data or display a message on the screen. The computer virus can copy itself to 
other programs. This copy ability can affect large networks. In recent years, viruses have 
disrupted large networks and caused the expenditure of millions of dollars in staff and 
machine hours to remove these viruses and restore normal operations. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1817 
Hoaxes 
A massive amount of media attention in recent years has focused on computer viruses. Many 
of the virus scares that occur, however, are hoaxes. While that is, on one hand, fortunate, 
these phony warnings cause harm of their own. They slow down transmission of 
information and have been known to cause overloads of organizational e-mail networks. 
Most of these fraudulent warnings urge recipients to “forward this to everyone you know.” 
Before forwarding a questionable warning, it is wise to consult a few of the authorities who 
track viruses. The following sites can be accessed to confirm or debunk virus notifications: 
• www.symantec.com/avcenter/hoax.html 
• www.vmyths.com 
• www.fsecure.com/virus-info/hoax/ 
• www.snopes.com 
 
Types and Terminology of Computer Viruses  
Macro Virus 
A macro is an instruction that carries out program commands automatically. Many common 
applications (e.g., word processing, spreadsheet, and slide presentation applications) make 
use of macros. Macro viruses are macros that self-replicate. If a user accesses a document 
containing a viral macro and unwittingly executes this macro virus, it can then copy itself 
into that application’s startup files. The computer is now infected — a copy of the macro 
virus resides on the machine. 
 
Any document on that machine that uses the same application can then become infected. If 
the infected computer is on a network, the infection is likely to spread rapidly to other 
machines on the network. Moreover, if a copy of an infected file is passed to anyone else 
(for example, by e-mail or CD), the virus can spread to the recipient’s computer. This 
process of infection will end only when the virus is noticed and all viral macros are 
eradicated.  
 
Macro viruses are the most common type of viruses, and are usually spread via e-mail 
messages containing infected attachments. Macro viruses can be written with very little 
specialist knowledge, and these viruses can spread to any platform on which the application 
is running. However, the main reason for their success is that documents are exchanged far 
more frequently than executables or disks, a direct result of e-mail’s popularity and Web use. 
Opening the e-mail attachment infects your ma chine; the virus overwrites certain files on 
your hard drive(s) and sends itself out to everyone in your e-mail address book. This 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1818                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
attachment will most likely come from someone you know. Consequently, the best 
protection against such viruses is to simply not open any attachment unless you are sure that 
it is virus free. If you’re unsure, ask for the sender to confirm that the attachment was 
intended for you.  
 
Boot Sector Viruses 
The boot sector is the first logical sector of a hard disk or floppy disk. Seventy-five to 90 
percent of viruses have been boot sector viruses. These viruses use system BIOS, replace the 
boot sector, and move the boot sector to another location. It then writes a copy of its own 
program code that will run every time the system is booted or when programs are being run. 
A boot sector cannot infect a computer if it is introduced after the machine is running the 
operating system. An example of a boot sector virus is Parity Boot. This virus’s payload 
displays the message “Parity Check” and fr eezes the operating system, rendering the 
computer useless. This virus message is taken from an actual error message that is displayed 
to users when a computer’s memory is faulty. As a result, a user whose computer is infected 
with the Parity Boot virus is led to believe that the machine has a memory fault rather than a 
disruptive virus infection. 
 
Parasitic Viruses 
Parasitic viruses attach themselves to programs known as executables. When a user launches 
a program that has a parasitic virus, the virus is surreptitiously launched first. To cloak its 
presence from the user, the virus then triggers the original program to open. The parasitic 
virus, because the operating system understands it to be part of the program, is given the 
same rights as the program to which the virus is attached. These rights allow the virus to 
replicate, install itself into memory, or release its payload. In the absence of antivirus 
software, only the payload might raise the normal user’s suspicions. A famous parasitic virus 
called Jerusalem has a payload of slowing down the sy stem and eventually deleting every 
program the user launches. 
 
TSRAM Viruses 
Terminate and Stay Resident (TSR) viruses usually hide in memory and cause system crashes, 
depending on their memory location. The TSR takes control of the operating system by 
passing its request to DOS each time DOS is executed. The virus Cascade B is a TSR virus 
that sometimes causes the system to crash. It also causes characters to fall down the screen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1819 
Application Software Viruses 
These types of viruses copy their virus code to a program file and modify the program so the 
virus code gets executed first. The virus does this by writing over the existing code or 
attaching itself to the program file. The more sophisticated types replicate themselves with a 
.com extension each time the user accesses an executable program file. The virus Vienna is a 
type of application virus. It increases infected files by 648 bytes and destroys the system by 
making it reboot when running certain programs. 
 
Multi-Partite Viruses  
Multi-partite viruses share some of the characteristics of boot sector viruses and file viruses, 
which increases its ability to spread. They can infect .com and .exe files, and the boot sector 
of the computer’s hard drive. 
 
On a computer booted up with an infected diskette, a typical multi-partite virus will first 
reside in memory and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive. From there the virus can 
infect a PC’s entire environment. This type of virus accounts for a large number of 
infections. 
 
The Tequila virus is a type of multi-partite virus. Tequila is a memory resident master boot 
sector (partition table) and .exe file infector. It uses a complex encryption method and 
garbling to avoid detection. When a program infected with Tequila is executed, the virus will 
modify the hard disk master boot sector, if it is not already infected. The virus also copies 
itself to the last six sectors of the system hard disk. When the workstation is later rebooted 
from the system hard disk, Tequila will become memory resident. Once Tequila is memory 
resident, it infects .exe files when they are executed.  
 
The CHKDSK command will indicate the system has 3,072 fewer bytes of memory than 
what is installed. Infected .exe programs increase in size by 2,468 bytes, though the file 
length increase cannot be seen in the disk directory listing because the virus hides it.  
Tequila activates four months after the initial date of infection. At this time, and every 
month thereafter, the virus will display a graphic and the following message: “Execute: mov 
ax, FE03 / int 21. Key to go on.”  
 
Polymorphic Viruses 
Polymorphic viruses create varied (though fully functional) copies of themselves as a way to 
avoid detection by antivirus software. Some polymorphic viruses use different encryption 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1820                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
schemes and require different decryption routines. Thus, the same virus may look 
completely different on different systems or even within different files. Other polymorphic 
viruses vary instruction sequences and use false commands in the attempt to thwart antivirus 
software. One of the most advanced polymorphic viruses uses a mutation engine and 
random-number generators to change the virus code and its decryption routine. 
Spanska.4250  is a type of polymorphic virus. This virus infects program files (files with .exe 
and .com extensions). When one of the programs is infected, the virus hides in the 
computer’s memory. Spanska.4250 remains in memory on the lookout to infect programs 
executed by users. Once Spanska.4250 carries out its infection the size of the infected 
programs will increase by 4250 bytes (the virus size). Moreover, the following message will 
be displayed: “(c) Spanska 97.” This virus uses an anti-tracing technique to make it more 
difficult to detect. In addition, it uses the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possible to 
find up to 366 different variants of this virus. 
 
Stealth Viruses 
Stealth viruses are more sophisticated viruses. They constantly change their patterns in an 
effort to blend into the system. They attempt to avoid detection by bypassing DOS interrupt 
calls when they are installed, and remove their code from the infected files before the file is 
accessed by the requesting program. 
 
The 4096 virus is a type of stealth virus. It increases the file size by 4096 bytes and decreases 
the memory by approximately 6kb. The message “FRODO LIVES” might appear in the 
middle of the screen. If the infected file is run on September 21, it causes the system  
to crash. 
 
Mutation Engine Viruses 
This modern day virus uses a special language-driven algorithm generator that enables it to 
create an infinite variety of original encryption algorithms. It avoids the checksum detection 
method, like stealth viruses, by not changing the infected file size. Each time they replicate, 
they produce a new and different code. 
 
Network Viruses 
It was just a matter of time before network-specific viruses were developed to attack the 
increased number of Local Area Networks (LANs) and other types of networks coming 
online. These viruses are generally developed to attack the file servers.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1821 
The boot sector and partition table viruses infect the boot operation of the file server. This 
virus does not spread from the workstation to the file server. However, if you are using 
NetWare it can cause the software to lose the location of its partition table on the file server 
if the file server is booted with an infected disk. 
 
Viruses that infect programs seem to be limited to infecting files on the server. However, 
because the files are continuously being accessed by workstations, this type of virus is 
difficult to contain. 
 
At least two NetWare-specific viruses have been discovered in Europe. One is the GP1 (Get 
Password 1) virus. It was allegedly created to penetrate Novell security features and then 
spread throughout the network. The second, CZ2986  virus, in Czechoslovakia. This virus 
places itself in memory and intercepts NetWare function calls when the workstations log in to 
the server. After it collects 15 user name/password combinations, it saves them in an infected 
file and uses them to gain access to the network. 
 
Worms 
A worm is a self-replicating program that resides as a file on a system, executes an 
autonomous process, and deliberately moves from system to system. It looks for other 
nodes on the networks, copies itself to them, and causes the self-copy to execute on other 
nodes. These programs find network utilities showing node names, monitor network traffic, 
and randomly select network identification codes as well as other mischief. 
 
An example of a worm is the SQL Slammer, which raced across the globe and wreaked havoc 
on the Internet in January 2003. This worm doubled the number of computers it infected 
every 8.5 seconds in the first minute of its appearance. The worm, which exploited a flaw in 
Microsoft Corporation’s SQL Server database software, caused damage by rapidly replicating 
itself and clogging the pipelines of the global data network. The worm did not erase or cause 
damage to desktop computers, but was designed to replicate itself so fast and so effectively 
that no other traffic could get through networks. 
 
Virus Carriers 
Viruses can infect computer systems from many sources. Some of the more common virus 
carriers are: 
• Unknown or unchecked application software 
• Software or media brought in by employees 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1822                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Programs downloaded from modem bulletin boards 
• Unsolicited e-mails 
• Vendors and suppliers with infected software 
• Uncontrolled and shared program applications 
• Demonstration software 
• Freeware and shareware 
 
Virus Indicators 
The following are some of the indicators that a computer might exhibit suggesting that it 
might be infected: 
• A sudden and sometimes dramatic decrease of free space on your media. 
• The system suddenly, and for no apparent reason, slows down its command-response 
time. 
• An increase in the size of some files. 
• There has been a change in the length of executable files, a change in their content, or a 
change in their file date/time stamp. 
• An unexpected number of disk accesses, especially to particular file(s). 
• The operating system and/or other programs suddenly begin behaving in unpredictable 
ways. Sometimes disk files that should be there cannot be accessed or are suddenly 
erased with no warning. 
• Unusual messages and graphics. 
• Unable to boot-up the system. 
• Unable to access files. 
• Unexplained and repeated maintenance repairs. 
• System or data files disappear or become fragmented. 
• Unexplained changes in memory. 
• Unexplained changes in program sizes. 
• Resident antiviral software programs display messages that a virus has been encountered. 
Note that until the source of the virus has been identified and removed from the system, 
antiviral systems might continually inform the operator that a virus is being encountered 
and removed. 
 
Virus Protection 
Computer users should take measures to protect their computers against viruses. Some of 
the steps that can be taken are: 
• Do not use a disk to boot your system. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1823 
• If you must boot your system from a disk, make sure it is properly labeled and 
continuously protected. 
• Don’t install shareware or other untested programs on your system, but if you do, don’t 
put them in the root directory. 
• In a network environment, don’t place untested programs on the server. 
• If you are sharing information on disks, ensure they only contain information and no 
executable files. 
• Use current antivirus software to detect potential viruses. 
• Back up all programs and files. 
• Write virus-free warranties and indemnities into your purchase orders and contracts. 
• Always write-protect your systems and program disks. 
• Teach computer users about computer viruses so that they can recognize them. 
• Always use caution when opening e-mail attachments. 
 
Antivirus Software Operation 
Conventional Disk Scanners 
This is the standard virus check program. It is run when the user requests it, and it scans the 
contents of the disk, directories, or files that the user wants, for any boot sectors and/or files 
that contain viruses that it recognizes based on the virus description information in its virus 
definition files. Usually run manually by the user either as a preventative maintenance activity 
or when a virus is suspected, scanning can also be automated through the use of a program 
scheduler.  
 
Heuristic Scanners 
These scanners inspect executable files for code using algorithms to identify operations that 
would indicate an unknown virus. They might also examine macros to detect virus-like 
behavior. 
 
Behavior-Based Detection Scanners   
These applications run continuously, looking for behavior that might indicate virus activity 
(for example, instructions to format a hard drive.) 
 
Change Detection Scanners   
Change detection scanners generate a database of characteristics for executable files and 
check for changes to these files that might signify a virus attack. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1824                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inoculation 
This is a totally different approach to virus detection. Instead of looking for the viruses 
themselves, this technique looks for the changes that the viruses make to files and boot 
sectors. Starting with a clean system, the software “inoculates” each boot sector and 
program file by storing a snapshot of information about it based on its content and size. 
Then, periodically, it reexamines these files to see if anything has changed. If it has, then the 
utility will inform the user; if the user hasn’t made the change, the virus may have. 
 
The main advantage of this type of virus detection is that since it is looking at the effects of 
the virus, it doesn’t need to know what the virus itself is; this means it will detect even new 
viruses without requiring updated virus definition files all of the time. The disadvantage, and 
why it is not used that often, is that it generates a substantial amount of false positives.   
 
Investigating Virus Infections 
Virus infections can be investigated by taking the following action:  
• Isolate the system and all media 
• Run antivirus software 
• Document findings 
• Interview the system custodian and all users, and determine: 
? Symptoms 
? Damage 
? Prior clean-up conducted  
? Access controls in place and working 
? System malfunction 
? Personal media used 
? Unauthorized media used 
? Virus identification 
• Follow the audit trail of the infection 
• Determine the source of the virus—person, system, or media 
• Make users aware of protection policies and procedures 
• Ensure countermeasures are in place and working 
• Track costs of virus problems  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1825 



:


comput virus
virus ar hidden comput program that us all the comput resourc therebi
shut down the system or slow it down significantli comput virus typic us
the infect comput resourc to replic itself and spread the infect to other
comput system on a network or through the internet via email comput virus rang
from the rel harmless displai a messag or greet to shutdown of entir
comput network for extend period
a comput viru is a program that contain instruct code to attack softwar the attack
might eras data or displai a messag on the screen the comput viru can copi itself to
other program thi copi abil can affect larg network in recent year virus have
disrupt larg network and caus the expenditur of million of dollar in staff and
machin hour to remov these virus and restor normal oper
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11817
hoax
a massiv amount of media attent in recent year ha focus on comput virus mani
of the viru scare that occur howev ar hoax while that is on on hand fortun
these phoni warn caus harm of their own thei slow down transmiss of
inform and have been known to caus overload of organiz email network
most of these fraudul warn urg recipi to forward thi to everyon you know
befor forward a question warn it is wise to consult a few of the author who
track virus the follow site can be access to confirm or debunk viru notif
wwwsymanteccomavcenterhoaxhtml
wwwvmythscom
wwwfsecurecomvirusinfohoax
wwwsnopescom
type and terminolog of comput virus
macro viru
a macro is an instruct that carri out program command automat mani common
applic eg word process spreadsheet and slide present applic make
us of macro macro virus ar macro that selfrepl if a user access a document
contain a viral macro and unwittingli execut thi macro viru it can then copi itself
into that applic startup file the comput is now infect a copi of the macro
viru resid on the machin
ani document on that machin that us the same applic can then becom infect if
the infect comput is on a network the infect is like to spread rapidli to other
machin on the network moreov if a copi of an infect file is pass to anyon els
for exampl by email or cd the viru can spread to the recipi comput thi
process of infect will end onli when the viru is notic and all viral macro ar
erad
macro virus ar the most common type of virus and ar usual spread via email
messag contain infect attach macro virus can be written with veri littl
specialist knowledg and these virus can spread to ani platform on which the applic
is run howev the main reason for their success is that document ar exchang far
more frequent than execut or disk a direct result of email popular and web us
open the email attach infect your ma chine the viru overwrit certain file on
your hard drive and send itself out to everyon in your email address book thi
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11818 2011 fraud examin manual
attach will most like come from someon you know consequ the best
protect against such virus is to simpli not open ani attach unless you ar sure that
it is viru free if your unsur ask for the sender to confirm that the attach wa
intend for you
boot sector virus
the boot sector is the first logic sector of a hard disk or floppi disk seventyf to 90
percent of virus have been boot sector virus these virus us system bio replac the
boot sector and move the boot sector to anoth locat it then write a copi of it own
program code that will run everi time the system is boot or when program ar be run
a boot sector cannot infect a comput if it is introduc after the machin is run the
oper system an exampl of a boot sector viru is pariti boot thi viruss payload
displai the messag pariti check and fr eez the oper system render the
comput useless thi viru messag is taken from an actual error messag that is displai
to user when a comput memori is faulti as a result a user whose comput is infect
with the pariti boot viru is led to believ that the machin ha a memori fault rather than a
disrupt viru infect
parasit virus
parasit virus attach themselv to program known as execut when a user launch
a program that ha a parasit viru the viru is surreptiti launch first to cloak it
presenc from the user the viru then trigger the origin program to open the parasit
viru becaus the oper system understand it to be part of the program is given the
same right as the program to which the viru is attach these right allow the viru to
replic instal itself into memori or releas it payload in the absenc of antiviru
softwar onli the payload might rais the normal user suspicion a famou parasit viru
call jerusalem ha a payload of slow down the sy stem and eventu delet everi
program the user launch
tsram virus
termin and stai resid tsr virus usual hide in memori and caus system crash
depend on their memori locat the tsr take control of the oper system by
pass it request to do each time do is execut the viru cascad b is a tsr viru
that sometim caus the system to crash it also caus charact to fall down the screen
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11819
applic softwar virus
these type of virus copi their viru code to a program file and modifi the program so the
viru code get execut first the viru doe thi by write over the exist code or
attach itself to the program file the more sophist type replic themselv with a
com extens each time the user access an execut program file the viru vienna is a
type of applic viru it increas infect file by 648 byte and destroi the system by
make it reboot when run certain program
multipartit virus
multipartit virus share some of the characterist of boot sector virus and file virus
which increas it abil to spread thei can infect com and ex file and the boot sector
of the comput hard drive
on a comput boot up with an infect diskett a typic multipartit viru will first
resid in memori and then infect the boot sector of the hard drive from there the viru can
infect a pc entir environ thi type of viru account for a larg number of
infect
the tequila viru is a type of multipartit viru tequila is a memori resid master boot
sector partit tabl and ex file infector it us a complex encrypt method and
garbl to avoid detect when a program infect with tequila is execut the viru will
modifi the hard disk master boot sector if it is not alreadi infect the viru also copi
itself to the last six sector of the system hard disk when the workstat is later reboot
from the system hard disk tequila will becom memori resid onc tequila is memori
resid it infect ex file when thei ar execut
the chkdsk command will indic the system ha 3072 fewer byte of memori than
what is instal infect ex program increas in size by 2468 byte though the file
length increas cannot be seen in the disk directori list becaus the viru hide it
tequila activ four month after the initi date of infect at thi time and everi
month thereaft the viru will displai a graphic and the follow messag execut mov
ax fe03 int 21 kei to go on
polymorph virus
polymorph virus creat vari though fulli function copi of themselv as a wai to
avoid detect by antiviru softwar some polymorph virus us differ encrypt
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11820 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme and requir differ decrypt routin thu the same viru mai look
complet differ on differ system or even within differ file other polymorph
virus vari instruct sequenc and us fals command in the attempt to thwart antiviru
softwar on of the most advanc polymorph virus us a mutat engin and
randomnumb gener to chang the viru code and it decrypt routin
spanska4250 is a type of polymorph viru thi viru infect program file file with ex
and com extens when on of the program is infect the viru hide in the
comput memori spanska4250 remain in memori on the lookout to infect program
execut by user onc spanska4250 carri out it infect the size of the infect
program will increas by 4250 byte the viru size moreov the follow messag will
be displai c spanska 97 thi viru us an antitrac techniqu to make it more
difficult to detect in addit it us the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possibl to
find up to 366 differ variant of thi viru
stealth virus
stealth virus ar more sophist virus thei constantli chang their pattern in an
effort to blend into the system thei attempt to avoid detect by bypass do interrupt
call when thei ar instal and remov their code from the infect file befor the file is
access by the request program
the 4096 viru is a type of stealth viru it increas the file size by 4096 byte and decreas
the memori by approxim 6kb the messag frodo live might appear in the
middl of the screen if the infect file is run on septemb 21 it caus the system
to crash
mutat engin virus
thi modern dai viru us a special languagedriven algorithm gener that enabl it to
creat an infinit varieti of origin encrypt algorithm it avoid the checksum detect
method like stealth virus by not chang the infect file size each time thei replic
thei produc a new and differ code
network virus
it wa just a matter of time befor networkspecif virus were develop to attack the
increas number of local area network lan and other type of network come
onlin these virus ar gener develop to attack the file server
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11821
the boot sector and partit tabl virus infect the boot oper of the file server thi
viru doe not spread from the workstat to the file server howev if you ar us
netwar it can caus the softwar to lose the locat of it partit tabl on the file server
if the file server is boot with an infect disk
virus that infect program seem to be limit to infect file on the server howev
becaus the file ar continu be access by workstat thi type of viru is
difficult to contain
at least two netwarespecif virus have been discov in europ on is the gp1 get
password 1 viru it wa allegedli creat to penetr novel secur featur and then
spread throughout the network the second cz2986 viru in czechoslovakia thi viru
place itself in memori and intercept netwar function call when the workstat log in to
the server after it collect 15 user namepassword combin it save them in an infect
file and us them to gain access to the network
worm
a worm is a selfrepl program that resid as a file on a system execut an
autonom process and deliber move from system to system it look for other
node on the network copi itself to them and caus the selfcopi to execut on other
node these program find network util show node name monitor network traffic
and randomli select network identif code as well as other mischief
an exampl of a worm is the sql slammer which race across the globe and wreak havoc
on the internet in januari 2003 thi worm doubl the number of comput it infect
everi 85 second in the first minut of it appear the worm which exploit a flaw in
microsoft corpor sql server databas softwar caus damag by rapidli replic
itself and clog the pipelin of the global data network the worm did not eras or caus
damag to desktop comput but wa design to replic itself so fast and so effect
that no other traffic could get through network
viru carrier
virus can infect comput system from mani sourc some of the more common viru
carrier ar
unknown or uncheck applic softwar
softwar or media brought in by employe
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11822 2011 fraud examin manual
program download from modem bulletin board
unsolicit email
vendor and supplier with infect softwar
uncontrol and share program applic
demonstr softwar
freewar and sharewar
viru indic
the follow ar some of the indic that a comput might exhibit suggest that it
might be infect
a sudden and sometim dramat decreas of free space on your media
the system suddenli and for no appar reason slow down it commandrespons
time
an increas in the size of some file
there ha been a chang in the length of execut file a chang in their content or a
chang in their file datetim stamp
an unexpect number of disk access especi to particular file
the oper system andor other program suddenli begin behav in unpredict
wai sometim disk file that should be there cannot be access or ar suddenli
eras with no warn
unusu messag and graphic
unabl to bootup the system
unabl to access file
unexplain and repeat mainten repair
system or data file disappear or becom fragment
unexplain chang in memori
unexplain chang in program size
resid antivir softwar program displai messag that a viru ha been encount
note that until the sourc of the viru ha been identifi and remov from the system
antivir system might continu inform the oper that a viru is be encount
and remov
viru protect
comput user should take measur to protect their comput against virus some of
the step that can be taken ar
do not us a disk to boot your system
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11823
if you must boot your system from a disk make sure it is properli label and
continu protect
dont instal sharewar or other untest program on your system but if you do dont
put them in the root directori
in a network environ dont place untest program on the server
if you ar share inform on disk ensur thei onli contain inform and no
execut file
us current antiviru softwar to detect potenti virus
back up all program and file
write virusfre warranti and indemn into your purchas order and contract
alwai writeprotect your system and program disk
teach comput user about comput virus so that thei can recogn them
alwai us caution when open email attach
antiviru softwar oper
convent disk scanner
thi is the standard viru check program it is run when the user request it and it scan the
content of the disk directori or file that the user want for ani boot sector andor file
that contain virus that it recogn base on the viru descript inform in it viru
definit file usual run manual by the user either as a prevent mainten activ
or when a viru is suspect scan can also be autom through the us of a program
schedul
heurist scanner
these scanner inspect execut file for code us algorithm to identifi oper that
would indic an unknown viru thei might also examin macro to detect viruslik
behavior
behaviorbas detect scanner
these applic run continu look for behavior that might indic viru activ
for exampl instruct to format a hard drive
chang detect scanner
chang detect scanner gener a databas of characterist for execut file and
check for chang to these file that might signifi a viru attack
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11824 2011 fraud examin manual
inocul
thi is a total differ approach to viru detect instead of look for the virus
themselv thi techniqu look for the chang that the virus make to file and boot
sector start with a clean system the softwar inocul each boot sector and
program file by store a snapshot of inform about it base on it content and size
then period it reexamin these file to see if anyth ha chang if it ha then the
util will inform the user if the user hasnt made the chang the viru mai have
the main advantag of thi type of viru detect is that sinc it is look at the effect of
the viru it doesnt need to know what the viru itself is thi mean it will detect even new
virus without requir updat viru definit file all of the time the disadvantag and
why it is not us that often is that it gener a substanti amount of fals posit
investig viru infect
viru infect can be investig by take the follow action
isol the system and all media
run antiviru softwar
document find
interview the system custodian and all user and determin
symptom
damag
prior cleanup conduct
access control in place and work
system malfunct
person media us
unauthor media us
viru identif
follow the audit trail of the infect
determin the sourc of the virusperson system or media
make user awar of protect polici and procedur
ensur countermeasur ar in place and work
track cost of viru problem
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11825
