2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses/Macro Virus


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Macro Virus 
A macro is an instruction that carries out program commands automatically. Many common 
applications (e.g., word processing, spreadsheet, and slide presentation applications) make 
use of macros. Macro viruses are macros that self-replicate. If a user accesses a document 
containing a viral macro and unwittingly executes this macro virus, it can then copy itself 
into that application’s startup files. The computer is now infected — a copy of the macro 
virus resides on the machine. 
 
Any document on that machine that uses the same application can then become infected. If 
the infected computer is on a network, the infection is likely to spread rapidly to other 
machines on the network. Moreover, if a copy of an infected file is passed to anyone else 
(for example, by e-mail or CD), the virus can spread to the recipient’s computer. This 
process of infection will end only when the virus is noticed and all viral macros are 
eradicated.  
 
Macro viruses are the most common type of viruses, and are usually spread via e-mail 
messages containing infected attachments. Macro viruses can be written with very little 
specialist knowledge, and these viruses can spread to any platform on which the application 
is running. However, the main reason for their success is that documents are exchanged far 
more frequently than executables or disks, a direct result of e-mail’s popularity and Web use. 
Opening the e-mail attachment infects your ma chine; the virus overwrites certain files on 
your hard drive(s) and sends itself out to everyone in your e-mail address book. This 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1818                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
attachment will most likely come from someone you know. Consequently, the best 
protection against such viruses is to simply not open any attachment unless you are sure that 
it is virus free. If you’re unsure, ask for the sender to confirm that the attachment was 
intended for you.  
 



:


macro viru
a macro is an instruct that carri out program command automat mani common
applic eg word process spreadsheet and slide present applic make
us of macro macro virus ar macro that selfrepl if a user access a document
contain a viral macro and unwittingli execut thi macro viru it can then copi itself
into that applic startup file the comput is now infect a copi of the macro
viru resid on the machin
ani document on that machin that us the same applic can then becom infect if
the infect comput is on a network the infect is like to spread rapidli to other
machin on the network moreov if a copi of an infect file is pass to anyon els
for exampl by email or cd the viru can spread to the recipi comput thi
process of infect will end onli when the viru is notic and all viral macro ar
erad
macro virus ar the most common type of virus and ar usual spread via email
messag contain infect attach macro virus can be written with veri littl
specialist knowledg and these virus can spread to ani platform on which the applic
is run howev the main reason for their success is that document ar exchang far
more frequent than execut or disk a direct result of email popular and web us
open the email attach infect your ma chine the viru overwrit certain file on
your hard drive and send itself out to everyon in your email address book thi
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11818 2011 fraud examin manual
attach will most like come from someon you know consequ the best
protect against such virus is to simpli not open ani attach unless you ar sure that
it is viru free if your unsur ask for the sender to confirm that the attach wa
intend for you
