2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses/Network Viruses


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Network Viruses 
It was just a matter of time before network-specific viruses were developed to attack the 
increased number of Local Area Networks (LANs) and other types of networks coming 
online. These viruses are generally developed to attack the file servers.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1821 
The boot sector and partition table viruses infect the boot operation of the file server. This 
virus does not spread from the workstation to the file server. However, if you are using 
NetWare it can cause the software to lose the location of its partition table on the file server 
if the file server is booted with an infected disk. 
 
Viruses that infect programs seem to be limited to infecting files on the server. However, 
because the files are continuously being accessed by workstations, this type of virus is 
difficult to contain. 
 
At least two NetWare-specific viruses have been discovered in Europe. One is the GP1 (Get 
Password 1) virus. It was allegedly created to penetrate Novell security features and then 
spread throughout the network. The second, CZ2986  virus, in Czechoslovakia. This virus 
places itself in memory and intercepts NetWare function calls when the workstations log in to 
the server. After it collects 15 user name/password combinations, it saves them in an infected 
file and uses them to gain access to the network. 
 



:


network virus
it wa just a matter of time befor networkspecif virus were develop to attack the
increas number of local area network lan and other type of network come
onlin these virus ar gener develop to attack the file server
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11821
the boot sector and partit tabl virus infect the boot oper of the file server thi
viru doe not spread from the workstat to the file server howev if you ar us
netwar it can caus the softwar to lose the locat of it partit tabl on the file server
if the file server is boot with an infect disk
virus that infect program seem to be limit to infect file on the server howev
becaus the file ar continu be access by workstat thi type of viru is
difficult to contain
at least two netwarespecif virus have been discov in europ on is the gp1 get
password 1 viru it wa allegedli creat to penetr novel secur featur and then
spread throughout the network the second cz2986 viru in czechoslovakia thi viru
place itself in memori and intercept netwar function call when the workstat log in to
the server after it collect 15 user namepassword combin it save them in an infect
file and us them to gain access to the network
