2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Internet Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Internet Fraud 
A booming segment of computer fraud, Internet fraud has become a growing concern to the 
law enforcement community. This type of fraud has proliferated and will continue to 
proliferate because of the ripe conditions that exist on the World Wide Web for fraudulent 
activities. The Internet is still a developing technology for much of international business 
and thus has not been subjected to much litigation or policing. The laws that do currently 
apply to the Internet are difficult to enforce, since the Internet crosses virtually every 
international border on the planet. The lack of international laws and the difficulty enforcing 
those laws gives Internet fraudsters a better than average chance of avoiding capture  
and punishment.  
 
For consumers to retain their confidence in Internet transactions, the perception that the 
Internet is a safe way to shop and do business must be fostered. Consumer awareness of 
online fraud must be raised without causing a loss of consumer confidence. This difficult 
endeavor may require an unprecedented effort by the private sector in conjunction with law 
enforcement. Consequently, private investigative resources may be called upon in greater 
numbers than ever, given law enforcement’s deficiencies in the area of computer fraud.  
 
Internet Fraud Schemes 
According to the 2009 Internet Crime Report, the Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3) 
received 336,665 complaints related to fraudulent and non-fraudulent issues on the Internet. 
The total dollar loss from all referred cases of fraud was $559.7 million, with a median dollar 
loss of $575 per complaint. All complaints received by IC3 are accessible to federal, state, 
and local law enforcement to support active investigations, trend analysis, and public 
outreach and awareness efforts. 
 
The top ten 2009 IC3 complaint categories are as follows: 
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1826                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internet Scheme Percentage of Complaints 
FBI Scams 16.6% 
Non-Delivery/Merchandise Scams 11.9% 
Advanced Fee 9.8% 
Identity Theft 8.2 
Overpayment Fraud 7.3% 
Miscellaneous Frauds 6.3 
Spam 6.2 
Credit Card Fraud 6.0% 
Auction Fraud 5.7% 
Computer Damage 4.5% 
 
The Internet presents fraudsters with myriad opportunities to multiply the devices at their 
disposal. Some fraudsters have even used reputations of charitable organizations to exploit 
the most benevolent of human impulses. Perhaps the best way to guard against Internet-
 facilitated scams is to simply stay informed. Keeping informed of the latest scams on the 
Internet may enable Internet users to recognize and report these scams instead of losing 
money to one of them. 
 
Modem Hijacking 
According to the Federal Trade Commission, this scheme is designed to exploit Internet 
users. While users are online, their computer modems are secretly disconnected from their 
ISP and reconnected to the Internet, only this time through an expensive international line. 
Victims have usually downloaded a special “viewer” program from a website offering free 
computer images. Once activated, the downloaded material began the hijacking 
disconnection and reconnection process. Long-distance charges continued to mount until 
victims shut down their computers, even if their Internet connection had already been 
terminated.  
 
Internet Commerce 
Much has been made in the national media about the dangers of providing credit card 
numbers to companies on the Internet. And it is understandable that many businesses and 
individuals have apprehensions concerning Internet commerce; the Internet is the most 
impersonal form of communication and it is also the least well known to most users. This 
concern, the feeling that a criminal might be “lurking in the shadows” of the Internet, scares 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1827 
many potential customers from making that initial transaction. There are some precautions 
to be taken before purchasing online items, but conducting business transactions on the 
Internet is ultimately as safe as making an order from a company via the telephone.  
 
Get Rich Quick  
Entering the phrase get rich quick in an Internet search engine results in sites with names like 
$50,000 First 10 Months, Secrets of the Millionaires, and Best Business Resource Center. These types 
of sites hawk everything from home businesses to investment opportunities. Some push 
home- and Internet-based businesses; others’ selling point is that telemarketers close all sales. 
The common denominator in these types of schemes is that consumers who spend money 
on them find themselves with worthless materials and information. 
 
The medium through which victims are snared lends the scam a false appearance of 
credibility. Glossy websites give the operations an official air. But, as with all get-rich-quick 
schemes, victims are sucked in through their desire to make easy money.  
 
Pyramid Schemes 
The tried-and-true pyramid has found a high-tech home on the Internet. As in most pyramid 
schemes, the initial participants of the scheme are rewarded handsomely, while the 
participants who join the scheme later are bilked out of their investment money.  
 
Foreign Trusts 
Information on this scheme is easily found on the Internet. The set-up caters to the desire to 
avoid taxes. For a fee, the company purports to be able to create a foreign trust to which 
taxpayers can transfer their assets. Since the trust is not within the taxpayer’s country, the 
logic goes, the assets are not subject to taxation. 
 
The logic is faulty for several reasons. First, if the taxpayer derives use from the funds in the 
trust, according to law those funds are considered taxable income. Thus, consumers who fall 
for this scam subject themselves to prosecution for tax evasion. 
 
That is, of course, only if the trust is set up at all. Some of the operators of this scheme 
simply take consumers’ money and disappear. And, sadly, those are the consumers who get 
off lightly. Others who have fallen for this pitch find that they have transferred all of their 
assets to a trust of which they are not the beneficiaries. Their assets then legally belong to 
another entity and getting them transferred back to their control is virtually impossible. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1828                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Chain Letters 
This fraud has once again become popular due to the Internet’s e-mail capabilities. Instead 
of sending numerous letters through the mail, as fraudsters were forced to do in the past, e-
 mail capabilities allow the fraudster to compose one letter and send thousands of copies to 
potential victims. The letter sent to unsuspecting targets generally forewarns of the grave 
dangers that await the target should he not reply to the letter. The letter asks for a small cash 
donation in exchange for the target’s piece of mind that no bad tidings will be spread, 
providing examples of some of the unfortunates who did not heed the letter. The money 
should be sent to a P.O. box, the e-mail often instructs.  
 
Investment and Securities Fraud 
Websites that offer investment or securities advice are not in short supply. Many of these 
sites are reputable, but an illicit cottage industry has been born on many of these sites. A 
fraudulent website will claim to have insider information about the value of a given stock, 
suggesting that something unexpected will soon happen to that company. When the 
unknowing stock investor takes the advice of the supposedly knowledgeable investment 
advisor, the advisor manipulates the stock price to his advantage. 
 
Spamming  
Spamming  involves sending e-mail to subscribers whose names appear on electronic versions 
of the phone list and posting ads to the plethora of discussion and chat groups using the 
Internet. These postings are often disguised to look like tips from individual citizens who 
 are supposedly engaged in a lawful enterprise, when in fact they are part of an Internet 
boiler room. 
 
Counterfeit Check Scams 
This scam has several variations but usually starts with the victim offering something for sale 
on the Internet. Usually it is a big ticket item. Somehow the fraudster has obtained a 
legitimate check from a person or company, scanned it, and altered it to support the scheme. 
The fraudster then contracts with the victim to buy the item but must supply a down 
payment first. The check is delivered by a highly recognized international carrier such as 
FedEx, further adding to the false impression that this is a legitimate deal. The victim 
deposits the check, but before it clears, the fraudster requests a refund and backs out of the 
deal offering to let the victim keep a portion of the funds for his trouble. The victim 
forwards part of the money back. Of course the victim later learns that his bank has reversed 
the deposit amount because the check was no good. The fraudsters usually claim to be in 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1829 
another country and must therefore use a “middle man” such as a lawyer to facilitate the 
transaction on their behalf. This is designed to create a sense of false security for the victim. 
 
Another variation on this scheme involves a seemingly chance meeting in a harmless chat 
room. Once the chat relationship develops the fr audster explains that they are in a foreign 
country and need some help. It seems that they are unable to cash certain traveler’s checks in 
their country and ask for the victim’s help to cash the checks for them in the United States 
and then send them a money order, less a small token of their appreciation. They usually 
invent some unfortunate circumstance or urgency for the request. The first time it occurs the 
checks are good and everything works out. In a second request, they ask for the victim’s help 
again, this time it’s a much larger amount and this time the checks are counterfeit. The 
victim unknowingly participates in a forgery by passing the counterfeit checks.  
 
Phishing 
Phishing scams are some of the fastest-growing threats on the Internet. According to the 
Gartner research firm, more than 5 million U.S. consumers lost money to phishing attacks in 
the 12 months ending in September 2008, an almost 40 percent increase over the 3.6 million 
who lost money in phishing attacks in the 12 months ending in August 2007. Although the 
number of consumers who lost money to phishing attacks increased in 2008, the average 
customer loss per incident in 2008 was $351, down 60 percent from 2007.  
 
The definition of phishing is to trick people into providing their personal and financial 
information by pretending to be from a legitimate company, agency, or organization. In this 
type of scam, phishers typically use e-mails to direct Internet users to websites that look like 
legitimate e-commerce sites, such as online banks, retailers, or government agencies. 
Phishers actually control these sites and use them to steal sensitive information, such as bank 
account details and passwords. Phishers can also use the phone to hunt for victims’ personal 
information. Some pose as employers and call people who have listed themselves on job 
search websites; others call pretending to be from a company or government agency, making 
the same kinds of false claims and asking for personal information. Phishers may also 
undertake technical subterfuge schemes to plant crimeware onto PCs to steal information 
directly, such as using key-logging systems to intercept customers’ online account user names 
and passwords. 
 
Opinions vary, but the amount of time it takes for an unprotected personal computer to 
become infected with a virus or malware can range from four to thirty-four minutes. To aid 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1830                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in preventing phishing, computers should be armed with spam filters, anti-virus and anti-
 spyware software, and a firewall, and kept up to date. A spam filter can help reduce the 
number of phishing e-mails received. Anti-virus software, which scans incoming messages 
for troublesome files, and anti-spyware software, which looks for programs that have been 
installed on a computer and tracks a user’s online activities without their knowledge, can 
protect users against pharming and other techniques that phishers use. Firewalls prevent 
hackers and unauthorized communications from entering a user’s computer—which is 
especially important if one has a broadband connection because their computer is open to 
the Internet whenever it’s turned on. Look for programs that offer automatic updates and 
take advantage of free patches that manufacturers offer to fix newly discovered problems. 
 
In order to prevent identity theft through phishing e-mails, computer users should 
completely delete unsolicited e-mails from banks, credit unions, investment firms, and 
government agencies with which they do not have an established relationship. If the 
recipient does have an existing relationship with the supposed originator of the e-mail, the 
Better Business Bureau recommends calling the organization to confirm whether or not the 
e-mail is legitimate before taking any further action. Computer users on the go should be 
wary of entering passwords or sensitive information into a computer that isn’t theirs, such as 
at an Internet café, library, computer lab, or airport kiosk. Wi-Fi networks, either on the road 
or in the consumer’s own home, present even more opportunities for identity thieves. The 
easiest way to protect a Wi-Fi network at home is to not broadcast the Service Set Identifier. 
A safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchanging sensitive information over a Wi-Fi connection 
and wait until a safe network can be accessed.  
 
SPEAR PHISHING 
Spear phishing is a targeted attack generally focused on a corporate entity. The ruse is meant 
to fool the corporate employee into believing that the phishing e-mail originated not from a 
bank or financial institution but from their own IT or HR department. The goal is to obtain 
the employee’s user name and password to access the corporate network. 
 
VISHING 
Voice phishing, or Vishing, is the act of leveraging Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 
technology in using the telephone system to falsely claim to be a legitimate enterprise in an 
attempt to scam users (both consumers and businesses) into disclosing personal information. 
Government, financial institutions, as well as online auctions and their payment services, can 
be targets of voice phishing. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1831 
A vishing scheme is generally transmitted as an incoming recorded telephone message that 
uses a spoofed (fraudulent) caller ID matching the identity of a misrepresented organization. 
The message uses an urgent pretext to direct unsuspecting users to another telephone 
number. The victim is invited to punch their personal information on their telephone 
keypad. The criminals capture the key tones and convert them back to numerical format. 
There are several types of information at risk from this type of scheme. This can include any 
numerical personal information: payment card information (numbers, expiration dates, and 
the last three digits printed on the signature panel), PIN (personal identification number), 
Social Security number, date of birth, bank account numbers, and passport number. 
 
Security experts have seen another variation of vishing where the criminals will leave a 
voicemail message or make telephone calls directing people to the bogus phone number. 
With Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and other Internet-based telephone technology, 
criminals can now make calls inexpensively and can mask their identity and their location 
and even make it look like they are calling from a legitimate company on caller displays. 
 
Some potential uses of the personal information that is gathered from victims includes 
control of the victim’s financial accounts; opening new bank accounts; transferring bank 
balances; applying for loans, credit cards, and other goods/services; making luxury 
purchases; hiding criminal activities; receiving government benefits; and obtaining a 
passport. 
 
Another version of vishing involves the sending of text messages to cell phones claiming the 
recipient’s online bank account has expired. The message instructs the recipient to renew 
their online bank account by using the link provided. 
 
SMISHING OR TISHING 
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message 
via SMS (the protocol used to transmit text messages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take 
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1832                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ROCK PHISHING 
One type of phishing attack has been particularly effective — the rock phish. It’s estimated 
that rock phishing accounts for roughly half of all phishing attacks (as measured by the 
number of unique URLs). Rock phishers have targeted national and regional banks 
throughout the U.S., Europe, and Latin America. Toward the end of 2007 they broadened 
their scope to include online brokerages, information services, treasury management 
companies, and even social networking sites. 
 
Like most phishers, rock phishers use botnets to send massive amounts of phishing e-mails 
to huge volumes of Internet users. The e-mails contain a message from a financial 
institution, hopefully enticing users to click on a fraudulent URL. There is some indication 
that they cycle through multiple e-mail lists and attempt to reach the Internet users most 
likely to use the brands that they are targeting. Unlike most phishers, they don’t compromise 
a Web server and install a phishing site. Instead, an elaborate process is implemented 
whereby multiple domain names are registered at multiple registrars — often with less known 
country-code based top-level domains. Multiple DNS (domain name system) servers are also 
set up, which provide names to IP services for the pool of domain names. The IP addresses 
used — and there may be upwards of 100 at a time — point to multiple compromised servers 
that simply forward Web connections to the real phish sites. These proxy servers typically 
handle connections for multiple targets at a time.  
 
It is interesting to note that before these bogus domains are identified and blocked, 
fraudsters have already done the damage. Looking at a rock phish URL one sees random 
numbers with a few alphabet characters in it — these are alphanumeric figures. These figures 
are used to make the URL string unique, complex, and difficult to differentiate from a 
legitimate one. 
 
Rock phishers have an advanced grasp of technology, using fast flux architecture to change 
name servers and site location in an instant, automating proxy servers to such an extent that 
if one is downed, it automatically switches to the next. Therefore, they are able to lengthen 
the life span of rock phish URLs and make them stealthier. 
 
One of the best ways to combat rock phishing is to implement a sender policy framework 
(SPF) or Domain Keys on your e-mail system. More and more, ISPs are rejecting, or at least 
sending to the spam folder, e-mail that fails SPF or Domain Key authentication.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1833 
Pharming 
Pharming  is an attack in which a user is fooled into entering sensitive data (such as a password 
or credit card number) into a malicious website that impersonates a legitimate website. It is 
different from phishing in that the attacker does not have to rely on having the user click on 
a link in the e-mail to direct him to the fake website. Pharming actually exploits a 
vulnerability in the DNS server software that allows a hacker to acquire the domain name for 
a site and redirect the website traffic from a legitimate site to a false one. So even though the 
user types in the correct website address, the pharming program sends the user to an 
illegitimate site that looks like the real thing. Unknowingly, the user is then providing 
passwords and information directly to the hacker. 
 
Combating Internet Fraud 
Conducting business on the Internet is generally a safe proposition that can be made even 
more so through a few additional safety precautions.  
• Encryption — Any confidential information or credit card numbers should be encrypted in 
their entirety. An encryption system is made up of a cryptographic function, which 
scrambles an electronic transmission, and an inverse decrypt function, which restores the 
transmission to its original state. Encryption hardware and software can be used to 
scramble any communication by utilizing a complex mathematical formula. The only way 
to unscramble an encrypted message is to provide the unique answer key, thus unlocking 
the message. Encryption is the best method to stymie would-be interceptors of company 
transactions. 
• Customer validation — Because the Internet offers users an additional layer of anonymity, 
businesses should install some form of a customer validation safeguard in their Internet 
purchasing system. This may include a customer code or password that the customer can 
identify himself with before purchasing a product. As well, the business should 
distinguish itself to the customer, ensuring that no one else can falsely assume the 
company’s identity. 
• Internal network security — Organizations that conduct business on the Web should never, 
under any circumstances, keep their financial information database on their Web server. 
A knowledgeable computer hacker can sometimes penetrate Internet websites, and 
financial information is the primary target of these hackers, for obvious reasons. 
Therefore, the database that maintains a company’s financial information should be a 
completely internal system, untouchable from the Internet. This safeguard will help 
ensure that sensitive information is not compromised in any way. 
• Firewalls — Firewalls are advanced software programs that effectively “lock up” access to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1834                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an Internet site or e-mail transmission. Firewalls are designed to control the interface 
between a network and the Internet. This technology surveys incoming and outgoing 
transmissions between the network and the Internet, stopping any questionable 
transmission attempt to access a sensitive area. While firewalls are not foolproof, they do 
provide an additional layer of protection against Internet attacks or breaches of security. 
 
More information about scams perpetrated agai nst businesses and individuals can be found 
in the previous chapter, “Consumer Fraud.”  
 
 



:


internet fraud
a boom segment of comput fraud internet fraud ha becom a grow concern to the
law enforc commun thi type of fraud ha prolifer and will continu to
prolifer becaus of the ripe condit that exist on the world wide web for fraudul
activ the internet is still a develop technolog for much of intern busi
and thu ha not been subject to much litig or polic the law that do current
appli to the internet ar difficult to enforc sinc the internet cross virtual everi
intern border on the planet the lack of intern law and the difficulti enforc
those law give internet fraudster a better than averag chanc of avoid captur
and punish
for consum to retain their confid in internet transact the percept that the
internet is a safe wai to shop and do busi must be foster consum awar of
onlin fraud must be rais without caus a loss of consum confid thi difficult
endeavor mai requir an unpreced effort by the privat sector in conjunct with law
enforc consequ privat investig resourc mai be call upon in greater
number than ever given law enforc defici in the area of comput fraud
internet fraud scheme
accord to the 2009 internet crime report the internet crime complaint center ic3
receiv 336665 complaint relat to fraudul and nonfraudul issu on the internet
the total dollar loss from all refer case of fraud wa 5597 million with a median dollar
loss of 575 per complaint all complaint receiv by ic3 ar access to feder state
and local law enforc to support activ investig trend analysi and public
outreach and awar effort
the top ten 2009 ic3 complaint categori ar as follow
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11826 2011 fraud examin manual
internet scheme percentag of complaint
fbi scam 166
nondeliverymerchandis scam 119
advanc fee 98
ident theft 82
overpay fraud 73
miscellan fraud 63
spam 62
credit card fraud 60
auction fraud 57
comput damag 45
the internet present fraudster with myriad opportun to multipli the devic at their
dispos some fraudster have even us reput of charit organ to exploit
the most benevol of human impuls perhap the best wai to guard against internet
facilit scam is to simpli stai inform keep inform of the latest scam on the
internet mai enabl internet user to recogn and report these scam instead of lose
monei to on of them
modem hijack
accord to the feder trade commiss thi scheme is design to exploit internet
user while user ar onlin their comput modem ar secretli disconnect from their
isp and reconnect to the internet onli thi time through an expens intern line
victim have usual download a special viewer program from a websit offer free
comput imag onc activ the download materi began the hijack
disconnect and reconnect process longdist charg continu to mount until
victim shut down their comput even if their internet connect had alreadi been
termin
internet commerc
much ha been made in the nation media about the danger of provid credit card
number to compani on the internet and it is understand that mani busi and
individu have apprehens concern internet commerc the internet is the most
imperson form of commun and it is also the least well known to most user thi
concern the feel that a crimin might be lurk in the shadow of the internet scare
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11827
mani potenti custom from make that initi transact there ar some precaut
to be taken befor purchas onlin item but conduct busi transact on the
internet is ultim as safe as make an order from a compani via the telephon
get rich quick
enter the phrase get rich quick in an internet search engin result in site with name like
50000 first 10 month secret of the millionair and best busi resourc center these type
of site hawk everyth from home busi to invest opportun some push
home and internetbas busi other sell point is that telemarket close all sale
the common denomin in these type of scheme is that consum who spend monei
on them find themselv with worthless materi and inform
the medium through which victim ar snare lend the scam a fals appear of
credibl glossi websit give the oper an offici air but as with all getrichquick
scheme victim ar suck in through their desir to make easi monei
pyramid scheme
the triedandtru pyramid ha found a hightech home on the internet as in most pyramid
scheme the initi particip of the scheme ar reward handsom while the
particip who join the scheme later ar bilk out of their invest monei
foreign trust
inform on thi scheme is easili found on the internet the setup cater to the desir to
avoid tax for a fee the compani purport to be abl to creat a foreign trust to which
taxpay can transfer their asset sinc the trust is not within the taxpay countri the
logic goe the asset ar not subject to taxat
the logic is faulti for sever reason first if the taxpay deriv us from the fund in the
trust accord to law those fund ar consid taxabl incom thu consum who fall
for thi scam subject themselv to prosecut for tax evas
that is of cours onli if the trust is set up at all some of the oper of thi scheme
simpli take consum monei and disappear and sadli those ar the consum who get
off lightli other who have fallen for thi pitch find that thei have transfer all of their
asset to a trust of which thei ar not the beneficiari their asset then legal belong to
anoth entiti and get them transfer back to their control is virtual imposs
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11828 2011 fraud examin manual
chain letter
thi fraud ha onc again becom popular due to the internet email capabl instead
of send numer letter through the mail as fraudster were forc to do in the past e
mail capabl allow the fraudster to compos on letter and send thousand of copi to
potenti victim the letter sent to unsuspect target gener forewarn of the grave
danger that await the target should he not repli to the letter the letter ask for a small cash
donat in exchang for the target piec of mind that no bad tide will be spread
provid exampl of some of the unfortun who did not heed the letter the monei
should be sent to a po box the email often instruct
invest and secur fraud
websit that offer invest or secur advic ar not in short suppli mani of these
site ar reput but an illicit cottag industri ha been born on mani of these site a
fraudul websit will claim to have insid inform about the valu of a given stock
suggest that someth unexpect will soon happen to that compani when the
unknow stock investor take the advic of the supposedli knowledg invest
advisor the advisor manipul the stock price to hi advantag
spam
spam involv send email to subscrib whose name appear on electron version
of the phone list and post ad to the plethora of discuss and chat group us the
internet these post ar often disguis to look like tip from individu citizen who
ar supposedli engag in a law enterpris when in fact thei ar part of an internet
boiler room
counterfeit check scam
thi scam ha sever variat but usual start with the victim offer someth for sale
on the internet usual it is a big ticket item somehow the fraudster ha obtain a
legitim check from a person or compani scan it and alter it to support the scheme
the fraudster then contract with the victim to bui the item but must suppli a down
payment first the check is deliv by a highli recogn intern carrier such as
fedex further ad to the fals impress that thi is a legitim deal the victim
deposit the check but befor it clear the fraudster request a refund and back out of the
deal offer to let the victim keep a portion of the fund for hi troubl the victim
forward part of the monei back of cours the victim later learn that hi bank ha revers
the deposit amount becaus the check wa no good the fraudster usual claim to be in
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11829
anoth countri and must therefor us a middl man such as a lawyer to facilit the
transact on their behalf thi is design to creat a sens of fals secur for the victim
anoth variat on thi scheme involv a seemingli chanc meet in a harmless chat
room onc the chat relationship develop the fr audster explain that thei ar in a foreign
countri and need some help it seem that thei ar unabl to cash certain travel check in
their countri and ask for the victim help to cash the check for them in the unit state
and then send them a monei order less a small token of their appreci thei usual
invent some unfortun circumst or urgenc for the request the first time it occur the
check ar good and everyth work out in a second request thei ask for the victim help
again thi time it a much larger amount and thi time the check ar counterfeit the
victim unknowingli particip in a forgeri by pass the counterfeit check
phish
phish scam ar some of the fastestgrow threat on the internet accord to the
gartner research firm more than 5 million us consum lost monei to phish attack in
the 12 month end in septemb 2008 an almost 40 percent increas over the 36 million
who lost monei in phish attack in the 12 month end in august 2007 although the
number of consum who lost monei to phish attack increas in 2008 the averag
custom loss per incid in 2008 wa 351 down 60 percent from 2007
the definit of phish is to trick peopl into provid their person and financi
inform by pretend to be from a legitim compani agenc or organ in thi
type of scam phisher typic us email to direct internet user to websit that look like
legitim ecommerc site such as onlin bank retail or govern agenc
phisher actual control these site and us them to steal sensit inform such as bank
account detail and password phisher can also us the phone to hunt for victim person
inform some pose as employ and call peopl who have list themselv on job
search websit other call pretend to be from a compani or govern agenc make
the same kind of fals claim and ask for person inform phisher mai also
undertak technic subterfug scheme to plant crimewar onto pc to steal inform
directli such as us keylog system to intercept custom onlin account user name
and password
opinion vari but the amount of time it take for an unprotect person comput to
becom infect with a viru or malwar can rang from four to thirtyfour minut to aid
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11830 2011 fraud examin manual
in prevent phish comput should be arm with spam filter antiviru and anti
spywar softwar and a firewal and kept up to date a spam filter can help reduc the
number of phish email receiv antiviru softwar which scan incom messag
for troublesom file and antispywar softwar which look for program that have been
instal on a comput and track a user onlin activ without their knowledg can
protect user against pharm and other techniqu that phisher us firewal prevent
hacker and unauthor commun from enter a user computerwhich is
especi import if on ha a broadband connect becaus their comput is open to
the internet whenev it turn on look for program that offer automat updat and
take advantag of free patch that manufactur offer to fix newli discov problem
in order to prevent ident theft through phish email comput user should
complet delet unsolicit email from bank credit union invest firm and
govern agenc with which thei do not have an establish relationship if the
recipi doe have an exist relationship with the suppos origin of the email the
better busi bureau recommend call the organ to confirm whether or not the
email is legitim befor take ani further action comput user on the go should be
wari of enter password or sensit inform into a comput that isnt their such as
at an internet caf librari comput lab or airport kiosk wifi network either on the road
or in the consum own home present even more opportun for ident thiev the
easiest wai to protect a wifi network at home is to not broadcast the servic set identifi
a safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchang sensit inform over a wifi connect
and wait until a safe network can be access
spear phish
spear phish is a target attack gener focus on a corpor entiti the ruse is meant
to fool the corpor employe into believ that the phish email origin not from a
bank or financi institut but from their own it or hr depart the goal is to obtain
the employe user name and password to access the corpor network
vish
voic phish or vish is the act of leverag voic over internet protocol voip
technolog in us the telephon system to fals claim to be a legitim enterpris in an
attempt to scam user both consum and busi into disclos person inform
govern financi institut as well as onlin auction and their payment servic can
be target of voic phish
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11831
a vish scheme is gener transmit as an incom record telephon messag that
us a spoof fraudul caller id match the ident of a misrepres organ
the messag us an urgent pretext to direct unsuspect user to anoth telephon
number the victim is invit to punch their person inform on their telephon
keypad the crimin captur the kei tone and convert them back to numer format
there ar sever type of inform at risk from thi type of scheme thi can includ ani
numer person inform payment card inform number expir date and
the last three digit print on the signatur panel pin person identif number
social secur number date of birth bank account number and passport number
secur expert have seen anoth variat of vish where the crimin will leav a
voicemail messag or make telephon call direct peopl to the bogu phone number
with voic over internet protocol voip and other internetbas telephon technolog
crimin can now make call inexpens and can mask their ident and their locat
and even make it look like thei ar call from a legitim compani on caller displai
some potenti us of the person inform that is gather from victim includ
control of the victim financi account open new bank account transfer bank
balanc appli for loan credit card and other goodsservic make luxuri
purchas hide crimin activ receiv govern benefit and obtain a
passport
anoth version of vish involv the send of text messag to cell phone claim the
recipi onlin bank account ha expir the messag instruct the recipi to renew
their onlin bank account by us the link provid
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag
via sm the protocol us to transmit text messag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11832 2011 fraud examin manual
rock phish
on type of phish attack ha been particularli effect the rock phish it estim
that rock phish account for roughli half of all phish attack as measur by the
number of uniqu url rock phisher have target nation and region bank
throughout the us europ and latin america toward the end of 2007 thei broaden
their scope to includ onlin brokerag inform servic treasuri manag
compani and even social network site
like most phisher rock phisher us botnet to send massiv amount of phish email
to huge volum of internet user the email contain a messag from a financi
institut hopefulli entic user to click on a fraudul url there is some indic
that thei cycl through multipl email list and attempt to reach the internet user most
like to us the brand that thei ar target unlik most phisher thei dont compromis
a web server and instal a phish site instead an elabor process is implement
wherebi multipl domain name ar regist at multipl registrar often with less known
countrycod base toplevel domain multipl dn domain name system server ar also
set up which provid name to ip servic for the pool of domain name the ip address
us and there mai be upward of 100 at a time point to multipl compromis server
that simpli forward web connect to the real phish site these proxi server typic
handl connect for multipl target at a time
it is interest to note that befor these bogu domain ar identifi and block
fraudster have alreadi done the damag look at a rock phish url on see random
number with a few alphabet charact in it these ar alphanumer figur these figur
ar us to make the url string uniqu complex and difficult to differenti from a
legitim on
rock phisher have an advanc grasp of technolog us fast flux architectur to chang
name server and site locat in an instant autom proxi server to such an extent that
if on is down it automat switch to the next therefor thei ar abl to lengthen
the life span of rock phish url and make them stealthier
on of the best wai to combat rock phish is to implement a sender polici framework
spf or domain kei on your email system more and more isp ar reject or at least
send to the spam folder email that fail spf or domain kei authent
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11833
pharm
pharm is an attack in which a user is fool into enter sensit data such as a password
or credit card number into a malici websit that imperson a legitim websit it is
differ from phish in that the attack doe not have to reli on have the user click on
a link in the email to direct him to the fake websit pharm actual exploit a
vulner in the dn server softwar that allow a hacker to acquir the domain name for
a site and redirect the websit traffic from a legitim site to a fals on so even though the
user type in the correct websit address the pharm program send the user to an
illegitim site that look like the real thing unknowingli the user is then provid
password and inform directli to the hacker
combat internet fraud
conduct busi on the internet is gener a safe proposit that can be made even
more so through a few addit safeti precaut
encrypt ani confidenti inform or credit card number should be encrypt in
their entireti an encrypt system is made up of a cryptograph function which
scrambl an electron transmiss and an invers decrypt function which restor the
transmiss to it origin state encrypt hardwar and softwar can be us to
scrambl ani commun by util a complex mathemat formula the onli wai
to unscrambl an encrypt messag is to provid the uniqu answer kei thu unlock
the messag encrypt is the best method to stymi wouldb interceptor of compani
transact
custom valid becaus the internet offer user an addit layer of anonym
busi should instal some form of a custom valid safeguard in their internet
purchas system thi mai includ a custom code or password that the custom can
identifi himself with befor purchas a product as well the busi should
distinguish itself to the custom ensur that no on els can fals assum the
compani ident
intern network secur organ that conduct busi on the web should never
under ani circumst keep their financi inform databas on their web server
a knowledg comput hacker can sometim penetr internet websit and
financi inform is the primari target of these hacker for obviou reason
therefor the databas that maintain a compani financi inform should be a
complet intern system untouch from the internet thi safeguard will help
ensur that sensit inform is not compromis in ani wai
firewal firewal ar advanc softwar program that effect lock up access to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11834 2011 fraud examin manual
an internet site or email transmiss firewal ar design to control the interfac
between a network and the internet thi technolog survei incom and outgo
transmiss between the network and the internet stop ani question
transmiss attempt to access a sensit area while firewal ar not foolproof thei do
provid an addit layer of protect against internet attack or breach of secur
more inform about scam perpetr agai nst busi and individu can be found
in the previou chapter consum fraud
