2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Internet Fraud/Phishing


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Phishing 
Phishing scams are some of the fastest-growing threats on the Internet. According to the 
Gartner research firm, more than 5 million U.S. consumers lost money to phishing attacks in 
the 12 months ending in September 2008, an almost 40 percent increase over the 3.6 million 
who lost money in phishing attacks in the 12 months ending in August 2007. Although the 
number of consumers who lost money to phishing attacks increased in 2008, the average 
customer loss per incident in 2008 was $351, down 60 percent from 2007.  
 
The definition of phishing is to trick people into providing their personal and financial 
information by pretending to be from a legitimate company, agency, or organization. In this 
type of scam, phishers typically use e-mails to direct Internet users to websites that look like 
legitimate e-commerce sites, such as online banks, retailers, or government agencies. 
Phishers actually control these sites and use them to steal sensitive information, such as bank 
account details and passwords. Phishers can also use the phone to hunt for victims’ personal 
information. Some pose as employers and call people who have listed themselves on job 
search websites; others call pretending to be from a company or government agency, making 
the same kinds of false claims and asking for personal information. Phishers may also 
undertake technical subterfuge schemes to plant crimeware onto PCs to steal information 
directly, such as using key-logging systems to intercept customers’ online account user names 
and passwords. 
 
Opinions vary, but the amount of time it takes for an unprotected personal computer to 
become infected with a virus or malware can range from four to thirty-four minutes. To aid 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1830                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in preventing phishing, computers should be armed with spam filters, anti-virus and anti-
 spyware software, and a firewall, and kept up to date. A spam filter can help reduce the 
number of phishing e-mails received. Anti-virus software, which scans incoming messages 
for troublesome files, and anti-spyware software, which looks for programs that have been 
installed on a computer and tracks a user’s online activities without their knowledge, can 
protect users against pharming and other techniques that phishers use. Firewalls prevent 
hackers and unauthorized communications from entering a user’s computer—which is 
especially important if one has a broadband connection because their computer is open to 
the Internet whenever it’s turned on. Look for programs that offer automatic updates and 
take advantage of free patches that manufacturers offer to fix newly discovered problems. 
 
In order to prevent identity theft through phishing e-mails, computer users should 
completely delete unsolicited e-mails from banks, credit unions, investment firms, and 
government agencies with which they do not have an established relationship. If the 
recipient does have an existing relationship with the supposed originator of the e-mail, the 
Better Business Bureau recommends calling the organization to confirm whether or not the 
e-mail is legitimate before taking any further action. Computer users on the go should be 
wary of entering passwords or sensitive information into a computer that isn’t theirs, such as 
at an Internet café, library, computer lab, or airport kiosk. Wi-Fi networks, either on the road 
or in the consumer’s own home, present even more opportunities for identity thieves. The 
easiest way to protect a Wi-Fi network at home is to not broadcast the Service Set Identifier. 
A safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchanging sensitive information over a Wi-Fi connection 
and wait until a safe network can be accessed.  
 
SPEAR PHISHING 
Spear phishing is a targeted attack generally focused on a corporate entity. The ruse is meant 
to fool the corporate employee into believing that the phishing e-mail originated not from a 
bank or financial institution but from their own IT or HR department. The goal is to obtain 
the employee’s user name and password to access the corporate network. 
 
VISHING 
Voice phishing, or Vishing, is the act of leveraging Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) 
technology in using the telephone system to falsely claim to be a legitimate enterprise in an 
attempt to scam users (both consumers and businesses) into disclosing personal information. 
Government, financial institutions, as well as online auctions and their payment services, can 
be targets of voice phishing. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1831 
A vishing scheme is generally transmitted as an incoming recorded telephone message that 
uses a spoofed (fraudulent) caller ID matching the identity of a misrepresented organization. 
The message uses an urgent pretext to direct unsuspecting users to another telephone 
number. The victim is invited to punch their personal information on their telephone 
keypad. The criminals capture the key tones and convert them back to numerical format. 
There are several types of information at risk from this type of scheme. This can include any 
numerical personal information: payment card information (numbers, expiration dates, and 
the last three digits printed on the signature panel), PIN (personal identification number), 
Social Security number, date of birth, bank account numbers, and passport number. 
 
Security experts have seen another variation of vishing where the criminals will leave a 
voicemail message or make telephone calls directing people to the bogus phone number. 
With Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and other Internet-based telephone technology, 
criminals can now make calls inexpensively and can mask their identity and their location 
and even make it look like they are calling from a legitimate company on caller displays. 
 
Some potential uses of the personal information that is gathered from victims includes 
control of the victim’s financial accounts; opening new bank accounts; transferring bank 
balances; applying for loans, credit cards, and other goods/services; making luxury 
purchases; hiding criminal activities; receiving government benefits; and obtaining a 
passport. 
 
Another version of vishing involves the sending of text messages to cell phones claiming the 
recipient’s online bank account has expired. The message instructs the recipient to renew 
their online bank account by using the link provided. 
 
SMISHING OR TISHING 
SMiShing is a hybrid of phishing and short message service, commonly known as text 
messaging. It uses much the same approach of phishing but delivers an alarming message 
via SMS (the protocol used to transmit text messages via cellular devices) instead of e-mail. 
Criminal activity such as SMiShing can be seen as the prelude to online frauds targeting 
mobile device users. As these devices continue to evolve, cyber criminals will take 
advantage of functionalities to obtain information as well as delivering mobile malware to 
mobile devices. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1832                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ROCK PHISHING 
One type of phishing attack has been particularly effective — the rock phish. It’s estimated 
that rock phishing accounts for roughly half of all phishing attacks (as measured by the 
number of unique URLs). Rock phishers have targeted national and regional banks 
throughout the U.S., Europe, and Latin America. Toward the end of 2007 they broadened 
their scope to include online brokerages, information services, treasury management 
companies, and even social networking sites. 
 
Like most phishers, rock phishers use botnets to send massive amounts of phishing e-mails 
to huge volumes of Internet users. The e-mails contain a message from a financial 
institution, hopefully enticing users to click on a fraudulent URL. There is some indication 
that they cycle through multiple e-mail lists and attempt to reach the Internet users most 
likely to use the brands that they are targeting. Unlike most phishers, they don’t compromise 
a Web server and install a phishing site. Instead, an elaborate process is implemented 
whereby multiple domain names are registered at multiple registrars — often with less known 
country-code based top-level domains. Multiple DNS (domain name system) servers are also 
set up, which provide names to IP services for the pool of domain names. The IP addresses 
used — and there may be upwards of 100 at a time — point to multiple compromised servers 
that simply forward Web connections to the real phish sites. These proxy servers typically 
handle connections for multiple targets at a time.  
 
It is interesting to note that before these bogus domains are identified and blocked, 
fraudsters have already done the damage. Looking at a rock phish URL one sees random 
numbers with a few alphabet characters in it — these are alphanumeric figures. These figures 
are used to make the URL string unique, complex, and difficult to differentiate from a 
legitimate one. 
 
Rock phishers have an advanced grasp of technology, using fast flux architecture to change 
name servers and site location in an instant, automating proxy servers to such an extent that 
if one is downed, it automatically switches to the next. Therefore, they are able to lengthen 
the life span of rock phish URLs and make them stealthier. 
 
One of the best ways to combat rock phishing is to implement a sender policy framework 
(SPF) or Domain Keys on your e-mail system. More and more, ISPs are rejecting, or at least 
sending to the spam folder, e-mail that fails SPF or Domain Key authentication.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1833 



:


phish
phish scam ar some of the fastestgrow threat on the internet accord to the
gartner research firm more than 5 million us consum lost monei to phish attack in
the 12 month end in septemb 2008 an almost 40 percent increas over the 36 million
who lost monei in phish attack in the 12 month end in august 2007 although the
number of consum who lost monei to phish attack increas in 2008 the averag
custom loss per incid in 2008 wa 351 down 60 percent from 2007
the definit of phish is to trick peopl into provid their person and financi
inform by pretend to be from a legitim compani agenc or organ in thi
type of scam phisher typic us email to direct internet user to websit that look like
legitim ecommerc site such as onlin bank retail or govern agenc
phisher actual control these site and us them to steal sensit inform such as bank
account detail and password phisher can also us the phone to hunt for victim person
inform some pose as employ and call peopl who have list themselv on job
search websit other call pretend to be from a compani or govern agenc make
the same kind of fals claim and ask for person inform phisher mai also
undertak technic subterfug scheme to plant crimewar onto pc to steal inform
directli such as us keylog system to intercept custom onlin account user name
and password
opinion vari but the amount of time it take for an unprotect person comput to
becom infect with a viru or malwar can rang from four to thirtyfour minut to aid
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11830 2011 fraud examin manual
in prevent phish comput should be arm with spam filter antiviru and anti
spywar softwar and a firewal and kept up to date a spam filter can help reduc the
number of phish email receiv antiviru softwar which scan incom messag
for troublesom file and antispywar softwar which look for program that have been
instal on a comput and track a user onlin activ without their knowledg can
protect user against pharm and other techniqu that phisher us firewal prevent
hacker and unauthor commun from enter a user computerwhich is
especi import if on ha a broadband connect becaus their comput is open to
the internet whenev it turn on look for program that offer automat updat and
take advantag of free patch that manufactur offer to fix newli discov problem
in order to prevent ident theft through phish email comput user should
complet delet unsolicit email from bank credit union invest firm and
govern agenc with which thei do not have an establish relationship if the
recipi doe have an exist relationship with the suppos origin of the email the
better busi bureau recommend call the organ to confirm whether or not the
email is legitim befor take ani further action comput user on the go should be
wari of enter password or sensit inform into a comput that isnt their such as
at an internet caf librari comput lab or airport kiosk wifi network either on the road
or in the consum own home present even more opportun for ident thiev the
easiest wai to protect a wifi network at home is to not broadcast the servic set identifi
a safe rule of thumb is to avoid exchang sensit inform over a wifi connect
and wait until a safe network can be access
spear phish
spear phish is a target attack gener focus on a corpor entiti the ruse is meant
to fool the corpor employe into believ that the phish email origin not from a
bank or financi institut but from their own it or hr depart the goal is to obtain
the employe user name and password to access the corpor network
vish
voic phish or vish is the act of leverag voic over internet protocol voip
technolog in us the telephon system to fals claim to be a legitim enterpris in an
attempt to scam user both consum and busi into disclos person inform
govern financi institut as well as onlin auction and their payment servic can
be target of voic phish
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11831
a vish scheme is gener transmit as an incom record telephon messag that
us a spoof fraudul caller id match the ident of a misrepres organ
the messag us an urgent pretext to direct unsuspect user to anoth telephon
number the victim is invit to punch their person inform on their telephon
keypad the crimin captur the kei tone and convert them back to numer format
there ar sever type of inform at risk from thi type of scheme thi can includ ani
numer person inform payment card inform number expir date and
the last three digit print on the signatur panel pin person identif number
social secur number date of birth bank account number and passport number
secur expert have seen anoth variat of vish where the crimin will leav a
voicemail messag or make telephon call direct peopl to the bogu phone number
with voic over internet protocol voip and other internetbas telephon technolog
crimin can now make call inexpens and can mask their ident and their locat
and even make it look like thei ar call from a legitim compani on caller displai
some potenti us of the person inform that is gather from victim includ
control of the victim financi account open new bank account transfer bank
balanc appli for loan credit card and other goodsservic make luxuri
purchas hide crimin activ receiv govern benefit and obtain a
passport
anoth version of vish involv the send of text messag to cell phone claim the
recipi onlin bank account ha expir the messag instruct the recipi to renew
their onlin bank account by us the link provid
smish or tish
smish is a hybrid of phish and short messag servic commonli known as text
messag it us much the same approach of phish but deliv an alarm messag
via sm the protocol us to transmit text messag via cellular devic instead of email
crimin activ such as smish can be seen as the prelud to onlin fraud target
mobil devic user as these devic continu to evolv cyber crimin will take
advantag of function to obtain inform as well as deliv mobil malwar to
mobil devic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11832 2011 fraud examin manual
rock phish
on type of phish attack ha been particularli effect the rock phish it estim
that rock phish account for roughli half of all phish attack as measur by the
number of uniqu url rock phisher have target nation and region bank
throughout the us europ and latin america toward the end of 2007 thei broaden
their scope to includ onlin brokerag inform servic treasuri manag
compani and even social network site
like most phisher rock phisher us botnet to send massiv amount of phish email
to huge volum of internet user the email contain a messag from a financi
institut hopefulli entic user to click on a fraudul url there is some indic
that thei cycl through multipl email list and attempt to reach the internet user most
like to us the brand that thei ar target unlik most phisher thei dont compromis
a web server and instal a phish site instead an elabor process is implement
wherebi multipl domain name ar regist at multipl registrar often with less known
countrycod base toplevel domain multipl dn domain name system server ar also
set up which provid name to ip servic for the pool of domain name the ip address
us and there mai be upward of 100 at a time point to multipl compromis server
that simpli forward web connect to the real phish site these proxi server typic
handl connect for multipl target at a time
it is interest to note that befor these bogu domain ar identifi and block
fraudster have alreadi done the damag look at a rock phish url on see random
number with a few alphabet charact in it these ar alphanumer figur these figur
ar us to make the url string uniqu complex and difficult to differenti from a
legitim on
rock phisher have an advanc grasp of technolog us fast flux architectur to chang
name server and site locat in an instant autom proxi server to such an extent that
if on is down it automat switch to the next therefor thei ar abl to lengthen
the life span of rock phish url and make them stealthier
on of the best wai to combat rock phish is to implement a sender polici framework
spf or domain kei on your email system more and more isp ar reject or at least
send to the spam folder email that fail spf or domain kei authent
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11833
