2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Insider Threats


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Insider Threats 
By far the greatest threat to information systems in terms of computer crime comes from 
employees inside an organization. It is not uncommon for operators, media librarians, 
hardware technicians, and other staff members to find themselves in positions of 
extraordinary privilege in relation to the key functions and assets of their organizations. A 
consequence of this situation is the probability that such individuals are frequently exposed 
to temptation. 
 
A further complication is the tendency on the part of management to tolerate less stringent 
supervisory controls over information system personnel. The premise is that the work is not 
only highly technical and specialized but difficult to understand and control. As an example, 
systems software support is often entrusted to a single programmer who generates the 
version of the operating system in use, establishes password or other control lists, and 
determines the logging and accounting features to be used. In addition, such personnel are 
often permitted, and sometimes encouraged, to perform these duties during non-prime shift 
periods, when demands on computer time are light. As a result, many of the most critical 
software development and maintenance functions are performed in an unsupervised 
environment. It is also clear that operators, librarians, and technicians often enjoy a degree 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1838                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of freedom quite different from that which would be considered normal in a more 
traditional employment area.  
 
Insiders are typically aware of the holes in the system of internal controls and often exploit 
weaknesses just to see if they can get away with it. The most prevalent method of 
committing computer fraud is probably alteration or falsification of input transactions 
(and/or documents), including: 
• Alteration of input 
• Alteration of output 
• Data file manipulation 
• Communications systems 
• Operating systems 
• Computer operations 
 
Characteristics 
The characteristics of the traditional inside computer fraudster are very similar to those of 
the hacker or other computer criminal: intelligent, hard working, seldom takes time off, 
bored with the routine of the job, and has a very large ego. Many computer technicians have 
demonstrated a greater loyalty to the technology than to the organization for which they 
work. This technology loyalty can create an attitude that any behavior is acceptable if it is in 
the name of technology.  
 
The following are indicators of insider computer fraud: 
• Access privileges beyond those required to perform assigned job functions. 
• Exception reports not reviewed and resolved. 
• Access logs not reviewed. 
• Production programs run at unusual hours. 
• Lack of separation of duties in the data center. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1839 



:


insid threat
by far the greatest threat to inform system in term of comput crime come from
employe insid an organ it is not uncommon for oper media librarian
hardwar technician and other staff member to find themselv in posit of
extraordinari privileg in relat to the kei function and asset of their organ a
consequ of thi situat is the probabl that such individu ar frequent expos
to temptat
a further complic is the tendenc on the part of manag to toler less stringent
supervisori control over inform system personnel the premis is that the work is not
onli highli technic and special but difficult to understand and control as an exampl
system softwar support is often entrust to a singl programm who gener the
version of the oper system in us establish password or other control list and
determin the log and account featur to be us in addit such personnel ar
often permit and sometim encourag to perform these duti dure nonprim shift
period when demand on comput time ar light as a result mani of the most critic
softwar develop and mainten function ar perform in an unsupervis
environ it is also clear that oper librarian and technician often enjoi a degre
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11838 2011 fraud examin manual
of freedom quit differ from that which would be consid normal in a more
tradit employ area
insid ar typic awar of the hole in the system of intern control and often exploit
weak just to see if thei can get awai with it the most preval method of
commit comput fraud is probabl alter or falsif of input transact
andor document includ
alter of input
alter of output
data file manipul
commun system
oper system
comput oper
characterist
the characterist of the tradit insid comput fraudster ar veri similar to those of
the hacker or other comput crimin intellig hard work seldom take time off
bore with the routin of the job and ha a veri larg ego mani comput technician have
demonstr a greater loyalti to the technolog than to the organ for which thei
work thi technolog loyalti can creat an attitud that ani behavior is accept if it is in
the name of technolog
the follow ar indic of insid comput fraud
access privileg beyond those requir to perform assign job function
except report not review and resolv
access log not review
product program run at unusu hour
lack of separ of duti in the data center
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11839
