2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Security


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Computer Security 
 
Effective Security  
Effective computer security ensures the availability of accurate data in time to meet an 
organization’s needs at a cost that is commen surate with the risks involved. Key elements 
are: 
• Protecting data and programs from intentional or inadvertent unauthorized alteration or 
destruction. 
• Maintaining the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data. 
• Protecting the data center from physical threats such as fire, flood, and intentional 
destruction.  
• Having the capability to restore data center operations in case of complete destruction. 
 
The most important step is to obtain management support for effective security. Without 
such support, any security plan will falter. 
 
Securing the Communications Network 
Some communications networks are very large, very complex, and technically demanding. 
The task of effectively securing these networks is demanding and requires the close 
cooperation of both network and security administration. The objective of data and voice 
networks is to provide connectivity with acceptable response times, user-friendly access, and 
a secure mode at an acceptable cost to the organization.  
 
Passwords 
Passwords are the predominant form of authenticating valid users. Effective password 
administration is essential for maintaining security. Passwords should be of sufficient length 
(usually a minimum of eight characters) and a combination of letters, numbers, and other 
characters, such as punctuation marks to avoid guessing. Group passwords and sharing of 
passwords should be prohibited so as to maintain individual accountability. Passwords of all 
terminated employees should be revoked immediately. Security administration often 
coordinates the notification of terminated employees with the personnel function. 
Employees who have changed job functions or transferred should have their old passwords 
canceled and new ones issued, if appropriate.  
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1840                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Other Network Security 
Securing a computer network by means of logical controls is a difficult but necessary 
requirement for ensuring the safety of a computer system from attacks by outsiders. Logical 
controls include management security policies, user authentication systems, data access 
controls, network firewalls, security awareness training, encryption algorithms, penetration 
testing, intrusion detection software, and incident response plans.  
 
Network security can also be provided by a combination of design, hardware devices, and 
software. Data encryption is carried out by a combination of hardware and software. 
Encrypted data is scrambled by a formula using a unique key and can only be unscrambled 
with the same formula and key at the receiving end. The decision to use encryption should be 
made in light of the risks and after a cost-benefit analysis. Drawbacks to encryption are the 
cost of the hardware and software, the cost of the administration, and the inherent delays 
incurred by the extra steps required for processing. 
 
Digital signatures are becoming more common, in part because Congress and many states 
have passed legislation to legitimize the electronic “signing” of documents. In 2000 the 
Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-SIGN Act) became 
effective. This federal statute basically provides a mechanism whereby any document that is 
required to be signed, can be signed “electr onically.” The E-SIGN Act does not require a 
party to use or accept electronic signatures, electronic contracts or electronic records, but 
rather seeks to facilitate the use of electronic signatures and documents by upholding their 
legal effect regardless of the type or method selected by the parties. The E-SIGN Act is also 
technology-neutral and does not require a specific type or method that businesses and 
consumers must use or accept in order to conduct their electronic transaction. The Act 
regulates any transactions involving interstate or foreign commerce. However, many states 
have enacted their own digital signature laws, which regulate purely intrastate transactions. 
Additionally, many state and federal agencies, including the Internal Revenue Service and the 
Securities and Exchange Commission, are encouraging the use of electronic filing and digital 
signatures as a means to speed up the collection and processing of information. 
 
Biological access verification, long the favorite stuff of movie makers, is now available.  
This verification technique includes fingerprints, palm prints, voice prints, signatures, and 
retina scans. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1841 
Profiling software authenticates users by monitoring their statistical characteristics, such as 
typing speed and keystroke touch. Smart card access devices are similar to an ATM card; like 
ATM cards, they are susceptible to loss and forgery. 
 
The most effective components of internal security are education, reporting facilities, and 
vigorous disciplinary action for offenders, including prosecution of illegal acts. An 
enterprise-wide employee awareness program should be combined with formal training in 
the area of information security. For employees to fulfill their security responsibilities they 
should know what information needs to be kept confidential, how to recognize threats to 
security, and how to use backups and other aids for their desktop machines. Giving 
employees incentives such as bonuses to follow security guidelines, however, will be the 
most effective motivator. 
 
Protecting the network from external threats requires some additional considerations. The 
less an external perpetrator knows about the technology environment (for example, type of 
hardware and software packages used), the harder it is to obtain fraudulent access. Part of 
the security policy should address how much and what kind of information regarding the 
technology of an organization should be made public.  
 
Organizations should guard against providing too much access to third parties. There is 
pressure to establish connectivity by marketing, purchasing, research, and other branches. 
Connectivity should be granted only after it has been established that the benefits outweigh 
the risks and costs. 
 
The Risk Assessment Process 
As organizations grow, their information technology and data change both in type and 
quantity. Assumptions made about security need to be updated. The vehicle for updating is 
the risk assessment. This is a zero-based process that should be performed periodically. A 
risk assessment is an analysis of the security objectives of confidentiality, integrity,  
and availability. 
 
Each data element should be examined to determine the impact if it is disclosed, lost, or 
entered incorrectly. Once this information is collected, the security measures in place should 
be reviewed to determine whether they provide necessary safeguards. The risk assessment 
process is a time-consuming process to undertake and many organizations employ outside 
security consultants to reduce its impact on day-to-day operations.  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1842                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Internal Controls in the Data Center 
In most instances, computer-related crimes are very difficult to detect. An intruder may be 
able to gain unauthorized access to a network or computer system, perpetrate whatever 
criminal activity was planned, and retreat without anyone being aware of the intrusion, much 
less the criminal activity that has taken place. So how does an organization become aware 
that its information resources have been compromised by someone — either inside or outside 
of the organization — with criminal intent? A few possibilities include: 
• A strong set of policies and standards to define for employees and management what the 
company deems as unacceptable or unauthorized activities. 
• Strong physical security to thwart those intent upon the theft of physical assets of the 
organization. 
• Central Systems access control and data object protection. 
• Strong security for the organization’s application programs. 
• Intrusion detection hardware and software for network and communications resources. 
• Auditing of system and violation logs.  
 
All of these mechanisms, if used correctly, will alert the organization of inappropriate 
actions. This all assumes, of course, that someone is keeping an eye out for exceptions and 
violations. All of the security policies and standards, the intrusion detection software, the 
violation logs, and the access controls will mean absolutely nothing if the organization is not 
committed to applying them properly and maintaining them adequately. 
 
General controls over a data center are relevant for all applications. The general control 
categories include system maintenance, implementation of new systems (including 
development), computer operations, system software (including security and 
telecommunications software), and data files. 
 
Systems Maintenance 
All program and system changes should be approved in writing. Programmers should not 
have access to the production library, but only to “test” libraries. All programs that are to be 
modified should be moved into a test library by someone other than a programmer. All 
completed program changes should be tested and the results approved by both data center 
and user personnel before being placed into production. Adequate program documentation 
should be approved for all program changes. User personnel should be notified when 
modified programs will be placed into production. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1843 
Implementation Controls 
Implementation controls are those controls over the development of, or purchase of, a new 
application. All new system requests should be made in writing. A system development life-
 cycle methodology should be used for developing and implementing in-house or purchased 
packages. All new systems requests should be approved by the appropriate management 
level. Users should be involved in the project from design through final testing. All test 
results should be approved by both data center management and user personnel. There 
should be an implementation plan for placing the new system into production. 
 
Computer Operations 
Computer operations controls are controls that govern the day-to-day operation of the 
computer system. There should be an approved schedule for all production runs. All system 
activity should be reviewed by data center management. Any unusual program executions 
should be investigated and resolved. A log of unusual events, such as abends  (abnormal 
terminations of a program execution) or reruns should be kept by operations staff and also 
should be reviewed by data center management. Access to the computer room should be 
restricted to authorized personnel. All third parties, such as technicians, should be 
accompanied by a data center employee. Doors to the data center should be secured. 
 
System Software 
Controls over system software include those that govern the installation of the computer 
system, the communications software, and the security software. Data center management 
should approve the system software selection as well as the chosen options and parameters. 
System software should be tested before implementation in a production environment. 
(Note that this might not be possible for the operating system itself.)  
 
Data Files 
Controls over data files ensure that correct files are used for each production job and that 
adequate backup files exist. Data-file label bypass options should be disabled. A data file 
management system should be used to record and locate all data files. Data file backup 
copies should be made and stored in a secure facility. Off-site backup file copies should be 
maintained in case of a disaster in the data center. Utilities that can modify data files should 
be removed from the system and used only under management supervision. Live data files 
should not be used for testing. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1844                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Access and Telecommunication Controls 
In the 1960s and 1970s, access controls meant ensuring that there was a lock on the 
computer room door. As online systems were implemented, the definition of access evolved 
to include logical access in addition to physical access. Logical access refers to any location 
where someone can sign on to the system. That sign-on access can be a direct connection or 
a dial-up. In today’s, online, real-time, and in terconnected world, it is easy to forget physical 
guards over computer equipment. Computer equipment must be physically secured. This 
should include network servers, telephone system computers, communications controllers, 
and personal computers with sensitive data. 
 
Access and telecommunications controls should achieve the following objectives: 
• Provide physical security over equipment, users, and information. 
• Protect critical data from loss, damage, or unauthorized disclosure. 
• Ensure network reliability by using appropriate hardware and software. 
• Prevent unauthorized access and use of the network. 
• Ensure system availability. 
• Meet user requirements. 
 
Separation of Duties 
Separation of duties is a key element in a well-designed internal control system. It is also 
fundamental to detecting and preventing fraud. Programmers should not operate the 
computer, have unsupervised access to production programs, or have access to production 
data sets (data files). Users should not have access to the production program code. 
Computer operators should not perform computer programming. Adequate supervision 
should be provided by personnel who do not actually perform the work. 
 
Logs and History Files 
Computer systems maintain a variety of history files or logs. These logs record activity in the 
following areas: 
• Mainframe activity 
? Programs executed 
? Data files accessed 
? Date, time, and duration 
? User IDs that initiated a particular action 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1845 
• Communications activity 
? User ID 
? Terminal identifier 
? Dial-in port identifier 
? Date, time, and duration 
? Error messages 
? Equipment malfunctions 
• Security software activity 
? User ID 
? Unsuccessful log-in attempts 
? Modifications to the password files and access capability 
 
These logs were originally designed to help in troubleshooting the system and correcting 
errors. These files contain a very valuable audit and fraud examination trail of system 
activity, and are now used for internal control functions. The logs should be reviewed by a 
responsible data center official and evidence should exist of this review. Many of the history 
files have a limited capacity and can be forced into wrapping if not printed periodically. 
Wrapping forces the software to record at the beginning of the file if the file is full and not 
printed out.  
 
Security Software 
There are a number of good security software packages on the market for all mainframes 
and most minicomputers. Security packages available for PCs are less numerous. Local area 
networks have some security packages available, but still rely primarily on the individual user 
in a stand-alone mode or the mainframe security in a connected mode. The purchase and 
installation of a security package might provide a false sense of security. Most of these 
packages are designed to be installed in a phased approach because of the complexity of  
the task.  
 
These options and decisions about security software should be reviewed by management. 
For example, most mainframe security packages allow a minimum of three levels of security. 
Log mode merely logs all system access to defined programs and data files. Warn mode tells the 
user if he is accessing a program or file that is not authorized for the password he has 
employed. Activity is also logged. Fail mode will not allow a user to access defined data files 
and programs without the proper password. This is the highest level of security and the only 
one that provides adequate protection. Another very important consideration involves the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1846                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
manual supervision of data provided by security packages, usually in the form of access logs. 
A security package needs consistent review to protect against possible violations. 
 
Internal Controls in Computer Applications 
Internal controls establish checks and balances to prevent one person from controlling the 
entire financial transaction. Competent and trustworthy employees are obviously a necessary 
element of a good internal control system. No employee with a known history of dishonesty 
should be hired.  
 
Assets and records, which can be easily appropriated or destroyed, should be physically 
safeguarded. They should be safeguarded by locks, physical security, and other methods to 
ensure that they will not be misappropriated. All accounting systems rely on proper 
documentation. Missing documentation should be  regarded as a red flag of possible fraud. 
Someone independent of the transaction must check the accounting controls. The 
knowledge that all work is checked is a powerful fraud deterrent. The elements of sound 
internal control do not change in a computerized environment. Objectives do not change, 
but techniques do. 
 
Control Techniques 
Control techniques commonly used in computerized systems are listed below. 
• One-for-one checking consists of checking each source document against a detailed list 
processed by the computer. This technique is normally used for low-volume input 
because of the cost and time involved. 
• Batch/control totals involve manually grouping transactions at the input stage and 
manually establishing a control total over the entire group. The methods used include 
document counts, item or line counts, dollar totals, and cash totals. 
• In computer sequence checking, the computer verifies the preassigned serial numbers of 
input transactions and reports missing or duplicate numbers. 
• Computer matching consists of the computer matching the input data to information 
held on the master file or suspense files. Unmatched items are reported for investigation.  
• Programmed edit checks are computer program procedures that edit data. Examples 
include: 
? Reasonableness 
? Dependency 
? Existence 
? Format 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1847 
? Mathematical accuracy 
? Range 
? Digit verification 
? Prior data matching 
• Prerecorded input is used to reduce errors during data entry.  
 
Control Objectives 
Well-designed computer applications have built-in controls for all functions. The major 
control objective is completeness of input. 
  
Input completeness  control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer 
sequence check, and computer matching. Input accuracy controls ensure that data is initially 
recorded correctly and converted correctly to machine-readable form. Input accuracy control 
techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer matching, programmed 
edits, and prerecorded input. 
 
Update accuracy ensures that the correct master file account is updated correctly with the 
correct transaction. Update accuracy control techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control 
totals, computer matching, and programmed checks. Update control completeness ensures that all 
data entered and accepted by the system updates the master file once and only once. Update 
control completeness techniques are one-for-one checking, batch control totals, computer sequence 
checks, and computer matching. 
 
Authorization controls ensure that only valid transactions are processed, that all transactions 
processed are authorized by management, and that transactions represent events that actually 
occurred. Authorization techniques used are one-for-one checking and programmed checks. 
 
Maintenance controls provide that data is kept up-to-date or identify unusual data requiring 
further action. They also ensure that data stored on file is not changed except through the 
normal processing cycle. Maintenance control techniques are used for one-for-one checking, 
batch control totals, and programmed checks. 
 
Evaluating Application Controls 
Evaluating internal controls in an application system requires a thorough understanding of 
the system. The first phase, information gathering, consists of collecting information about 
the industry and the risks associated with that industry; conducting ratio analysis and peer 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1848                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
comparisons to identify aberrations; understanding how management runs the business; and 
determining if there are strong budget-to-actual controls in the organization. 
 
Evaluation is the second phase and consists of the use of questionnaires and/or matrices to 
evaluate the internal controls and to identify internal control weaknesses. Analyzing the 
results is necessary to determine if a weakness exists and/or the extent of any weaknesses. A 
results report should be prepared that includes recommendations. 
 
End-User Computing Internal Control 
End-user computing, or distributed processing, has emerged since the advent of micro-computers 
and provides end-users with equipment (such as PCs) and processing capability. 
Examples include microcomputer development tools such as spreadsheets, database 
programs, and downloading part of an application and its associated files for processing on a 
local area network either connected to the mainframe or in a stand-alone mode. 
 
Several control concerns have been identified as a result of end-user computing. 
• Data center controls over the equipment itself (backups, access controls, local password 
administration, etc.) might not be implemented by the end users. 
• Locally developed spreadsheet or database applications might not have all the controls 
typically found in mainframe systems. 
• Access can be compromised by the end users by installing a modem and phone line 
connected to a local area network or stand-alone PC and not informing data security 
about the arrangement. 
 
 



:


comput secur
effect secur
effect comput secur ensur the avail of accur data in time to meet an
organ need at a cost that is commen surat with the risk involv kei element
ar
protect data and program from intent or inadvert unauthor alter or
destruct
maintain the confidenti integr and avail of data
protect the data center from physic threat such as fire flood and intent
destruct
have the capabl to restor data center oper in case of complet destruct
the most import step is to obtain manag support for effect secur without
such support ani secur plan will falter
secur the commun network
some commun network ar veri larg veri complex and technic demand
the task of effect secur these network is demand and requir the close
cooper of both network and secur administr the object of data and voic
network is to provid connect with accept respons time userfriendli access and
a secur mode at an accept cost to the organ
password
password ar the predomin form of authent valid user effect password
administr is essenti for maintain secur password should be of suffici length
usual a minimum of eight charact and a combin of letter number and other
charact such as punctuat mark to avoid guess group password and share of
password should be prohibit so as to maintain individu account password of all
termin employe should be revok immedi secur administr often
coordin the notif of termin employe with the personnel function
employe who have chang job function or transfer should have their old password
cancel and new on issu if appropri
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11840 2011 fraud examin manual
other network secur
secur a comput network by mean of logic control is a difficult but necessari
requir for ensur the safeti of a comput system from attack by outsid logic
control includ manag secur polici user authent system data access
control network firewal secur awar train encrypt algorithm penetr
test intrus detect softwar and incid respons plan
network secur can also be provid by a combin of design hardwar devic and
softwar data encrypt is carri out by a combin of hardwar and softwar
encrypt data is scrambl by a formula us a uniqu kei and can onli be unscrambl
with the same formula and kei at the receiv end the decis to us encrypt should be
made in light of the risk and after a costbenefit analysi drawback to encrypt ar the
cost of the hardwar and softwar the cost of the administr and the inher delai
incur by the extra step requir for process
digit signatur ar becom more common in part becaus congress and mani state
have pass legisl to legitim the electron sign of document in 2000 the
electron signatur in global and nation commerc act esign act becam
effect thi feder statut basic provid a mechan wherebi ani document that is
requir to be sign can be sign electr onic the esign act doe not requir a
parti to us or accept electron signatur electron contract or electron record but
rather seek to facilit the us of electron signatur and document by uphold their
legal effect regardless of the type or method select by the parti the esign act is also
technologyneutr and doe not requir a specif type or method that busi and
consum must us or accept in order to conduct their electron transact the act
regul ani transact involv interst or foreign commerc howev mani state
have enact their own digit signatur law which regul pure intrast transact
addition mani state and feder agenc includ the intern revenu servic and the
secur and exchang commiss ar encourag the us of electron file and digit
signatur as a mean to speed up the collect and process of inform
biolog access verif long the favorit stuff of movi maker is now avail
thi verif techniqu includ fingerprint palm print voic print signatur and
retina scan
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11841
profil softwar authent user by monitor their statist characterist such as
type speed and keystrok touch smart card access devic ar similar to an atm card like
atm card thei ar suscept to loss and forgeri
the most effect compon of intern secur ar educ report facil and
vigor disciplinari action for offend includ prosecut of illeg act an
enterprisewid employe awar program should be combin with formal train in
the area of inform secur for employe to fulfil their secur respons thei
should know what inform need to be kept confidenti how to recogn threat to
secur and how to us backup and other aid for their desktop machin give
employe incent such as bonus to follow secur guidelin howev will be the
most effect motiv
protect the network from extern threat requir some addit consider the
less an extern perpetr know about the technolog environ for exampl type of
hardwar and softwar packag us the harder it is to obtain fraudul access part of
the secur polici should address how much and what kind of inform regard the
technolog of an organ should be made public
organ should guard against provid too much access to third parti there is
pressur to establish connect by market purchas research and other branch
connect should be grant onli after it ha been establish that the benefit outweigh
the risk and cost
the risk assess process
as organ grow their inform technolog and data chang both in type and
quantiti assumpt made about secur need to be updat the vehicl for updat is
the risk assess thi is a zerobas process that should be perform period a
risk assess is an analysi of the secur object of confidenti integr
and avail
each data element should be examin to determin the impact if it is disclos lost or
enter incorrectli onc thi inform is collect the secur measur in place should
be review to determin whether thei provid necessari safeguard the risk assess
process is a timeconsum process to undertak and mani organ emploi outsid
secur consult to reduc it impact on daytodai oper
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11842 2011 fraud examin manual
intern control in the data center
in most instanc computerrel crime ar veri difficult to detect an intrud mai be
abl to gain unauthor access to a network or comput system perpetr whatev
crimin activ wa plan and retreat without anyon be awar of the intrus much
less the crimin activ that ha taken place so how doe an organ becom awar
that it inform resourc have been compromis by someon either insid or outsid
of the organ with crimin intent a few possibl includ
a strong set of polici and standard to defin for employe and manag what the
compani deem as unaccept or unauthor activ
strong physic secur to thwart those intent upon the theft of physic asset of the
organ
central system access control and data object protect
strong secur for the organ applic program
intrus detect hardwar and softwar for network and commun resourc
audit of system and violat log
all of these mechan if us correctli will alert the organ of inappropri
action thi all assum of cours that someon is keep an ey out for except and
violat all of the secur polici and standard the intrus detect softwar the
violat log and the access control will mean absolut noth if the organ is not
commit to appli them properli and maintain them adequ
gener control over a data center ar relev for all applic the gener control
categori includ system mainten implement of new system includ
develop comput oper system softwar includ secur and
telecommun softwar and data file
system mainten
all program and system chang should be approv in write programm should not
have access to the product librari but onli to test librari all program that ar to be
modifi should be move into a test librari by someon other than a programm all
complet program chang should be test and the result approv by both data center
and user personnel befor be place into product adequ program document
should be approv for all program chang user personnel should be notifi when
modifi program will be place into product
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11843
implement control
implement control ar those control over the develop of or purchas of a new
applic all new system request should be made in write a system develop life
cycl methodolog should be us for develop and implement inhous or purchas
packag all new system request should be approv by the appropri manag
level user should be involv in the project from design through final test all test
result should be approv by both data center manag and user personnel there
should be an implement plan for place the new system into product
comput oper
comput oper control ar control that govern the daytodai oper of the
comput system there should be an approv schedul for all product run all system
activ should be review by data center manag ani unusu program execut
should be investig and resolv a log of unusu event such as abend abnorm
termin of a program execut or rerun should be kept by oper staff and also
should be review by data center manag access to the comput room should be
restrict to author personnel all third parti such as technician should be
accompani by a data center employe door to the data center should be secur
system softwar
control over system softwar includ those that govern the instal of the comput
system the commun softwar and the secur softwar data center manag
should approv the system softwar select as well as the chosen option and paramet
system softwar should be test befor implement in a product environ
note that thi might not be possibl for the oper system itself
data file
control over data file ensur that correct file ar us for each product job and that
adequ backup file exist datafil label bypass option should be disabl a data file
manag system should be us to record and locat all data file data file backup
copi should be made and store in a secur facil offsit backup file copi should be
maintain in case of a disast in the data center util that can modifi data file should
be remov from the system and us onli under manag supervis live data file
should not be us for test
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11844 2011 fraud examin manual
access and telecommun control
in the 1960 and 1970 access control meant ensur that there wa a lock on the
comput room door as onlin system were implement the definit of access evolv
to includ logic access in addit to physic access logic access refer to ani locat
where someon can sign on to the system that signon access can be a direct connect or
a dialup in todai onlin realtim and in terconnect world it is easi to forget physic
guard over comput equip comput equip must be physic secur thi
should includ network server telephon system comput commun control
and person comput with sensit data
access and telecommun control should achiev the follow object
provid physic secur over equip user and inform
protect critic data from loss damag or unauthor disclosur
ensur network reliabl by us appropri hardwar and softwar
prevent unauthor access and us of the network
ensur system avail
meet user requir
separ of duti
separ of duti is a kei element in a welldesign intern control system it is also
fundament to detect and prevent fraud programm should not oper the
comput have unsupervis access to product program or have access to product
data set data file user should not have access to the product program code
comput oper should not perform comput program adequ supervis
should be provid by personnel who do not actual perform the work
log and histori file
comput system maintain a varieti of histori file or log these log record activ in the
follow area
mainfram activ
program execut
data file access
date time and durat
user id that initi a particular action
error messag
equip malfunct
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11845
commun activ
user id
termin identifi
dialin port identifi
date time and durat
error messag
equip malfunct
secur softwar activ
user id
unsuccess login attempt
modif to the password file and access capabl
these log were origin design to help in troubleshoot the system and correct
error these file contain a veri valuabl audit and fraud examin trail of system
activ and ar now us for intern control function the log should be review by a
respons data center offici and evid should exist of thi review mani of the histori
file have a limit capac and can be forc into wrap if not print period
wrap forc the softwar to record at the begin of the file if the file is full and not
print out
secur softwar
there ar a number of good secur softwar packag on the market for all mainfram
and most minicomput secur packag avail for pc ar less numer local area
network have some secur packag avail but still reli primarili on the individu user
in a standalon mode or the mainfram secur in a connect mode the purchas and
instal of a secur packag might provid a fals sens of secur most of these
packag ar design to be instal in a phase approach becaus of the complex of
the task
these option and decis about secur softwar should be review by manag
for exampl most mainfram secur packag allow a minimum of three level of secur
log mode mere log all system access to defin program and data file warn mode tell the
user if he is access a program or file that is not author for the password he ha
emploi activ is also log fail mode will not allow a user to access defin data file
and program without the proper password thi is the highest level of secur and the onli
on that provid adequ protect anoth veri import consider involv the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11846 2011 fraud examin manual
manual supervis of data provid by secur packag usual in the form of access log
a secur packag need consist review to protect against possibl violat
intern control in comput applic
intern control establish check and balanc to prevent on person from control the
entir financi transact compet and trustworthi employe ar obvious a necessari
element of a good intern control system no employe with a known histori of dishonesti
should be hire
asset and record which can be easili appropri or destroi should be physic
safeguard thei should be safeguard by lock physic secur and other method to
ensur that thei will not be misappropri all account system reli on proper
document miss document should be regard as a red flag of possibl fraud
someon independ of the transact must check the account control the
knowledg that all work is check is a power fraud deterr the element of sound
intern control do not chang in a computer environ object do not chang
but techniqu do
control techniqu
control techniqu commonli us in computer system ar list below
oneforon check consist of check each sourc document against a detail list
process by the comput thi techniqu is normal us for lowvolum input
becaus of the cost and time involv
batchcontrol total involv manual group transact at the input stage and
manual establish a control total over the entir group the method us includ
document count item or line count dollar total and cash total
in comput sequenc check the comput verifi the preassign serial number of
input transact and report miss or duplic number
comput match consist of the comput match the input data to inform
held on the master file or suspens file unmatch item ar report for investig
program edit check ar comput program procedur that edit data exampl
includ
reason
depend
exist
format
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11847
mathemat accuraci
rang
digit verif
prior data match
prerecord input is us to reduc error dure data entri
control object
welldesign comput applic have builtin control for all function the major
control object is complet of input
input complet control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput
sequenc check and comput match input accuraci control ensur that data is initi
record correctli and convert correctli to machineread form input accuraci control
techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput match program
edit and prerecord input
updat accuraci ensur that the correct master file account is updat correctli with the
correct transact updat accuraci control techniqu ar oneforon check batch control
total comput match and program check updat control complet ensur that all
data enter and accept by the system updat the master file onc and onli onc updat
control complet techniqu ar oneforon check batch control total comput sequenc
check and comput match
author control ensur that onli valid transact ar process that all transact
process ar author by manag and that transact repres event that actual
occur author techniqu us ar oneforon check and program check
mainten control provid that data is kept uptod or identifi unusu data requir
further action thei also ensur that data store on file is not chang except through the
normal process cycl mainten control techniqu ar us for oneforon check
batch control total and program check
evalu applic control
evalu intern control in an applic system requir a thorough understand of
the system the first phase inform gather consist of collect inform about
the industri and the risk associ with that industri conduct ratio analysi and peer
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11848 2011 fraud examin manual
comparison to identifi aberr understand how manag run the busi and
determin if there ar strong budgettoactu control in the organ
evalu is the second phase and consist of the us of questionnair andor matric to
evalu the intern control and to identifi intern control weak analyz the
result is necessari to determin if a weak exist andor the extent of ani weak a
result report should be prepar that includ recommend
endus comput intern control
endus comput or distribut process ha emerg sinc the advent of microcomput
and provid endus with equip such as pc and process capabl
exampl includ microcomput develop tool such as spreadsheet databas
program and download part of an applic and it associ file for process on a
local area network either connect to the mainfram or in a standalon mode
sever control concern have been identifi as a result of endus comput
data center control over the equip itself backup access control local password
administr etc might not be implement by the end user
local develop spreadsheet or databas applic might not have all the control
typic found in mainfram system
access can be compromis by the end user by instal a modem and phone line
connect to a local area network or standalon pc and not inform data secur
about the arrang
