2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes 
Once an organization has received an indication that a possible criminal violation has 
occurred by means of its information system resources, a preliminary investigation into the 
allegation should be conducted to achieve the following goals: 
 
1. Determine if indeed a crime has been committed. This is the critical step in the 
internal investigation. The organization must be careful to differentiate between 
inadvertent computer misuse and deliberate criminal intent. The company’s internal 
auditors, physical and information security specialists, and senior management 
should be involved in making this type of decision. 
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1849 
2. Determine the status of the crime. When did the incident begin? Where did the 
intrusion come from? Internal or external? Is the incident still occurring? If not still 
occurring, when did it stop? 
 
3. Review the organization security and audit policies and procedures to determine the 
best method for continuing the investigation. 
 
4. Determine the need for law enforcement assistance. The organization will have to 
decide if the violation is serious enough to call in the police or other law 
enforcement entities. Most computer crimes are not reported to law enforcement 
due to several factors, including the organization’s desire to keep its flaws and 
weaknesses from being exposed to its customers and stockholders. This is a difficult 
decision for the company to make. However, as we also mentioned earlier, if 
companies don’t report computer crimes, then law enforcement will be powerless to 
help prevent and solve them and computer criminals will feel they have a free hand 
to continue their activities. 
 
Handling the Evidence 
One of the major differences between investigating computer-related crimes and 
conventional criminal activities is the volatility of the evidence that resides in the computers 
themselves. Indeed, the evidence of a computer intrusion might be erased or altered as part 
of the intrusion itself. It is therefore very important for the organization and/or law 
enforcement personnel to deal quickly and decisively with evidence of suspected computer-
 related criminal activities. 
 
The admissibility of evidence obtained from computers in a court case is really no different 
from the admissibility of any other type of evidence. The evidence must be: 
• Relevant  
• Supported by a foundation for its introduction into court 
• Legally obtained 
• Properly identified 
• Properly preserved 
 
In the handling of computer data in criminal investigations, the examiner or investigators 
must be aware of some of the vulnerabilities of computer evidence: 
• The investigator must ensure that turning off power to computer equipment will not 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1850                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy or erase evidence that is required for the investigation. 
• The read/write heads of hard disk drives must be parked in a retracted position so that 
powering down the disk drive will not cause the read/write head to contact the surface 
of the disk platter. 
• Be aware that magnetic storage media are vulnerable to magnetic fields and that evidence 
might be erased without the investigator being aware of the erasure if the media are 
brought close to a source of a magnetic field. 
• Be aware that other equipment attached to the computer might be needed to complete 
the investigation into the data that resides in the computer. 
• The investigator should write-protect all diskettes that are being used in the investigation 
so that they cannot be written upon inadvertently. 
 
Integrity of Evidence 
There are certain issues that must be considered when processing computer evidence. These 
areas should be considered regardless of whether the incident will be processed as a criminal 
offense for prosecution or possible civil litigation. Even if the organization decides to take 
no action at all, how a computer fraud examination is conducted might have potential civil 
liability implications for both the organization and/or the fraud examiner.  
 
Should the fraud examiner discover evidence on a computer system, he must be able to state 
unequivocally that the evidence was not changed in any way by their actions. This requires 
that strict forensic methodologies be followed to satisfy the stringent evidentiary standards 
necessary to ensure the integrity of the evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt” for possible 
court presentation. Therefore, fraud examiners must be aware of the following issues that 
relate to the gathering of computer evidence. 
 
Search & Seizure — Expectation of Privacy 
The first question that should be asked in a computer fraud examination pertains to the 
expectation of privacy for any employee or outsider who might be involved in the incident.  
 
For example, in one incident an employee was caught using a company computer for 
personal use. The company had never established computer use policies. The employee had 
never been formally notified that personal use of the computer was prohibited and that the 
company had the right to inspect the contents of the computer at any time. Therefore, when 
a supervisor discovered inappropriate personal files on the employee’s computer, the 
employee protested the act as an invasion of his privacy. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1851 
This demonstrates that appropriate policies can be critical. In the above circumstances the 
company might have created a situation where they would actually need to obtain a court 
order or a search warrant through a law enforcement agency just to examine the contents of 
their own computers. 
 
There is specific wording that should be used in the construction of a search warrant 
involving either computers or telecommunications equipment. How the equipment and 
magnetic media are described will be critical to the success of the court case. 
 
Pre-Search Preparation 
Obtaining as much intelligence as possible regard ing the location of the potential evidence is 
very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Questions that fraud examiners 
should consider might include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search. In one case, 
approximately 17 networked file servers were involved, with multiple routers and dial-up 
modems. A team of only two investigators would need at least four to six hours to 
complete a seizure of this magnitude.  
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant. The time to discover that an “expert 
witness” has a criminal conviction is before the search warrant affidavit has even been 
written, not when the witness takes the stand to testify in a criminal proceeding. 
• Determine the resources that will be required to successfully conduct the search. If a 
great deal of equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported 
from the location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search. In another case, an assistant district attorney 
requested assistance in the execution of a search warrant. When detectives arrived, they 
discovered that the DA wanted them to seize more than 30 computers, including 3 file 
servers. This was at 3 p.m., and the DA then told the detectives that the authority to 
execute the search warrant expired at 5 p.m. Naturally, the detectives could not possibly 
have conducted the seizure within that time frame and in this case, the evidence was lost. 
A better strategy would have been to time the execution of the search warrant for 5 p.m.  
  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1852                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
on a Friday afternoon. This would give the entire weekend to conduct the search, if 
necessary. 
 
Search Warrant Affidavit Construction 
The construction of search warrants has been affected by both advancements in technology 
and the evolving nature of criminal law. Fraud examiners must now consider several 
problems not encountered before. For example, the fraud examiner must know how to write 
a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the fraud 
examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (i.e., 
computer storage devices such as disks or CD-ROMs, which contain information that 
cannot be viewed without the aid of some electronic device).  
 
The warrant must allow for such contingencies as the ability to seize data files pertinent to 
the case that are mixed with data files that have nothing to do with the case but reside on the 
same storage device. The warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of 
all computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all 
material that is not. This can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might 
depend on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. 
 
To satisfy the “particularity” requirements of the Fourth Amendment, the fraud examiner 
must be able to justify each and every item that might contain evidence. For example, stating 
that “all printers” should be seized might be considered to be overly broad unless the fraud 
examiner can justify the need for each specific printer. 
 
However, with some thought fraud examiners should be able to justify the search and 
seizure for everything that they need to complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized 
might contain any or all of the following, depending upon the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1853 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? ZIP or JAZ drives 
• Cables, wiring, cords 
• Storage media 
? Floppy disks 
? Hard disks 
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROM 
? Magnetic/Optical disks 
? Digital Audio Tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital camera storage) 
? USB thumb drives 
• Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
• Documents 
• Manuals 
• Printouts 
• File listings 
 
All related documentation should be covered by the wording of the search warrant and 
seized along with the computer system. This documentation could be critical in the analysis 
of the system hardware and software. Documents could indicate changes that have been 
made to the system that will help the fraud examiner avoid damaging the system. The fact 
that access control products have been added to the system might be a helpful piece of 
information for the fraud examiner. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1854                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Processing Evidence for Removal 
The search for and seizure of technical equipment requires specific procedures that must be 
followed by fraud examiners to guarantee the integrity of evidence, and to protect both the 
organization and the individual fraud examiner from civil litigation. These guidelines are 
written to satisfy the evidentiary requirements for criminal prosecution, and each step in the 
process is there for a reason. Fraud examiners who deviate from these guidelines should be 
able to justify their actions if called into question later. 
 
1.  If possible, before executing a search warrant where computer equipment and/or 
magnetic storage media is to be seized, try to make sure that someone will be present 
who is familiar with computer equipment to assist in the identification of the various 
components. 
 
2.  It is critical that anyone not involved in the investigation be kept away from any 
computer equipment, and not be allowed to touch any of the equipment. This 
includes any person not directly involved in handling the computer and related 
equipment. It is possible for a suspect or any person touching only one key of a 
system keyboard (when a computer is operational) to destroy evidence. Limit the 
number of personnel responsible for processing computer-related evidence to 
maintain the integrity of this evidence.  
 
 
3.  If the person seizing the system has the appropriate training and expertise, it might be 
useful to observe the video display of the system. Information might be displayed that 
will be of value in the case. If this occurs, document with a close-up photograph of the 
video screen. (Take care if using a camera with a flash that the flash does not reflect 
back into the camera lens.) 
 
4.  If a computer or peripheral is not covered by the respective search warrant, leave it 
alone until a supplemental warrant can be obtained. 
 
5.  If the computer is to be removed from the location, do not enter anything via the 
system keyboard or attempt to read information from the system or any associated 
magnetic media. 
 
6.  Do not move the computer any more than is necessary until it is properly secured. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1855 
Even then, extreme care should be taken, as sudden motion could cause the 
destruction of data or damage to the equipment itself. 
 
7.  Photograph the overall view of the computer system (wide view). Move the equipment 
as little as possible before taking this photograph to indicate how the equipment was 
originally positioned. Consider videotaping the confiscation procedure for complete 
documentation of all actions performed. However, caution is advised, since the video 
will capture everything that is said and done. Speculative statements or levity should be 
restricted.  
 
8.  Document the state of the computer when first observed (was it operational, what was 
displayed on the monitor screen, etc.). 
 
9.  Depending on the experience of the person seizing the system, it might be advisable to 
unplug the power from the Central Processing Unit (CPU) before taking any further 
action. Unplug the power at the wall outlet, if accessible. Even though this action will 
lose any data in Random Access Memory, it might prevent the computer from deleting 
or changing other data. N O TE: This applies to sta nd alone microcomputers only, 
and does not include computers connected to a Local Area Network (LAN). 
 
10.  Turn off the power to all other components and/or pieces of peripheral equipment 
(such as printers, video display CRTs, or monitors, etc.). Be aware that many 
peripherals utilize Random Access Memory, which can contain evidence that will be 
lost when power is removed. 
 
11.  If possible, photograph all cable connections (usually in the rear of the system), before 
disconnecting. 
 
12.  Disconnect all components that are attached to an external power supply only (e.g., 
from an electrical wall socket, etc.). 
 
13.  Never connect or disconnect any of the cables of the system when the computer is 
operating. This could result in physical damage to the system components and/or 
peripheral equipment. 
 
14.  Label all cable connections, including any telephone cables that are connected to the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1856                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
system so that the system can be reconstructed at a later time for analysis. 
 
15.  Again, photograph all cable connections. Before photographing, try to arrange the 
cable connector labels in such a way that they will be visible in the photographs. 
 
16.  Label each item of equipment that will be confiscated. This includes the CPU, 
monitor, printers, etc. Each item that has a removable exterior case should be sealed 
with a tamperproof evidence tape (especially the CPU case). This will help to prevent 
later allegations that components were removed or altered. 
 
17.  Consideration should be given to separate close-up isolation photographs for each 
item to be seized. These close-up shots will serve the purpose of providing more 
specific identification of seized items, and responding to possible future allegations of 
physical damage to a seized item. 
 
18.  Document the location of all items seized (which room, specific location in the room, 
reference to photographs, the person who seized the item, serial numbers, special 
identification markings, etc.). 
 
19.  Check all disk drives to determine if they contain a disk. If so, remove the disk from 
the drive and place it in a disk sleeve. Write-protect the disk immediately. Label the 
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from, and then label a paper 
bag to indicate that the disk was taken from the labeled drive. Place the disk in the 
paper bag and seal it. 
 
20.  Place a cardboard insert or a “throwaway” disk  into the disk drive and secure the drive 
door shut to secure the drive heads for transportation. Cardboard inserts are specially 
made for this purpose. If none are available, a disk of the particular size that contains 
no data might be used (preferably a new, unused disk). 
 
21.  Check any other removable storage media drives, remove any storage media they 
contain, and label the media for identification purposes. (This includes components 
such as optical drives, external tape drives, IOMEGA drives, CD-ROM, etc.) 
 
22.  If there is any uncertainty as to what a piece of equipment is, do not speculate, just 
label the equipment with a unique identifying number and secure the item for later 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1857 
analysis. However, be prepared to justify the seizure of a component that might or 
might not be covered in the search warrant. 
 
23.  When all components and cables have been labeled and documented, disconnect the 
cables from their respective component and secure the cables.  
 
24.  If covered in the search warrant, confiscate all related manuals and other 
documentation, and all magnetic media. Also confiscate any other items that might be 
evidence in the case and that are covered by the terms of the search warrant. 
 
25.  If at all possible, after all equipment and magnetic media have been labeled and 
inventoried, each item should be stored in a paper bag or a cardboard box and sealed 
(to keep out dust). Large items, such as the CPU and/or printers could be stored in 
large paper bags or large boxes. Smaller items, such as disks and CDs, could be stored 
in sandwich-bag sized paper bags. This practice will protect these items from 
unnecessary exposure to dust. An additional label should be attached to the bag 
identifying the contents of the bag, along with any identifying numbers, such as the 
number of an evidence tag. Note: Plastic bags (such as garbage and sandwich 
bags) should not be used to store evidence.  
 
26.  Ensure that adequate support is given to all items when they are being moved. 
 
27.  Thoroughly document the inventory of everything to be removed from the location. 
This will be required for the search warrant return (if applicable), but also serves to 
provide a measure of liability protection for the person seizing the system.  
 
Basic computer procedures are essential when processing evidence. These precautions must 
be followed explicitly when working with computers: 
• Do not eat, drink, or smoke close to the computer system or near any of the storage 
media (such as disks or CDs). Crumbs, liquid, and/or smoke particles could all 
potentially damage the equipment or stored data. If this happens, it becomes very 
difficult, if not impossible, to recover the data (and evidence). 
• Do not fold or bend disks, or touch the magnetic media inside the disk cover. 
• Do not write on a disk, on a label of a disk, or on a bag that contains a disk. Write on a 
label and then place the label on the disk. If it is necessary to write on a disk, use a soft 
felt-tip pen. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1858                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not  place magnetic media near magnetic fields, as this could cause damage. Magnetic 
fields strong enough to damage data are more common than you might think. 
• Do not expose magnetic media to either extreme heat or cold. Temperatures outside of 
the range from 40-90 degrees Fahrenheit can damage the data. 
• Do not fingerprint magnetic media. The particles of fingerprint powder are almost 
impossible to remove from the media surface, and the drive will not be able to read the 
data contained on the media. Permanent damage to the drive equipment could  
also result. 
 
Evidence Storage 
After a computer system has been seized, most criminal justice agencies have a central 
evidence storage facility where the equipment is transported and stored until it is either 
processed further or needed in court. In the majority of cases, the special storage 
requirements of computer systems are not addressed. 
 
The storage environment should be in a location that is: 
• Relatively dust-free 
• Both temperature and humidity controlled 
• Free of magnetic and electronic fields 
 
Possible Threats to Magnetic Media 
• Telephones 
• Radio speakers 
• Radio transmitters 
• Copy machines 
• Plastic garbage or sandwich bags  
• Degaussing equipment 
• Electric fans 
• Under-shelf lighting (heat) 
• Leaving media in vehicle trunk during ex treme temperatures (either hot or cold) 
• Magnets 
• Proximity to a radiator or an open heating vent 
 
Evidence Analysis 
The primary concern during the analysis of electronic evidence is to maintain the integrity of 
the evidence. This means that procedures must be developed to ensure that no allegations 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1859 
can be raised in court that the methodology used during analysis could have damaged or 
altered the hardware, media, or data that constitutes the evidence. 
 
Currently, there are no specialized evidence analysis laboratories available to most criminal 
justice agencies to analyze computer, electronic, or magnetic evidence. The U.S. Secret 
Service and the FBI both have such capabilities, but unless the case is of critical importance 
these laboratories process only cases investigated by those agencies. 
 
Understanding the Terms 
To effectively analyze the data stored within a computer the fraud examiner must have a 
practical understanding of the basic operations of a computer and how it stores information. 
The fraud examiner must also have the expertise to access the data at the most basic level. 
Without this knowledge, information could be hidden from view or stored within other files 
or locations not usually accessed by the computer. 
 
Each new development in technology brings with it new concepts and a new vocabulary. 
The modern fraud examiner must stay current on the terms used to describe technological 
developments, tools, and practices, as he may be asked to explain such concepts as part of 
the engagement, in the resulting report, or as an expert witness during consequent 
legal proceedings.  
 
Fraud examiners must also be educated in the use of the various software utilities that will 
enable them to analyze the electronic data. Utilities such as Norton Utilities will be of great 
assistance in investigations involving personal computers. There are several utility 
applications that automate a great deal of the evidence analysis process. However, you 
should not use these programs unless you have been properly trained.  
 
Evidence Inventory 
Many times computers seized as evidence are only inventoried according to the information 
available on the outside of the CPU case — namely the make, model, and serial number of 
the particular unit. The components inside the CPU case are never examined. Fraud 
examiners must consider that there could literally be thousands of dollars of equipment 
inside this case. Inadequate inventories of computer equipment leave the organization, and 
possibly the fraud examiner, in a precarious liability position should any of this equipment be 
damaged or lost. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1860                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In analyzing and searching magnetic or optical media for potential evidence, the fraud 
examiner should consider the following: 
• Mirror copies 
• Virus detection 
• Keyword search 
• Hidden and deleted files 
• File slack area 
• File signatures 
• Encrypted files 
 
“Mirror” Copies 
If possible, the fraud examiner should make an exact duplicate, or “mirror” copy, of any 
media that is to be analyzed. This will ensure that no changes or damage occurs to the 
original evidence. This will not be possible in all cases due to a lack of equipment or other 
resources, but should be considered as the “ideal” procedure. 
 
When there is no alternative but to analyze the original of the seized evidence, consideration 
should be given to using utility software to “lock” the disk so that no information can be 
written to the disk. This will protect the integrity of the original evidence, and prevent 
inadvertent alteration of the original data. 
 
Virus Detection 
All data storage media should be examined for computer viruses. This will serve not only to 
protect the fraud examiner’s own equipment, but also will protect the fraud examiner from 
possible allegations that he infected the seized media with a computer virus. 
 
Keyword Search 
Due to the tremendous storage capacity of contemporary computer media, it might be more 
cost effective for the fraud examiner to conduct a “keyword search” of the media, searching 
for key words, names, dates, account numbers, etc. that are material to the fraud case. This 
will minimize the amount of time used to complete the analysis, and also protects the fraud 
examiner from possible allegations that their search was overly broad. 
 
“Hidden” and “Deleted” Files 
Most computer operating systems allow files to be designated as “hidden” files. When so 
designated, the files might not be visible to normal search procedures, such as displaying a 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1861 
disk directory. Utility programs exist to show these “hidden” files. Fraud examiners should 
inspect these files to determine if they were intentionally hidden because they contain 
evidence. 
 
In addition, many computer users do not realize that an initial command to “delete” a file 
does not necessarily mean that the file contents have been destroyed. With the appropriate 
utility programs, erased files can be “unerased” and reviewed by the fraud examiner. 
 
File Slack Area 
There is a difference in most operating systems between the “logical” size of a file and the 
“physical” size of the file. The logical size pertains to the size in the number of “bytes” that 
the file occupies. In a directory listing, this is the number that is displayed for “file size.”   
 
The physical size of a file depends on how the operating system stores files. In most 
operating systems, the disk is organized into designated blocks called clusters. Files occupy a 
whole number of clusters, even if the logical size of the file is smaller than the cluster size. In 
these cases, difference in space between the physical file space and the logical file space is 
called the file slack area. This area might contain data from previously-erased files that could 
contain evidence. Unless the fraud examiner has a special utility to identify and investigate 
the file slack area, potential evidence possibly located there could be missed. 
 
File Signatures 
When reviewing a directory listing in a file manager such as Windows Explorer, the “type” 
of file is one of the options that might display. This information might indicate that the file 
is an “application,” or that it is a “Word Document,” or some other type. However, this 
designation is usually based on the “extension” of the file, and might not be an accurate 
indication of the file contents.  
 
For example, if a file were created in Microsoft Word, and saved with the file name of 
“Murder Confession.doc,” the directory listing would correctly indicate that this file was a 
“Word Document.” However, if the file were renamed as “Angel.exe,” the directory listing 
would mistakenly indicate that the file was an “application,” even though the contents of the 
file itself have not changed. 
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1862                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inspecting each and every file on seized media would be tremendously tedious and very 
time-consuming. However, there are utility programs that can automate this process and 
report any discrepancies such as the one described above. 
 
Encrypted Files 
Should the fraud examiner come across files that have been encrypted during the analysis of 
seized computer media, several considerations arise. 
 
First of all, utility programs exist to decrypt documents encrypted by many of the more 
common business software applications, such as Microsoft Word and WordPerfect. There 
are also several companies who specialize in this type of decryption. 
 
Secondly, there is precedent for forcing the suspect to divulge the decryption code through a 
court order. Consider once again that the computer is only a container and that the 
encryption is an additional “lock” that is prohibiting the fraud examiner from reviewing the 
contents for potential evidence. If a valid search warrant exists authorizing the examination 
of the data, this would be no different than a court ordering a suspect to unlock a file cabinet 
to allow the inspection of its contents. 
 
 



:


conduct an investig regard comput crime
onc an organ ha receiv an indic that a possibl crimin violat ha
occur by mean of it inform system resourc a preliminari investig into the
alleg should be conduct to achiev the follow goal
1 determin if inde a crime ha been commit thi is the critic step in the
intern investig the organ must be care to differenti between
inadvert comput misus and deliber crimin intent the compani intern
auditor physic and inform secur specialist and senior manag
should be involv in make thi type of decis
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11849
2 determin the statu of the crime when did the incid begin where did the
intrus come from intern or extern is the incid still occur if not still
occur when did it stop
3 review the organ secur and audit polici and procedur to determin the
best method for continu the investig
4 determin the need for law enforc assist the organ will have to
decid if the violat is seriou enough to call in the polic or other law
enforc entiti most comput crime ar not report to law enforc
due to sever factor includ the organ desir to keep it flaw and
weak from be expos to it custom and stockhold thi is a difficult
decis for the compani to make howev as we also mention earlier if
compani dont report comput crime then law enforc will be powerless to
help prevent and solv them and comput crimin will feel thei have a free hand
to continu their activ
handl the evid
on of the major differ between investig computerrel crime and
convent crimin activ is the volatil of the evid that resid in the comput
themselv inde the evid of a comput intrus might be eras or alter as part
of the intrus itself it is therefor veri import for the organ andor law
enforc personnel to deal quickli and decis with evid of suspect comput
relat crimin activ
the admiss of evid obtain from comput in a court case is realli no differ
from the admiss of ani other type of evid the evid must be
relev
support by a foundat for it introduct into court
legal obtain
properli identifi
properli preserv
in the handl of comput data in crimin investig the examin or investig
must be awar of some of the vulner of comput evid
the investig must ensur that turn off power to comput equip will not
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11850 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi or eras evid that is requir for the investig
the readwrit head of hard disk drive must be park in a retract posit so that
power down the disk drive will not caus the readwrit head to contact the surfac
of the disk platter
be awar that magnet storag media ar vulner to magnet field and that evid
might be eras without the investig be awar of the erasur if the media ar
brought close to a sourc of a magnet field
be awar that other equip attach to the comput might be need to complet
the investig into the data that resid in the comput
the investig should writeprotect all diskett that ar be us in the investig
so that thei cannot be written upon inadvert
integr of evid
there ar certain issu that must be consid when process comput evid these
area should be consid regardless of whether the incid will be process as a crimin
offens for prosecut or possibl civil litig even if the organ decid to take
no action at all how a comput fraud examin is conduct might have potenti civil
liabil implic for both the organ andor the fraud examin
should the fraud examin discov evid on a comput system he must be abl to state
unequivoc that the evid wa not chang in ani wai by their action thi requir
that strict forens methodolog be follow to satisfi the stringent evidentiari standard
necessari to ensur the integr of the evid beyond a reason doubt for possibl
court present therefor fraud examin must be awar of the follow issu that
relat to the gather of comput evid
search seizur expect of privaci
the first question that should be ask in a comput fraud examin pertain to the
expect of privaci for ani employe or outsid who might be involv in the incid
for exampl in on incid an employe wa caught us a compani comput for
person us the compani had never establish comput us polici the employe had
never been formal notifi that person us of the comput wa prohibit and that the
compani had the right to inspect the content of the comput at ani time therefor when
a supervisor discov inappropri person file on the employe comput the
employe protest the act as an invas of hi privaci
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11851
thi demonstr that appropri polici can be critic in the abov circumst the
compani might have creat a situat where thei would actual need to obtain a court
order or a search warrant through a law enforc agenc just to examin the content of
their own comput
there is specif word that should be us in the construct of a search warrant
involv either comput or telecommun equip how the equip and
magnet media ar describ will be critic to the success of the court case
presearch prepar
obtain as much intellig as possibl regard ing the locat of the potenti evid is
veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit question that fraud examin
should consid might includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search in on case
approxim 17 network file server were involv with multipl router and dialup
modem a team of onli two investig would need at least four to six hour to
complet a seizur of thi magnitud
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant the time to discov that an expert
wit ha a crimin convict is befor the search warrant affidavit ha even been
written not when the wit take the stand to testifi in a crimin proceed
determin the resourc that will be requir to successfulli conduct the search if a
great deal of equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport
from the locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search in anoth case an assist district attornei
request assist in the execut of a search warrant when detect arriv thei
discov that the da want them to seiz more than 30 comput includ 3 file
server thi wa at 3 pm and the da then told the detect that the author to
execut the search warrant expir at 5 pm natur the detect could not possibl
have conduct the seizur within that time frame and in thi case the evid wa lost
a better strategi would have been to time the execut of the search warrant for 5 pm
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11852 2011 fraud examin manual
on a fridai afternoon thi would give the entir weekend to conduct the search if
necessari
search warrant affidavit construct
the construct of search warrant ha been affect by both advanc in technolog
and the evolv natur of crimin law fraud examin must now consid sever
problem not encount befor for exampl the fraud examin must know how to write
a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the fraud
examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form ie
comput storag devic such as disk or cdrom which contain inform that
cannot be view without the aid of some electron devic
the warrant must allow for such conting as the abil to seiz data file pertin to
the case that ar mix with data file that have noth to do with the case but resid on the
same storag devic the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of
all comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all
materi that is not thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might
depend on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present
to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the fraud examin
must be abl to justifi each and everi item that might contain evid for exampl state
that all printer should be seiz might be consid to be overli broad unless the fraud
examin can justifi the need for each specif printer
howev with some thought fraud examin should be abl to justifi the search and
seizur for everyth that thei need to complet the search for evid item to be seiz
might contain ani or all of the follow depend upon the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
word process equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11853
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
zip or jaz drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
floppi disk
hard disk
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digit camera storag
usb thumb drive
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
all relat document should be cover by the word of the search warrant and
seiz along with the comput system thi document could be critic in the analysi
of the system hardwar and softwar document could indic chang that have been
made to the system that will help the fraud examin avoid damag the system the fact
that access control product have been ad to the system might be a help piec of
inform for the fraud examin
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11854 2011 fraud examin manual
process evid for remov
the search for and seizur of technic equip requir specif procedur that must be
follow by fraud examin to guarante the integr of evid and to protect both the
organ and the individu fraud examin from civil litig these guidelin ar
written to satisfi the evidentiari requir for crimin prosecut and each step in the
process is there for a reason fraud examin who deviat from these guidelin should be
abl to justifi their action if call into question later
1 if possibl befor execut a search warrant where comput equip andor
magnet storag media is to be seiz try to make sure that someon will be present
who is familiar with comput equip to assist in the identif of the variou
compon
2 it is critic that anyon not involv in the investig be kept awai from ani
comput equip and not be allow to touch ani of the equip thi
includ ani person not directli involv in handl the comput and relat
equip it is possibl for a suspect or ani person touch onli on kei of a
system keyboard when a comput is oper to destroi evid limit the
number of personnel respons for process computerrel evid to
maintain the integr of thi evid
3 if the person seiz the system ha the appropri train and expertis it might be
us to observ the video displai of the system inform might be displai that
will be of valu in the case if thi occur document with a closeup photograph of the
video screen take care if us a camera with a flash that the flash doe not reflect
back into the camera len
4 if a comput or peripher is not cover by the respect search warrant leav it
alon until a supplement warrant can be obtain
5 if the comput is to be remov from the locat do not enter anyth via the
system keyboard or attempt to read inform from the system or ani associ
magnet media
6 do not move the comput ani more than is necessari until it is properli secur
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11855
even then extrem care should be taken as sudden motion could caus the
destruct of data or damag to the equip itself
7 photograph the overal view of the comput system wide view move the equip
as littl as possibl befor take thi photograph to indic how the equip wa
origin posit consid videotap the confisc procedur for complet
document of all action perform howev caution is advis sinc the video
will captur everyth that is said and done specul statement or leviti should be
restrict
8 document the state of the comput when first observ wa it oper what wa
displai on the monitor screen etc
9 depend on the experi of the person seiz the system it might be advis to
unplug the power from the central process unit cpu befor take ani further
action unplug the power at the wall outlet if access even though thi action will
lose ani data in random access memori it might prevent the comput from delet
or chang other data n o te thi appli to sta nd alon microcomput onli
and doe not includ comput connect to a local area network lan
10 turn off the power to all other compon andor piec of peripher equip
such as printer video displai crt or monitor etc be awar that mani
peripher util random access memori which can contain evid that will be
lost when power is remov
11 if possibl photograph all cabl connect usual in the rear of the system befor
disconnect
12 disconnect all compon that ar attach to an extern power suppli onli eg
from an electr wall socket etc
13 never connect or disconnect ani of the cabl of the system when the comput is
oper thi could result in physic damag to the system compon andor
peripher equip
14 label all cabl connect includ ani telephon cabl that ar connect to the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11856 2011 fraud examin manual
system so that the system can be reconstruct at a later time for analysi
15 again photograph all cabl connect befor photograph try to arrang the
cabl connector label in such a wai that thei will be visibl in the photograph
16 label each item of equip that will be confisc thi includ the cpu
monitor printer etc each item that ha a remov exterior case should be seal
with a tamperproof evid tape especi the cpu case thi will help to prevent
later alleg that compon were remov or alter
17 consider should be given to separ closeup isol photograph for each
item to be seiz these closeup shot will serv the purpos of provid more
specif identif of seiz item and respond to possibl futur alleg of
physic damag to a seiz item
18 document the locat of all item seiz which room specif locat in the room
refer to photograph the person who seiz the item serial number special
identif mark etc
19 check all disk drive to determin if thei contain a disk if so remov the disk from
the drive and place it in a disk sleev writeprotect the disk immedi label the
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from and then label a paper
bag to indic that the disk wa taken from the label drive place the disk in the
paper bag and seal it
20 place a cardboard insert or a throwawai disk into the disk drive and secur the drive
door shut to secur the drive head for transport cardboard insert ar special
made for thi purpos if none ar avail a disk of the particular size that contain
no data might be us prefer a new unus disk
21 check ani other remov storag media drive remov ani storag media thei
contain and label the media for identif purpos thi includ compon
such as optic drive extern tape drive iomega drive cdrom etc
22 if there is ani uncertainti as to what a piec of equip is do not specul just
label the equip with a uniqu identifi number and secur the item for later
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11857
analysi howev be prepar to justifi the seizur of a compon that might or
might not be cover in the search warrant
23 when all compon and cabl have been label and document disconnect the
cabl from their respect compon and secur the cabl
24 if cover in the search warrant confisc all relat manual and other
document and all magnet media also confisc ani other item that might be
evid in the case and that ar cover by the term of the search warrant
25 if at all possibl after all equip and magnet media have been label and
inventori each item should be store in a paper bag or a cardboard box and seal
to keep out dust larg item such as the cpu andor printer could be store in
larg paper bag or larg box smaller item such as disk and cd could be store
in sandwichbag size paper bag thi practic will protect these item from
unnecessari exposur to dust an addit label should be attach to the bag
identifi the content of the bag along with ani identifi number such as the
number of an evid tag note plastic bag such as garbag and sandwich
bag should not be us to store evid
26 ensur that adequ support is given to all item when thei ar be move
27 thoroughli document the inventori of everyth to be remov from the locat
thi will be requir for the search warrant return if applic but also serv to
provid a measur of liabil protect for the person seiz the system
basic comput procedur ar essenti when process evid these precaut must
be follow explicitli when work with comput
do not eat drink or smoke close to the comput system or near ani of the storag
media such as disk or cd crumb liquid andor smoke particl could all
potenti damag the equip or store data if thi happen it becom veri
difficult if not imposs to recov the data and evid
do not fold or bend disk or touch the magnet media insid the disk cover
do not write on a disk on a label of a disk or on a bag that contain a disk write on a
label and then place the label on the disk if it is necessari to write on a disk us a soft
felttip pen
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11858 2011 fraud examin manual
do not place magnet media near magnet field as thi could caus damag magnet
field strong enough to damag data ar more common than you might think
do not expos magnet media to either extrem heat or cold temperatur outsid of
the rang from 4090 degre fahrenheit can damag the data
do not fingerprint magnet media the particl of fingerprint powder ar almost
imposs to remov from the media surfac and the drive will not be abl to read the
data contain on the media perman damag to the drive equip could
also result
evid storag
after a comput system ha been seiz most crimin justic agenc have a central
evid storag facil where the equip is transport and store until it is either
process further or need in court in the major of case the special storag
requir of comput system ar not address
the storag environ should be in a locat that is
rel dustfre
both temperatur and humid control
free of magnet and electron field
possibl threat to magnet media
telephon
radio speaker
radio transmitt
copi machin
plastic garbag or sandwich bag
degauss equip
electr fan
undershelf light heat
leav media in vehicl trunk dure ex treme temperatur either hot or cold
magnet
proxim to a radiat or an open heat vent
evid analysi
the primari concern dure the analysi of electron evid is to maintain the integr of
the evid thi mean that procedur must be develop to ensur that no alleg
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11859
can be rais in court that the methodolog us dure analysi could have damag or
alter the hardwar media or data that constitut the evid
current there ar no special evid analysi laboratori avail to most crimin
justic agenc to analyz comput electron or magnet evid the us secret
servic and the fbi both have such capabl but unless the case is of critic import
these laboratori process onli case investig by those agenc
understand the term
to effect analyz the data store within a comput the fraud examin must have a
practic understand of the basic oper of a comput and how it store inform
the fraud examin must also have the expertis to access the data at the most basic level
without thi knowledg inform could be hidden from view or store within other file
or locat not usual access by the comput
each new develop in technolog bring with it new concept and a new vocabulari
the modern fraud examin must stai current on the term us to describ technolog
develop tool and practic as he mai be ask to explain such concept as part of
the engag in the result report or as an expert wit dure consequ
legal proceed
fraud examin must also be educ in the us of the variou softwar util that will
enabl them to analyz the electron data util such as norton util will be of great
assist in investig involv person comput there ar sever util
applic that autom a great deal of the evid analysi process howev you
should not us these program unless you have been properli train
evid inventori
mani time comput seiz as evid ar onli inventori accord to the inform
avail on the outsid of the cpu case name the make model and serial number of
the particular unit the compon insid the cpu case ar never examin fraud
examin must consid that there could liter be thousand of dollar of equip
insid thi case inadequ inventori of comput equip leav the organ and
possibl the fraud examin in a precari liabil posit should ani of thi equip be
damag or lost
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11860 2011 fraud examin manual
in analyz and search magnet or optic media for potenti evid the fraud
examin should consid the follow
mirror copi
viru detect
keyword search
hidden and delet file
file slack area
file signatur
encrypt file
mirror copi
if possibl the fraud examin should make an exact duplic or mirror copi of ani
media that is to be analyz thi will ensur that no chang or damag occur to the
origin evid thi will not be possibl in all case due to a lack of equip or other
resourc but should be consid as the ideal procedur
when there is no altern but to analyz the origin of the seiz evid consider
should be given to us util softwar to lock the disk so that no inform can be
written to the disk thi will protect the integr of the origin evid and prevent
inadvert alter of the origin data
viru detect
all data storag media should be examin for comput virus thi will serv not onli to
protect the fraud examin own equip but also will protect the fraud examin from
possibl alleg that he infect the seiz media with a comput viru
keyword search
due to the tremend storag capac of contemporari comput media it might be more
cost effect for the fraud examin to conduct a keyword search of the media search
for kei word name date account number etc that ar materi to the fraud case thi
will minim the amount of time us to complet the analysi and also protect the fraud
examin from possibl alleg that their search wa overli broad
hidden and delet file
most comput oper system allow file to be design as hidden file when so
design the file might not be visibl to normal search procedur such as displai a
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11861
disk directori util program exist to show these hidden file fraud examin should
inspect these file to determin if thei were intention hidden becaus thei contain
evid
in addit mani comput user do not realiz that an initi command to delet a file
doe not necessarili mean that the file content have been destroi with the appropri
util program eras file can be uneras and review by the fraud examin
file slack area
there is a differ in most oper system between the logic size of a file and the
physic size of the file the logic size pertain to the size in the number of byte that
the file occupi in a directori list thi is the number that is displai for file size
the physic size of a file depend on how the oper system store file in most
oper system the disk is organ into design block call cluster file occupi a
whole number of cluster even if the logic size of the file is smaller than the cluster size in
these case differ in space between the physic file space and the logic file space is
call the file slack area thi area might contain data from previouslyeras file that could
contain evid unless the fraud examin ha a special util to identifi and investig
the file slack area potenti evid possibl locat there could be miss
file signatur
when review a directori list in a file manag such as window explor the type
of file is on of the option that might displai thi inform might indic that the file
is an applic or that it is a word document or some other type howev thi
design is usual base on the extens of the file and might not be an accur
indic of the file content
for exampl if a file were creat in microsoft word and save with the file name of
murder confessiondoc the directori list would correctli indic that thi file wa a
word document howev if the file were renam as angelex the directori list
would mistakenli indic that the file wa an applic even though the content of the
file itself have not chang
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11862 2011 fraud examin manual
inspect each and everi file on seiz media would be tremend tediou and veri
timeconsum howev there ar util program that can autom thi process and
report ani discrep such as the on describ abov
encrypt file
should the fraud examin come across file that have been encrypt dure the analysi of
seiz comput media sever consider aris
first of all util program exist to decrypt document encrypt by mani of the more
common busi softwar applic such as microsoft word and wordperfect there
ar also sever compani who special in thi type of decrypt
secondli there is preced for forc the suspect to divulg the decrypt code through a
court order consid onc again that the comput is onli a contain and that the
encrypt is an addit lock that is prohibit the fraud examin from review the
content for potenti evid if a valid search warrant exist author the examin
of the data thi would be no differ than a court order a suspect to unlock a file cabinet
to allow the inspect of it content
