2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Conducting an Investigation Regarding Computer Crimes/Processing Evidence for Removal


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Processing Evidence for Removal 
The search for and seizure of technical equipment requires specific procedures that must be 
followed by fraud examiners to guarantee the integrity of evidence, and to protect both the 
organization and the individual fraud examiner from civil litigation. These guidelines are 
written to satisfy the evidentiary requirements for criminal prosecution, and each step in the 
process is there for a reason. Fraud examiners who deviate from these guidelines should be 
able to justify their actions if called into question later. 
 
1.  If possible, before executing a search warrant where computer equipment and/or 
magnetic storage media is to be seized, try to make sure that someone will be present 
who is familiar with computer equipment to assist in the identification of the various 
components. 
 
2.  It is critical that anyone not involved in the investigation be kept away from any 
computer equipment, and not be allowed to touch any of the equipment. This 
includes any person not directly involved in handling the computer and related 
equipment. It is possible for a suspect or any person touching only one key of a 
system keyboard (when a computer is operational) to destroy evidence. Limit the 
number of personnel responsible for processing computer-related evidence to 
maintain the integrity of this evidence.  
 
 
3.  If the person seizing the system has the appropriate training and expertise, it might be 
useful to observe the video display of the system. Information might be displayed that 
will be of value in the case. If this occurs, document with a close-up photograph of the 
video screen. (Take care if using a camera with a flash that the flash does not reflect 
back into the camera lens.) 
 
4.  If a computer or peripheral is not covered by the respective search warrant, leave it 
alone until a supplemental warrant can be obtained. 
 
5.  If the computer is to be removed from the location, do not enter anything via the 
system keyboard or attempt to read information from the system or any associated 
magnetic media. 
 
6.  Do not move the computer any more than is necessary until it is properly secured. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1855 
Even then, extreme care should be taken, as sudden motion could cause the 
destruction of data or damage to the equipment itself. 
 
7.  Photograph the overall view of the computer system (wide view). Move the equipment 
as little as possible before taking this photograph to indicate how the equipment was 
originally positioned. Consider videotaping the confiscation procedure for complete 
documentation of all actions performed. However, caution is advised, since the video 
will capture everything that is said and done. Speculative statements or levity should be 
restricted.  
 
8.  Document the state of the computer when first observed (was it operational, what was 
displayed on the monitor screen, etc.). 
 
9.  Depending on the experience of the person seizing the system, it might be advisable to 
unplug the power from the Central Processing Unit (CPU) before taking any further 
action. Unplug the power at the wall outlet, if accessible. Even though this action will 
lose any data in Random Access Memory, it might prevent the computer from deleting 
or changing other data. N O TE: This applies to sta nd alone microcomputers only, 
and does not include computers connected to a Local Area Network (LAN). 
 
10.  Turn off the power to all other components and/or pieces of peripheral equipment 
(such as printers, video display CRTs, or monitors, etc.). Be aware that many 
peripherals utilize Random Access Memory, which can contain evidence that will be 
lost when power is removed. 
 
11.  If possible, photograph all cable connections (usually in the rear of the system), before 
disconnecting. 
 
12.  Disconnect all components that are attached to an external power supply only (e.g., 
from an electrical wall socket, etc.). 
 
13.  Never connect or disconnect any of the cables of the system when the computer is 
operating. This could result in physical damage to the system components and/or 
peripheral equipment. 
 
14.  Label all cable connections, including any telephone cables that are connected to the 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1856                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
system so that the system can be reconstructed at a later time for analysis. 
 
15.  Again, photograph all cable connections. Before photographing, try to arrange the 
cable connector labels in such a way that they will be visible in the photographs. 
 
16.  Label each item of equipment that will be confiscated. This includes the CPU, 
monitor, printers, etc. Each item that has a removable exterior case should be sealed 
with a tamperproof evidence tape (especially the CPU case). This will help to prevent 
later allegations that components were removed or altered. 
 
17.  Consideration should be given to separate close-up isolation photographs for each 
item to be seized. These close-up shots will serve the purpose of providing more 
specific identification of seized items, and responding to possible future allegations of 
physical damage to a seized item. 
 
18.  Document the location of all items seized (which room, specific location in the room, 
reference to photographs, the person who seized the item, serial numbers, special 
identification markings, etc.). 
 
19.  Check all disk drives to determine if they contain a disk. If so, remove the disk from 
the drive and place it in a disk sleeve. Write-protect the disk immediately. Label the 
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from, and then label a paper 
bag to indicate that the disk was taken from the labeled drive. Place the disk in the 
paper bag and seal it. 
 
20.  Place a cardboard insert or a “throwaway” disk  into the disk drive and secure the drive 
door shut to secure the drive heads for transportation. Cardboard inserts are specially 
made for this purpose. If none are available, a disk of the particular size that contains 
no data might be used (preferably a new, unused disk). 
 
21.  Check any other removable storage media drives, remove any storage media they 
contain, and label the media for identification purposes. (This includes components 
such as optical drives, external tape drives, IOMEGA drives, CD-ROM, etc.) 
 
22.  If there is any uncertainty as to what a piece of equipment is, do not speculate, just 
label the equipment with a unique identifying number and secure the item for later 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1857 
analysis. However, be prepared to justify the seizure of a component that might or 
might not be covered in the search warrant. 
 
23.  When all components and cables have been labeled and documented, disconnect the 
cables from their respective component and secure the cables.  
 
24.  If covered in the search warrant, confiscate all related manuals and other 
documentation, and all magnetic media. Also confiscate any other items that might be 
evidence in the case and that are covered by the terms of the search warrant. 
 
25.  If at all possible, after all equipment and magnetic media have been labeled and 
inventoried, each item should be stored in a paper bag or a cardboard box and sealed 
(to keep out dust). Large items, such as the CPU and/or printers could be stored in 
large paper bags or large boxes. Smaller items, such as disks and CDs, could be stored 
in sandwich-bag sized paper bags. This practice will protect these items from 
unnecessary exposure to dust. An additional label should be attached to the bag 
identifying the contents of the bag, along with any identifying numbers, such as the 
number of an evidence tag. Note: Plastic bags (such as garbage and sandwich 
bags) should not be used to store evidence.  
 
26.  Ensure that adequate support is given to all items when they are being moved. 
 
27.  Thoroughly document the inventory of everything to be removed from the location. 
This will be required for the search warrant return (if applicable), but also serves to 
provide a measure of liability protection for the person seizing the system.  
 
Basic computer procedures are essential when processing evidence. These precautions must 
be followed explicitly when working with computers: 
• Do not eat, drink, or smoke close to the computer system or near any of the storage 
media (such as disks or CDs). Crumbs, liquid, and/or smoke particles could all 
potentially damage the equipment or stored data. If this happens, it becomes very 
difficult, if not impossible, to recover the data (and evidence). 
• Do not fold or bend disks, or touch the magnetic media inside the disk cover. 
• Do not write on a disk, on a label of a disk, or on a bag that contains a disk. Write on a 
label and then place the label on the disk. If it is necessary to write on a disk, use a soft 
felt-tip pen. 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1858                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Do not  place magnetic media near magnetic fields, as this could cause damage. Magnetic 
fields strong enough to damage data are more common than you might think. 
• Do not expose magnetic media to either extreme heat or cold. Temperatures outside of 
the range from 40-90 degrees Fahrenheit can damage the data. 
• Do not fingerprint magnetic media. The particles of fingerprint powder are almost 
impossible to remove from the media surface, and the drive will not be able to read the 
data contained on the media. Permanent damage to the drive equipment could  
also result. 
 



:


process evid for remov
the search for and seizur of technic equip requir specif procedur that must be
follow by fraud examin to guarante the integr of evid and to protect both the
organ and the individu fraud examin from civil litig these guidelin ar
written to satisfi the evidentiari requir for crimin prosecut and each step in the
process is there for a reason fraud examin who deviat from these guidelin should be
abl to justifi their action if call into question later
1 if possibl befor execut a search warrant where comput equip andor
magnet storag media is to be seiz try to make sure that someon will be present
who is familiar with comput equip to assist in the identif of the variou
compon
2 it is critic that anyon not involv in the investig be kept awai from ani
comput equip and not be allow to touch ani of the equip thi
includ ani person not directli involv in handl the comput and relat
equip it is possibl for a suspect or ani person touch onli on kei of a
system keyboard when a comput is oper to destroi evid limit the
number of personnel respons for process computerrel evid to
maintain the integr of thi evid
3 if the person seiz the system ha the appropri train and expertis it might be
us to observ the video displai of the system inform might be displai that
will be of valu in the case if thi occur document with a closeup photograph of the
video screen take care if us a camera with a flash that the flash doe not reflect
back into the camera len
4 if a comput or peripher is not cover by the respect search warrant leav it
alon until a supplement warrant can be obtain
5 if the comput is to be remov from the locat do not enter anyth via the
system keyboard or attempt to read inform from the system or ani associ
magnet media
6 do not move the comput ani more than is necessari until it is properli secur
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11855
even then extrem care should be taken as sudden motion could caus the
destruct of data or damag to the equip itself
7 photograph the overal view of the comput system wide view move the equip
as littl as possibl befor take thi photograph to indic how the equip wa
origin posit consid videotap the confisc procedur for complet
document of all action perform howev caution is advis sinc the video
will captur everyth that is said and done specul statement or leviti should be
restrict
8 document the state of the comput when first observ wa it oper what wa
displai on the monitor screen etc
9 depend on the experi of the person seiz the system it might be advis to
unplug the power from the central process unit cpu befor take ani further
action unplug the power at the wall outlet if access even though thi action will
lose ani data in random access memori it might prevent the comput from delet
or chang other data n o te thi appli to sta nd alon microcomput onli
and doe not includ comput connect to a local area network lan
10 turn off the power to all other compon andor piec of peripher equip
such as printer video displai crt or monitor etc be awar that mani
peripher util random access memori which can contain evid that will be
lost when power is remov
11 if possibl photograph all cabl connect usual in the rear of the system befor
disconnect
12 disconnect all compon that ar attach to an extern power suppli onli eg
from an electr wall socket etc
13 never connect or disconnect ani of the cabl of the system when the comput is
oper thi could result in physic damag to the system compon andor
peripher equip
14 label all cabl connect includ ani telephon cabl that ar connect to the
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11856 2011 fraud examin manual
system so that the system can be reconstruct at a later time for analysi
15 again photograph all cabl connect befor photograph try to arrang the
cabl connector label in such a wai that thei will be visibl in the photograph
16 label each item of equip that will be confisc thi includ the cpu
monitor printer etc each item that ha a remov exterior case should be seal
with a tamperproof evid tape especi the cpu case thi will help to prevent
later alleg that compon were remov or alter
17 consider should be given to separ closeup isol photograph for each
item to be seiz these closeup shot will serv the purpos of provid more
specif identif of seiz item and respond to possibl futur alleg of
physic damag to a seiz item
18 document the locat of all item seiz which room specif locat in the room
refer to photograph the person who seiz the item serial number special
identif mark etc
19 check all disk drive to determin if thei contain a disk if so remov the disk from
the drive and place it in a disk sleev writeprotect the disk immedi label the
particular disk drive to show which drive the disk came from and then label a paper
bag to indic that the disk wa taken from the label drive place the disk in the
paper bag and seal it
20 place a cardboard insert or a throwawai disk into the disk drive and secur the drive
door shut to secur the drive head for transport cardboard insert ar special
made for thi purpos if none ar avail a disk of the particular size that contain
no data might be us prefer a new unus disk
21 check ani other remov storag media drive remov ani storag media thei
contain and label the media for identif purpos thi includ compon
such as optic drive extern tape drive iomega drive cdrom etc
22 if there is ani uncertainti as to what a piec of equip is do not specul just
label the equip with a uniqu identifi number and secur the item for later
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11857
analysi howev be prepar to justifi the seizur of a compon that might or
might not be cover in the search warrant
23 when all compon and cabl have been label and document disconnect the
cabl from their respect compon and secur the cabl
24 if cover in the search warrant confisc all relat manual and other
document and all magnet media also confisc ani other item that might be
evid in the case and that ar cover by the term of the search warrant
25 if at all possibl after all equip and magnet media have been label and
inventori each item should be store in a paper bag or a cardboard box and seal
to keep out dust larg item such as the cpu andor printer could be store in
larg paper bag or larg box smaller item such as disk and cd could be store
in sandwichbag size paper bag thi practic will protect these item from
unnecessari exposur to dust an addit label should be attach to the bag
identifi the content of the bag along with ani identifi number such as the
number of an evid tag note plastic bag such as garbag and sandwich
bag should not be us to store evid
26 ensur that adequ support is given to all item when thei ar be move
27 thoroughli document the inventori of everyth to be remov from the locat
thi will be requir for the search warrant return if applic but also serv to
provid a measur of liabil protect for the person seiz the system
basic comput procedur ar essenti when process evid these precaut must
be follow explicitli when work with comput
do not eat drink or smoke close to the comput system or near ani of the storag
media such as disk or cd crumb liquid andor smoke particl could all
potenti damag the equip or store data if thi happen it becom veri
difficult if not imposs to recov the data and evid
do not fold or bend disk or touch the magnet media insid the disk cover
do not write on a disk on a label of a disk or on a bag that contain a disk write on a
label and then place the label on the disk if it is necessari to write on a disk us a soft
felttip pen
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11858 2011 fraud examin manual
do not place magnet media near magnet field as thi could caus damag magnet
field strong enough to damag data ar more common than you might think
do not expos magnet media to either extrem heat or cold temperatur outsid of
the rang from 4090 degre fahrenheit can damag the data
do not fingerprint magnet media the particl of fingerprint powder ar almost
imposs to remov from the media surfac and the drive will not be abl to read the
data contain on the media perman damag to the drive equip could
also result
