2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Crime Laws


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Computer Crime Laws 
 
International Law 
With a global communications network such as the Internet, the odds have dramatically 
increased that a crime may have been perpetrated in a foreign nation, or that records related 
to a portion of the communications transmission may have passed through another country. 
This can cause tremendous complications for a fraud examiner attempting to pursue his 
investigation. 
 
Victims of scams originating overseas usually find themselves with virtually no recourse. 
Recent computer equipment and software scam operations in former communist nations 
have specifically targeted U.S. users. Language, communication, and distance obstacles are 
nearly insurmountable in working with foreign law enforcement officials to resolve such 
cases. In the future, greater international cooperation will be necessary to combat 
international high tech crime.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1863 
Recently, however, the U.S. has taken two substantial steps to combat the inconsistency in 
international laws pertaining to computer fraud. First, on September 29, 2006, the United 
States became a party to the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, which “is the 
only legally binding multilateral instrument specifically addressing computer-related crime, 
helping protect citizens against computer hacking and Internet fraud, as well as crimes 
involving electronic evidence.” Parties to the Convention are committed to harmonizing 
national laws, to improving investigative techniques, and to increasing cooperation.  
 
Second, the U.S. is an active participant in the Subgroup on High-Tech Crime at G8’s Lyon 
Group, which was created “to enhance the abilities of G8 countries to prevent, investigate, 
and prosecute crimes involving computers, networked communications, and other new 
technologies.” One significant accomplishment of the Subgroup was the creation of a 
network that allows law enforcement authorities of member nations to receive rapid 
cooperation in investigating computer crime. 
 
Federal Laws 
There are many laws that can be used to prosecute computer crimes and frauds. In the 
United States, the basic laws used to prosecute computer and other high tech crimes are 
divided into the federal laws and state laws.  
 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1030) 
Most computer crimes are prosecuted under traditional fraud, theft, and embezzlement 
statutes. A statute enacted in 1984, Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1030, makes certain 
computer-related activity a specific federal offense. More information on section 1030 is set 
out in the “Law Related to Fraud” chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
In brief, section 1030(a) prohibits seven acts involving “protected computers.”  
 
A protected computer, under this section, includes: 
• A computer that is used exclusively by a financial institution or the United States 
government. 
• Any computer the use of which affects a computer used by a financial institution or the 
federal government. 
• A computer that is used in interstate or foreign commerce or communication. 
 
Briefly, section 1030(a) prohibits using a protected computer:  
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1864                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To commit espionage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(1));  
• To obtain, without authorization, certain government, financial institution, or 
commercial information (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2)); 
• To access, without authorization, a government computer (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(3)); 
• To commit fraud ((18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(4));  
• To transmit a program, code, or command to damage a protected computer or to access 
a protected computer that results in damage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(5)) 
• For trafficking in passwords (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(6)); 
• To transmit extortionate threats (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(7).  
 
Sections 1030(a)(5) and 1030(a)(4) are discussed in further detail below.  
 
COMPUTER FRAUD (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 1030(a)(4)) 
As noted above, section 1030(a)(4) outlaws fraud involving protected computers. There are 
three elements of the crime, which include: 
• Knowingly accessing a protected computer without authorization (or exceeding 
authorization); 
• With the intent to defraud; and  
• Thereby obtaining anything of value (more than $5,000 over the course of a year). 
 
CAUSING COMPUTER DAMAGE (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE SECTION 1030(a)(5)) 
Section 1030(a)(5), which applies to computers used in interstate or foreign commerce or 
communication, outlaws causing computer damage. But it contains two categories of 
offense, depending on intent. The first category provides that it is illegal to knowingly 
transmit a program, code, or command that intentionally causes damage a protected 
computer. This offense applies even if the individual had authorization to access the 
computer.  
 
The second category provides that it is illegal to access a protected computer, without 
authorization, that results in damage. Unlike the first category, this offense does not require 
intent to damage, only the intent to access the information.  
 
Unlawful actions under the first category of section 1030(a)(5) violations include 
imprisonment up to one year and/or a fine. Violators under the second category of section 
1030(a)(5) may receive up to five years imprisonment (not more than 10 years for repeat 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1865 
offenders) and/or a fine. Both categories provide a civil remedy for any person who suffers 
damage as a result of a violation of section 1030(a)(5).  
 
To apply, section 1030(a)(5) requires that the defendant’s conduct “cause” damage to a 
computer. Due to its broadness, the definition allows section 1030(a)(5) to apply in various 
situations, including instances where an act causes information to be deleted or changed, 
where an intruder alters the way a computer operates, or where an act makes information 
unavailable. Even if an intruder did not make any alterations and the computer system works 
as it did before, some courts have ruled that accessing and copying private data from 
protected computers may cause damage to the data under section 1035(a)(5).  
 
PENALTIES   
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act provides both criminal and civil liability. Section 1030 
includes criminal punishment provisions; however, it provides different penalties, depending 
on the specific conduct. The Act also provides civil remedies for individuals that suffered 
damages resulting from section 1030 violations. 
 
Can-Spam Act (Title 18, U.S. Code Section 1037) 
The Can-Spam Act, or the Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and 
Marketing Act, attempts to reduce the amount of unsolicited commercial e-mail, which is 
also known as spam, by establishing national standards for sending e-mail solicitations. To 
reduce the amount of spam, the Can-Spam Act provides several provisions that apply to 
individuals or companies sending spam. More specifically, the Act prohibits several 
deceptive and/or fraudulent practices commonly used in spam, including the prohibition of 
using deceptive subject lines, using deceptive header information, and requiring sender 
identification. Penalties under the Can-Spam Act include punishment by a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
Access Device Fraud (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1029) 
Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1029, criminalizes the production, use, trafficking, or possession 
of unauthorized or counterfeit access devices. Access devices are devices that allow access to 
account funds. Most importantly, section 1029 proh ibits the fraudulent use of credit cards. 
However, because Congress broadly defined the term “access devices,” section 1029 also 
applies to crimes using other access device numbers, including debit cards, ATM cards, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), computer passwords, “or any other thing of value, 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1866                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
or that can be used to initiate a transfer of funds (other than a transfer originated solely by 
paper instrument).” 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1028) 
As discussed in the Consumer Fraud section, the growth of identity theft led Congress to 
pass the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act, which makes identity theft a federal 
crime. This Act outlaws the intentional and unauthorized use of another individual’s 
identification, with the intent to commit a crime. The Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act carries a maximum term of 15 years’ imprisonment, a fine, and criminal 
forfeiture of any personal property used or intended to be used to commit the offense. The 
penalty is increased to imprisonment of up to 30 years if the offense is committed to 
facilitate an act of terrorism.  
 
Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property (ITSP) (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 2314) 
The ITSP statute prohibits the transportation, transmittal, or transfer of fraudulently 
received goods, wares, merchandise, securities, or money in interstate or foreign commerce, 
when valued at $5,000 or more. Prosecutors of ten use the ITSP statute in fraud prosecutions 
in conjunction with mail fraud counts, wire fraud counts, or to provide federal jurisdiction in 
their absence. To apply, the ITSP statute requires that an individual transport the proceeds, 
which must value at least $5,000, across state lin es. Defendants also violate the statute if they 
induce their victim(s) to travel in interstate commerce as part of the scheme to defraud. 
Courts may aggregate items valued at less than $5,000 as part of the same scheme to meet 
the value requirement. 
 
Additionally, it is clear that section 2314 applies when defendants steal tangible items, which 
qualify as goods, wares, or merchandise, that contains intellectual property. However, courts 
have had varying opinions on the characterization of intellectual property as “goods, wares, 
merchandise, securities, or money” when an individual steals intangible property through 
intangible means.  
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986  
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, governs the illegal interception of electronic 
communication and the unauthorized access of electronically stored data. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1867 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, the Stored Communications Act, and 
the Pen Register Act, which regulates pen registers and trap and trace devices. This section, 
however, focuses on the Wiretap Act and the Stored Communications Act. 
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTIONS 2510-2521) 
In response to privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, which prohibits anyone 
from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, oral, or electronic 
communication. 
  
Focusing on its applicability to computer fraud, the Wiretap Act prohibits the intentional 
interception of certain electronic communications, including e-mail; it does not govern 
stored communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of 
the contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts 
have held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Additionally, most courts agree that interception does not occur when an individual obtains 
access to an electronically stored copy of the communication, “whether such storage occurs 
pre- or post-delivery, and even if the storage lasts only a few milliseconds.” As a result, the 
Wiretap Act is often inadequate to protect electronic communications sent over the Internet.  
 
The Wiretap Act also contains several exceptions to prosecution, including the consent 
exception, which provides that parties to the communication may authorize others to 
intercept the transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees.  
  
STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 2701) 
As part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Congress enacted the Stored 
Communications Act (SCA) to protect stored electronic communications, such as e-mail, 
and voicemail by prohibiting the unauthorized access of such communications that are in 
storage. More specifically, the SCA prohibits unlawful access to a facility, which provides an 
electronic communication service, and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1868                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
access to a wire or electronic communication while it is electronically stored in such  
a system.  
 
Unlike interception under the Wiretap Act, an electronic communication falls under the SCA 
once a system receives and stores it. However, like the Wiretap Act, the SCA includes a 
consent exception. Under this exception, a service provider may disclose electronic 
communications with the lawful consent of the originator, an addressee, or the intended 
recipient.  
 
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment for 
up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for not more than 10 years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, courts may impose a 
fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all subsequent convictions, 
courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to 10 years. 
 
Mail and Wire Fraud (Title 18, U. S. Code, Sections 1341 and 1343) 
As discussed above, a computer may be the tool used to commit traditional crimes, including 
mail and wire fraud. Due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statutes, prosecutors 
may use these traditional criminal statutes to prosecute computer fraud. In basic terms, the 
laws prohibit the use of mails or wires, including the Internet, in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property.  
 
Several cases have held that the federal mail and wire fraud statues apply to computer fraud. 
Furthermore, prosecutors may use these statutes in addition to or in lieu of cases that 
implicate trade secrets; counterfeit or illicit labels; counterfeit documentation or packaging; 
or counterfeit trademarks, service marks, or certification marks. However, courts disagree on 
whether the mail and wire fraud statutes reach criminal copyright infringement.  
 
Penalties under the mail and wire fraud statues include fines, imprisonment up to five years, 
or both. However, if the violation affects a financial institution, the violator may receive 
fines up to $1,000,000, imprisonment up to thirty years, or both.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1869 
False Statements (Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 1001) 
Prosecutors most often use section 1001 to prosecute false statements made to law 
enforcement or regulatory officials, not made under oath, in the course of an official 
investigation, or on an application for such things as federal employment, credit, and visa 
applications. Prosecutors may also use section 1001 in lieu of the misdemeanor provisions of 
the IRS Code for filing false documents with tax returns.  
 
Section 1001 violations may implicate other federal laws, including computer fraud (18 
U.S.C. 1030(a)(4) and Internet Fraud (e.g., auction fraud or “phishing”) by making false 
statements in any matter within the jurisdiction of the government. 
 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (Title 18, U.S. Code, Sections 1831-183 9) 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA) makes the theft of trade secrets a federal 
criminal offense. The EEA outlaws two types of trade secret misappropriation: section 1831 
criminalizes economic espionage, which is the theft of a trade secret to benefit a foreign 
government, instrumentality, or agent; and section 1832 criminalizes the theft of commercial 
trade secrets to obtain an economic advantage.  
 
Sections 1831 and 1832 provide significant penalties for trade secret violations. If done to 
benefit a foreign government, the theft of trade secrets is punishable by up to fifteen years 
imprisonment and up to a $500,000 fine. Trade secret theft for commercial benefit is 
punishable by up to 10 years imprisonment and up to a $250,000 fine. The EEA, however, 
does not provide any civil remedies. 
 
Additionally, prosecutors can apply the EEA to a wide variety of misconduct because it 
criminalizes attempts and conspiracies to violate the EEA. The same penalties apply to these 
offenses with increased penalties if the trade secret misappropriation benefits a foreign 
government, foreign instrumentality, or a foreign agent.  
 
Moreover, the EEA authorizes the Attorney General to commence a civil action seeking 
injunctive relief to prevent further disclosure of a trade secret by the defendant or third 
parties.   
 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1870                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal Infringement of a Copyright (Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 506 and Title 18, U.S. Code, Section 2319) 
Title 17, U.S. Code, section 506, criminalizes willful copyright infringement and defines what 
conduct is prohibited, while Title 18, U.S. Code, section 2319, imposes the criminal 
punishment for a copyright infringement conviction, which is to be added to any other 
penalties imposed by other provisions or laws. 
 
Copyright law grants copyright holders six exclusive rights to their works, including the right 
to reproduction. Generally, infringement occurs if an individual exercises any one of the 
copyright holder’s exclusive rights without authorization or other legal authority. However, 
not all infringements are criminal offenses. Instead, section 506 provides that copyright 
infringement is criminal if an individual willfully reproduces or distributes, for commercial 
advantage or private financial gain, one or more copies of copyrighted works totaling in 
retail value $1,000 or more.  
 
Section 2319 imposes punishment for both felony and misdemeanor crimes. Felony 
penalties attach when the infringement consists of the reproduction or distribution of 10 or 
more copies of copyrighted works within 180 days that, taken together, are worth more than 
$2,500, or when the violation involves distribution of a “work being prepared for 
commercial distribution” over “a computer network accessible to members of the public.” 
Alternatively, misdemeanor crimes attach when the infringement consisted of any of  
the following: 
• Infringement of reproduction or distribution rights for private financial gain or 
commercial advantage, regardless of the exact volume or value of the infringement;  
• Infringement of reproduction or distribution rights of one or more copies of 
copyrighted works within 180 days that are worth a total retail value of $1,000 or more, 
and it does not involve private financial gain or commercial advantage; or  
• Infringement of rights other than reproduction or distribution for private financial gain 
or commercial advantage 
 
In 1997, President Clinton signed The No Electronic Theft Act into law, which amended the 
copyright laws to prohibit electronic infringements and extended the copyright infringement 
to include acts that do not necessarily give rise to a profit.  
 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1871 
Limitations on Exclusive Rights: Computer Programs (Title 17, U.S. Code, Section 117) 
Although copyright laws provide copyright holders the exclusive right to reproduction, this 
right is subject to a number of limitations, including section 117, which allows the copying of 
copyrighted software in limited circumstances. Under section 117, the owner of a copy of a 
computer program is allowed to make additional copies of such program in two instances. 
First, owners may copy a computer program if it is necessary for the use of the computer 
program. Second, users may make a copy for archival purposes to prevent loss due to hard 
drive failures and the like.  
 
Even though the law authorizes copies made under section 117’s limitations, there are 
restrictions. All copies must be destroyed when the possession of a computer program 
ceases to be deemed rightful. Furthermore, any copies made in accordance with this section 
may be transferred but must be accompanied by the original program from which copies 
were made and with all rights in the program. 
 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (Title 17, U.S. Code, Sections 1201-1205) 
The advent of the Internet and digital media has led to an increase in intellectual copyright 
infringement. In response to this development, Congress enacted the Digital Millennium 
Copyright Act of 1998 (DMCA). The DMCA outlaws the use of computers (and other 
electronic devices) to infringe against copyright holders’ exclusive rights. To further this goal, 
the DMCA provides liability limitations for transmitting copyrighted material online. The 
DMCA also provides criminal penalties for circumventing copyright protection systems, 
which are set forth in section 1201, and for compromising the integrity of copyright 
management information pursuant to section 1202.  
 
Violations under either section 1201 or 1202  are subject to a maximum of five years 
imprisonment, up to $500,000 fine, or both. Subsequent offenses are subject to a maximum 
of 10 years, a maximum fine of $1,000,000, or both. 
 
Electronic Fund Transfers: Criminal Liability (Title 15, U.S. Code, Section 1693n) 
Congress designed this legislation to allow consumers the ease and benefit of electronic fund 
transfer, while defining the rights and liabilities of the parties involved in such transactions. 
Section 1693n applies to paperless money transfers between accounts, including ATM 
transactions, debit and credit card transactions, point-of-sale (POS) debit transactions, 
telephone transfers, and, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1872                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
any “other electronic banking transactions that can result in the withdrawal of cash from 
your bank account.” 
 
In particular, this statute attaches criminal liability to the acts of: 
• Giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations; or 
• Failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations. 
 
It also prohibits certain actions affecting commerce, including: 
• Using, attempting to use, or conspiring to use any fraudulently obtained debit 
instrument, with knowledge of fraudulent character, to obtain anything with an 
aggregating value of at least $1,000 within a one-year period; or 
• Transporting, attempting to transport, or conspiring to transport a fraudulent debit 
instrument with unlawful or fraudulent intent, and knowledge; or 
• Selling or transporting in interstate or foreign commerce of any fraudulent debit 
instrument, with knowledge; or 
• Receiving, concealing, using, or transporting anything that is proceeds from a fraudulent 
activity and that has a value exceeding $1,000 within any one-year period; or  
• Receiving, concealing, using, selling, or transporting of one or more tickets for interstate 
or foreign transportation that have a value aggregating $500 or more and were obtained 
by use of a fraudulent debit instrument; or 
• Furnishing money, property, services, or anything else of value, aggregating  
$1,000 or more within a one-year period, in  conjunction with the use of a fraudulent 
debit instrument.  
 
State Laws 
At the state level, statutes that might be of use in prosecuting computer crimes would 
include the penal code violations of larceny (in its many forms), false pretenses, forgery, 
fraud, embezzlement, vandalism, property destruction, malicious mischief, proprietary 
information, theft, commercial bribery, and extortion. But most states now expressly provide 
penalties for crimes perpetrated by use of computers or perpetrated against computers. See 
the Law section for a complete listing of state computer fraud statutes. 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1873 



:


comput crime law
intern law
with a global commun network such as the internet the odd have dramat
increas that a crime mai have been perpetr in a foreign nation or that record relat
to a portion of the commun transmiss mai have pass through anoth countri
thi can caus tremend complic for a fraud examin attempt to pursu hi
investig
victim of scam origin oversea usual find themselv with virtual no recours
recent comput equip and softwar scam oper in former communist nation
have specif target us user languag commun and distanc obstacl ar
nearli insurmount in work with foreign law enforc offici to resolv such
case in the futur greater intern cooper will be necessari to combat
intern high tech crime
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11863
recent howev the us ha taken two substanti step to combat the inconsist in
intern law pertain to comput fraud first on septemb 29 2006 the unit
state becam a parti to the council of europ convent on cybercrim which is the
onli legal bind multilater instrument specif address computerrel crime
help protect citizen against comput hack and internet fraud as well as crime
involv electron evid parti to the convent ar commit to harmon
nation law to improv investig techniqu and to increas cooper
second the us is an activ particip in the subgroup on hightech crime at g8 lyon
group which wa creat to enhanc the abil of g8 countri to prevent investig
and prosecut crime involv comput network commun and other new
technolog on signific accomplish of the subgroup wa the creation of a
network that allow law enforc author of member nation to receiv rapid
cooper in investig comput crime
feder law
there ar mani law that can be us to prosecut comput crime and fraud in the
unit state the basic law us to prosecut comput and other high tech crime ar
divid into the feder law and state law
comput fraud and abus act titl 18 us code section 1030
most comput crime ar prosecut under tradit fraud theft and embezzl
statut a statut enact in 1984 titl 18 us code section 1030 make certain
computerrel activ a specif feder offens more inform on section 1030 is set
out in the law relat to fraud chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
in brief section 1030a prohibit seven act involv protect comput
a protect comput under thi section includ
a comput that is us exclus by a financi institut or the unit state
govern
ani comput the us of which affect a comput us by a financi institut or the
feder govern
a comput that is us in interst or foreign commerc or commun
briefli section 1030a prohibit us a protect comput
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11864 2011 fraud examin manual
to commit espionag 18 usc 1030a1
to obtain without author certain govern financi institut or
commerci inform 18 usc 1030a2
to access without author a govern comput 18 usc 1030a3
to commit fraud 18 usc 1030a4
to transmit a program code or command to damag a protect comput or to access
a protect comput that result in damag 18 usc 1030a5
for traffick in password 18 usc 1030a6
to transmit extortion threat 18 usc 1030a7
section 1030a5 and 1030a4 ar discuss in further detail below
comput fraud titl 18 us code section 1030a4
as note abov section 1030a4 outlaw fraud involv protect comput there ar
three element of the crime which includ
knowingli access a protect comput without author or exceed
author
with the intent to defraud and
therebi obtain anyth of valu more than 5000 over the cours of a year
caus comput damag titl 18 us code section 1030a5
section 1030a5 which appli to comput us in interst or foreign commerc or
commun outlaw caus comput damag but it contain two categori of
offens depend on intent the first categori provid that it is illeg to knowingli
transmit a program code or command that intention caus damag a protect
comput thi offens appli even if the individu had author to access the
comput
the second categori provid that it is illeg to access a protect comput without
author that result in damag unlik the first categori thi offens doe not requir
intent to damag onli the intent to access the inform
unlaw action under the first categori of section 1030a5 violat includ
imprison up to on year andor a fine violat under the second categori of section
1030a5 mai receiv up to five year imprison not more than 10 year for repeat
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11865
offend andor a fine both categori provid a civil remedi for ani person who suffer
damag as a result of a violat of section 1030a5
to appli section 1030a5 requir that the defend conduct caus damag to a
comput due to it broad the definit allow section 1030a5 to appli in variou
situat includ instanc where an act caus inform to be delet or chang
where an intrud alter the wai a comput oper or where an act make inform
unavail even if an intrud did not make ani alter and the comput system work
as it did befor some court have rule that access and copi privat data from
protect comput mai caus damag to the data under section 1035a5
penalti
the comput fraud and abus act provid both crimin and civil liabil section 1030
includ crimin punish provis howev it provid differ penalti depend
on the specif conduct the act also provid civil remedi for individu that suffer
damag result from section 1030 violat
canspam act titl 18 us code section 1037
the canspam act or the control the assault of nonsolicit pornographi and
market act attempt to reduc the amount of unsolicit commerci email which is
also known as spam by establish nation standard for send email solicit to
reduc the amount of spam the canspam act provid sever provis that appli to
individu or compani send spam more specif the act prohibit sever
decept andor fraudul practic commonli us in spam includ the prohibit of
us decept subject line us decept header inform and requir sender
identif penalti under the canspam act includ punish by a fine andor
imprison for not more than five year
access devic fraud titl 18 us code section 1029
titl 18 us code section 1029 crimin the product us traffick or possess
of unauthor or counterfeit access devic access devic ar devic that allow access to
account fund most importantli section 1029 proh ibit the fraudul us of credit card
howev becaus congress broadli defin the term access devic section 1029 also
appli to crime us other access devic number includ debit card atm card
person identif number pin comput password or ani other thing of valu
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11866 2011 fraud examin manual
or that can be us to initi a transfer of fund other than a transfer origin sole by
paper instrument
ident theft and assumpt deterr act of 1998 titl 18 us code section 1028
as discuss in the consum fraud section the growth of ident theft led congress to
pass the ident theft and assumpt deterr act which make ident theft a feder
crime thi act outlaw the intent and unauthor us of anoth individu
identif with the intent to commit a crime the ident theft and assumpt
deterr act carri a maximum term of 15 year imprison a fine and crimin
forfeitur of ani person properti us or intend to be us to commit the offens the
penalti is increas to imprison of up to 30 year if the offens is commit to
facilit an act of terror
interst transport of stolen properti itsp titl 18 us code section 2314
the itsp statut prohibit the transport transmitt or transfer of fraudul
receiv good ware merchandis secur or monei in interst or foreign commerc
when valu at 5000 or more prosecutor of ten us the itsp statut in fraud prosecut
in conjunct with mail fraud count wire fraud count or to provid feder jurisdict in
their absenc to appli the itsp statut requir that an individu transport the proce
which must valu at least 5000 across state lin es defend also violat the statut if thei
induc their victim to travel in interst commerc as part of the scheme to defraud
court mai aggreg item valu at less than 5000 as part of the same scheme to meet
the valu requir
addition it is clear that section 2314 appli when defend steal tangibl item which
qualifi as good ware or merchandis that contain intellectu properti howev court
have had vari opinion on the character of intellectu properti as good ware
merchandis secur or monei when an individu steal intang properti through
intang mean
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 govern the illeg intercept of electron
commun and the unauthor access of electron store data
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11867
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act the store commun act and
the pen regist act which regul pen regist and trap and trace devic thi section
howev focus on the wiretap act and the store commun act
the wiretap act titl 18 us code section 25102521
in respons to privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act which prohibit anyon
from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire oral or electron
commun
focus on it applic to comput fraud the wiretap act prohibit the intent
intercept of certain electron commun includ email it doe not govern
store commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of
the content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court
have held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
addition most court agre that intercept doe not occur when an individu obtain
access to an electron store copi of the commun whether such storag occur
pre or postdeliveri and even if the storag last onli a few millisecond as a result the
wiretap act is often inadequ to protect electron commun sent over the internet
the wiretap act also contain sever except to prosecut includ the consent
except which provid that parti to the commun mai author other to
intercept the transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
store commun act titl 18 us code section 2701
as part of the electron commun privaci act congress enact the store
commun act sca to protect store electron commun such as email
and voicemail by prohibit the unauthor access of such commun that ar in
storag more specif the sca prohibit unlaw access to a facil which provid an
electron commun servic and then obtain alter or prevent author
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11868 2011 fraud examin manual
access to a wire or electron commun while it is electron store in such
a system
unlik intercept under the wiretap act an electron commun fall under the sca
onc a system receiv and store it howev like the wiretap act the sca includ a
consent except under thi except a servic provid mai disclos electron
commun with the law consent of the origin an addresse or the intend
recipi
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison for
up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor imprison
for not more than 10 year in ani other case where it is a first offens court mai impos a
fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all subsequ convict
court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to 10 year
mail and wire fraud titl 18 u s code section 1341 and 1343
as discuss abov a comput mai be the tool us to commit tradit crime includ
mail and wire fraud due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statut prosecutor
mai us these tradit crimin statut to prosecut comput fraud in basic term the
law prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti
sever case have held that the feder mail and wire fraud statu appli to comput fraud
furthermor prosecutor mai us these statut in addit to or in lieu of case that
implic trade secret counterfeit or illicit label counterfeit document or packag
or counterfeit trademark servic mark or certif mark howev court disagre on
whether the mail and wire fraud statut reach crimin copyright infring
penalti under the mail and wire fraud statu includ fine imprison up to five year
or both howev if the violat affect a financi institut the violat mai receiv
fine up to 1000000 imprison up to thirti year or both
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11869
fals statement titl 18 us code section 1001
prosecutor most often us section 1001 to prosecut fals statement made to law
enforc or regulatori offici not made under oath in the cours of an offici
investig or on an applic for such thing as feder employ credit and visa
applic prosecutor mai also us section 1001 in lieu of the misdemeanor provis of
the ir code for file fals document with tax return
section 1001 violat mai implic other feder law includ comput fraud 18
usc 1030a4 and internet fraud eg auction fraud or phish by make fals
statement in ani matter within the jurisdict of the govern
the econom espionag act of 1996 titl 18 us code section 1831183 9
the econom espionag act of 1996 eea make the theft of trade secret a feder
crimin offens the eea outlaw two type of trade secret misappropri section 1831
crimin econom espionag which is the theft of a trade secret to benefit a foreign
govern instrument or agent and section 1832 crimin the theft of commerci
trade secret to obtain an econom advantag
section 1831 and 1832 provid signific penalti for trade secret violat if done to
benefit a foreign govern the theft of trade secret is punish by up to fifteen year
imprison and up to a 500000 fine trade secret theft for commerci benefit is
punish by up to 10 year imprison and up to a 250000 fine the eea howev
doe not provid ani civil remedi
addition prosecutor can appli the eea to a wide varieti of misconduct becaus it
crimin attempt and conspiraci to violat the eea the same penalti appli to these
offens with increas penalti if the trade secret misappropri benefit a foreign
govern foreign instrument or a foreign agent
moreov the eea author the attornei gener to commenc a civil action seek
injunct relief to prevent further disclosur of a trade secret by the defend or third
parti
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11870 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin infring of a copyright titl 17 us code section 506 and titl 18 us code section 2319
titl 17 us code section 506 crimin will copyright infring and defin what
conduct is prohibit while titl 18 us code section 2319 impos the crimin
punish for a copyright infring convict which is to be ad to ani other
penalti impos by other provis or law
copyright law grant copyright holder six exclus right to their work includ the right
to reproduct gener infring occur if an individu exercis ani on of the
copyright holder exclus right without author or other legal author howev
not all infring ar crimin offens instead section 506 provid that copyright
infring is crimin if an individu willfulli reproduc or distribut for commerci
advantag or privat financi gain on or more copi of copyright work total in
retail valu 1000 or more
section 2319 impos punish for both feloni and misdemeanor crime feloni
penalti attach when the infring consist of the reproduct or distribut of 10 or
more copi of copyright work within 180 dai that taken togeth ar worth more than
2500 or when the violat involv distribut of a work be prepar for
commerci distribut over a comput network access to member of the public
altern misdemeanor crime attach when the infring consist of ani of
the follow
infring of reproduct or distribut right for privat financi gain or
commerci advantag regardless of the exact volum or valu of the infring
infring of reproduct or distribut right of on or more copi of
copyright work within 180 dai that ar worth a total retail valu of 1000 or more
and it doe not involv privat financi gain or commerci advantag or
infring of right other than reproduct or distribut for privat financi gain
or commerci advantag
in 1997 presid clinton sign the no electron theft act into law which amend the
copyright law to prohibit electron infring and extend the copyright infring
to includ act that do not necessarili give rise to a profit
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11871
limit on exclus right comput program titl 17 us code section 117
although copyright law provid copyright holder the exclus right to reproduct thi
right is subject to a number of limit includ section 117 which allow the copi of
copyright softwar in limit circumst under section 117 the owner of a copi of a
comput program is allow to make addit copi of such program in two instanc
first owner mai copi a comput program if it is necessari for the us of the comput
program second user mai make a copi for archiv purpos to prevent loss due to hard
drive failur and the like
even though the law author copi made under section 117 limit there ar
restrict all copi must be destroi when the possess of a comput program
ceas to be deem right furthermor ani copi made in accord with thi section
mai be transfer but must be accompani by the origin program from which copi
were made and with all right in the program
digit millennium copyright act titl 17 us code section 12011205
the advent of the internet and digit media ha led to an increas in intellectu copyright
infring in respons to thi develop congress enact the digit millennium
copyright act of 1998 dmca the dmca outlaw the us of comput and other
electron devic to infring against copyright holder exclus right to further thi goal
the dmca provid liabil limit for transmit copyright materi onlin the
dmca also provid crimin penalti for circumv copyright protect system
which ar set forth in section 1201 and for compromis the integr of copyright
manag inform pursuant to section 1202
violat under either section 1201 or 1202 ar subject to a maximum of five year
imprison up to 500000 fine or both subsequ offens ar subject to a maximum
of 10 year a maximum fine of 1000000 or both
electron fund transfer crimin liabil titl 15 us code section 1693n
congress design thi legisl to allow consum the eas and benefit of electron fund
transfer while defin the right and liabil of the parti involv in such transact
section 1693n appli to paperless monei transfer between account includ atm
transact debit and credit card transact pointofsal po debit transact
telephon transfer and accord to the feder deposit insur corpor fdic
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11872 2011 fraud examin manual
ani other electron bank transact that can result in the withdraw of cash from
your bank account
in particular thi statut attach crimin liabil to the act of
give fals or inaccur inform under the bank law and regul or
fail to provid inform requir under the bank law and regul
it also prohibit certain action affect commerc includ
us attempt to us or conspir to us ani fraudul obtain debit
instrument with knowledg of fraudul charact to obtain anyth with an
aggreg valu of at least 1000 within a oneyear period or
transport attempt to transport or conspir to transport a fraudul debit
instrument with unlaw or fraudul intent and knowledg or
sell or transport in interst or foreign commerc of ani fraudul debit
instrument with knowledg or
receiv conceal us or transport anyth that is proce from a fraudul
activ and that ha a valu exceed 1000 within ani oneyear period or
receiv conceal us sell or transport of on or more ticket for interst
or foreign transport that have a valu aggreg 500 or more and were obtain
by us of a fraudul debit instrument or
furnish monei properti servic or anyth els of valu aggreg
1000 or more within a oneyear period in conjunct with the us of a fraudul
debit instrument
state law
at the state level statut that might be of us in prosecut comput crime would
includ the penal code violat of larceni in it mani form fals pretens forgeri
fraud embezzl vandal properti destruct malici mischief proprietari
inform theft commerci briberi and extort but most state now expressli provid
penalti for crime perpetr by us of comput or perpetr against comput see
the law section for a complet list of state comput fraud statut
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11873
