2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Crime Laws/Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986  
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, governs the illegal interception of electronic 
communication and the unauthorized access of electronically stored data. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1867 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, the Stored Communications Act, and 
the Pen Register Act, which regulates pen registers and trap and trace devices. This section, 
however, focuses on the Wiretap Act and the Stored Communications Act. 
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTIONS 2510-2521) 
In response to privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, which prohibits anyone 
from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, oral, or electronic 
communication. 
  
Focusing on its applicability to computer fraud, the Wiretap Act prohibits the intentional 
interception of certain electronic communications, including e-mail; it does not govern 
stored communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of 
the contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts 
have held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Additionally, most courts agree that interception does not occur when an individual obtains 
access to an electronically stored copy of the communication, “whether such storage occurs 
pre- or post-delivery, and even if the storage lasts only a few milliseconds.” As a result, the 
Wiretap Act is often inadequate to protect electronic communications sent over the Internet.  
 
The Wiretap Act also contains several exceptions to prosecution, including the consent 
exception, which provides that parties to the communication may authorize others to 
intercept the transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees.  
  
STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (TITLE 18, U.S. CODE, SECTION 2701) 
As part of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, Congress enacted the Stored 
Communications Act (SCA) to protect stored electronic communications, such as e-mail, 
and voicemail by prohibiting the unauthorized access of such communications that are in 
storage. More specifically, the SCA prohibits unlawful access to a facility, which provides an 
electronic communication service, and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1868                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
access to a wire or electronic communication while it is electronically stored in such  
a system.  
 
Unlike interception under the Wiretap Act, an electronic communication falls under the SCA 
once a system receives and stores it. However, like the Wiretap Act, the SCA includes a 
consent exception. Under this exception, a service provider may disclose electronic 
communications with the lawful consent of the originator, an addressee, or the intended 
recipient.  
 
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment for 
up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for not more than 10 years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, courts may impose a 
fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all subsequent convictions, 
courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to 10 years. 
 



:


electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 govern the illeg intercept of electron
commun and the unauthor access of electron store data
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11867
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act the store commun act and
the pen regist act which regul pen regist and trap and trace devic thi section
howev focus on the wiretap act and the store commun act
the wiretap act titl 18 us code section 25102521
in respons to privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act which prohibit anyon
from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire oral or electron
commun
focus on it applic to comput fraud the wiretap act prohibit the intent
intercept of certain electron commun includ email it doe not govern
store commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of
the content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court
have held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
addition most court agre that intercept doe not occur when an individu obtain
access to an electron store copi of the commun whether such storag occur
pre or postdeliveri and even if the storag last onli a few millisecond as a result the
wiretap act is often inadequ to protect electron commun sent over the internet
the wiretap act also contain sever except to prosecut includ the consent
except which provid that parti to the commun mai author other to
intercept the transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
store commun act titl 18 us code section 2701
as part of the electron commun privaci act congress enact the store
commun act sca to protect store electron commun such as email
and voicemail by prohibit the unauthor access of such commun that ar in
storag more specif the sca prohibit unlaw access to a facil which provid an
electron commun servic and then obtain alter or prevent author
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11868 2011 fraud examin manual
access to a wire or electron commun while it is electron store in such
a system
unlik intercept under the wiretap act an electron commun fall under the sca
onc a system receiv and store it howev like the wiretap act the sca includ a
consent except under thi except a servic provid mai disclos electron
commun with the law consent of the origin an addresse or the intend
recipi
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison for
up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor imprison
for not more than 10 year in ani other case where it is a first offens court mai impos a
fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all subsequ convict
court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to 10 year
