2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Deposit Tickets


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Deposit Tickets 
The deposit ticket is the principal source document for crediting the customer’s account. 
Deposits are first recorded on the deposit ticket or slip that usually segregates currency, 
coins, and checks. The checks are listed separately. In many localities the depositor writes 
the ABA number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket. Either of 
these might help to identify the source of the check. In other localities the bank writes the 
ABA number on the deposit ticket, and in some banks no identifying data is entered on the 
deposit ticket. Regardless of the detail contained on a deposit ticket, bank record-keeping 
systems allow deposits to be identified and traced to their sources.  
 
In working with deposit tickets, the fraud examiner must remember that sometimes the 
depositor splits the deposit, meaning only part of the check is actually deposited. In these 
instances, the customer either receives cash or requests that part of the proceeds be applied 
to a note or interest due to the bank. In some instances, it might be important to determine 
the total amount of cash and checks presented for deposit before deductions. When this is 
the case, the fraud examiner should inquire from the bank how split deposits are handled. 
 
Deposit items can be broken down into two types: on-us items and clearinghouse items. 
 



:


deposit ticket
the deposit ticket is the princip sourc document for credit the custom account
deposit ar first record on the deposit ticket or slip that usual segreg currenc
coin and check the check ar list separ in mani local the depositor write
the aba number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket either of
these might help to identifi the sourc of the check in other local the bank write the
aba number on the deposit ticket and in some bank no identifi data is enter on the
deposit ticket regardless of the detail contain on a deposit ticket bank recordkeep
system allow deposit to be identifi and trace to their sourc
in work with deposit ticket the fraud examin must rememb that sometim the
depositor split the deposit mean onli part of the check is actual deposit in these
instanc the custom either receiv cash or request that part of the proce be appli
to a note or interest due to the bank in some instanc it might be import to determin
the total amount of cash and check present for deposit befor deduct when thi is
the case the fraud examin should inquir from the bank how split deposit ar handl
deposit item can be broken down into two type onu item and clearinghous item
