2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Net-Worth Methods/THE FINANCIAL PROFILE


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


THE FINANCIAL PROFILE 
The first step is to prepare the financial profile  of the suspect. The financial profile is 
essentially a financial statement with certain modifications and additions that shows what the 
defendant owns, owes, earns, and spends at any given point or over a period of time. The 
profile might yield direct evidence of illegal income or hidden assets, or circumstantial 
evidence thereof, by showing that the suspect’s expenditures exceeded known sources of 
income. 
 
The financial profile will identify most illicit funds that are deposited to accounts or 
expended in significant amounts. It will not catch relatively small currency transactions, 
particularly if they were for concealed activities, consumables, or for unusual one-time 
expenses such as medical bills. 
 
Determine the target’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses from the following sources: 
• Interviews 
• The target 
• Associates 
• Documents from financial sources (e.g., accountant, banker) 
• Bank account records 
• Mortgage and loan files 
• Credit card records 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tax returns 
• Public records 
• Business filings 
• Real estate filings 
• Court records 
 
To prepare the financial profile, follow the following six steps.  
 
STEP 1 
Identify all significant assets held by the suspect. An asset is cash (on hand) or anything else 
of value that can be converted into cash.  
 
Cash on hand is coin and currency (bills, coins, Federal Reserve notes) in the subject’s 
possession (on the subject’s person, in the subject ’s residence or other place in a nominee’s 
hands, or in a safe-deposit box). It does not include money in any account with a financial 
institution. When using the net-worth method, the item that may be the most difficult to 
verify is the amount of cash on hand, which is usually claimed by defendants to be sufficient 
to account for all or part of the unknown sources of income. To establish a firm starting net 
worth, it must be shown that the target had no large cash sums for which he was not given 
credit. This is usually done by offering evidence that negates the existence of a cash hoard. 
Such evidence might include: 
• Written or oral admissions of the subject concerning net worth (a signed net-worth 
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand) 
• Low earnings in pre-examination years, as shown by records of former employers 
and/or tax returns filed by subject 
• Net worth, as established by books and records of the subject 
• Financial statement presented for credit or other purposes at a time before or during the 
period under examination (banks, loan companies, and bonding companies are some of 
the better sources from which to obtain this type of document) 
• Bankruptcy before examination periods 
• Prior indebtedness, compromise of overdue debts, and avoidance of bankruptcy 
• Installment buying 
• History of low earnings and expenditures, and checks returned for insufficient funds (a 
financial history covering members of the subject’s family also might be helpful) 
• Loss of furniture and business because of financial reasons 
• Receipt of some type of public assistance 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.837 
STEP 2 
Identify all significant liabilities. A liability is an obligation (debt) arising from an oral or 
written promise to pay.  
 
STEP 3 
Identify all income sources during the relevant time period. Income includes money or other 
things of value received in exchange for services or goods. Income is never included as an 
asset. Loan proceeds are not included as income but are treated as an asset that is offset by a 
corresponding liability. 
 
STEP 4 
Identify all significant expenses incurred during the relevant period. An expense is any 
payment for consumables, for personal or business reasons, over the relevant time period. 
Expenses are not included as liabilities. 
 
STEP 5 
Analyze the information you have collected by using the following charts. 
 
The Financial Profile 
 
TYPICAL ASSETS For each significant asset determine : 
 
Residence 
Real estate 
Bank accounts 
Stocks and 
bonds 
Automobiles 
Insurance 
Cash on hand 
 
Jewelry 
Clothing 
Collectibles 
Pensions 
Home 
furnishings 
Boats 
 
—When was it acquired and from whom? 
—How much did it cost?  
—How was it paid for (currency, check, cashier’s 
check)? 
—What source of funds was used to acquire it? 
—What documentation exists for the purchase and 
where is it? 
 
 
 
TYPICAL LIABILITIES For each significant liability determine: 
 
Mortgage(s) 
Other loans 
Lines of credit 
Credit cards  
Installment purchases 
Accounts payable 
 
—What was the original amount of the liability? 
—What is the present balance due? 
—When was the liability incurred? 
—What was the purpose for the loan or debt? 
—How were the proceeds used and where were they 
deposited? 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Taxes and other bills 
Alimony and child support 
— What security (collateral), if any, was given for the 
debt? 
— What documentation exists for the transaction and 
where is it? 
— Was the debt written off as a bad loan for tax 
purposes? 
— Who was the creditor or lender? 
 
 



:


the financi profil
the first step is to prepar the financi profil of the suspect the financi profil is
essenti a financi statement with certain modif and addit that show what the
defend own ow earn and spend at ani given point or over a period of time the
profil might yield direct evid of illeg incom or hidden asset or circumstanti
evid thereof by show that the suspect expenditur exceed known sourc of
incom
the financi profil will identifi most illicit fund that ar deposit to account or
expend in signific amount it will not catch rel small currenc transact
particularli if thei were for conceal activ consum or for unusu onetim
expens such as medic bill
determin the target asset liabil incom and expens from the follow sourc
interview
the target
associ
document from financi sourc eg account banker
bank account record
mortgag and loan file
credit card record
trace illicit transact investig
3836 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return
public record
busi file
real estat file
court record
to prepar the financi profil follow the follow six step
step 1
identifi all signific asset held by the suspect an asset is cash on hand or anyth els
of valu that can be convert into cash
cash on hand is coin and currenc bill coin feder reserv note in the subject
possess on the subject person in the subject s resid or other place in a nomine
hand or in a safedeposit box it doe not includ monei in ani account with a financi
institut when us the networth method the item that mai be the most difficult to
verifi is the amount of cash on hand which is usual claim by defend to be suffici
to account for all or part of the unknown sourc of incom to establish a firm start net
worth it must be shown that the target had no larg cash sum for which he wa not given
credit thi is usual done by offer evid that negat the exist of a cash hoard
such evid might includ
written or oral admiss of the subject concern net worth a sign networth
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand
low earn in preexamin year as shown by record of former employ
andor tax return file by subject
net worth as establish by book and record of the subject
financi statement present for credit or other purpos at a time befor or dure the
period under examin bank loan compani and bond compani ar some of
the better sourc from which to obtain thi type of document
bankruptci befor examin period
prior indebted compromis of overdu debt and avoid of bankruptci
instal bui
histori of low earn and expenditur and check return for insuffici fund a
financi histori cover member of the subject famili also might be help
loss of furnitur and busi becaus of financi reason
receipt of some type of public assist
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3837
step 2
identifi all signific liabil a liabil is an oblig debt aris from an oral or
written promis to pai
step 3
identifi all incom sourc dure the relev time period incom includ monei or other
thing of valu receiv in exchang for servic or good incom is never includ as an
asset loan proce ar not includ as incom but ar treat as an asset that is offset by a
correspond liabil
step 4
identifi all signific expens incur dure the relev period an expens is ani
payment for consum for person or busi reason over the relev time period
expens ar not includ as liabil
step 5
analyz the inform you have collect by us the follow chart
the financi profil
typic asset for each signific asset determin
resid
real estat
bank account
stock and
bond
automobil
insur
cash on hand
jewelri
cloth
collect
pension
home
furnish
boat
when wa it acquir and from whom
how much did it cost
how wa it paid for currenc check cashier
check
what sourc of fund wa us to acquir it
what document exist for the purchas and
where is it
typic liabil for each signific liabil determin
mortgag
other loan
line of credit
credit card
instal purchas
account payabl
what wa the origin amount of the liabil
what is the present balanc due
when wa the liabil incur
what wa the purpos for the loan or debt
how were the proce us and where were thei
deposit
trace illicit transact investig
3838 2011 fraud examin manual
tax and other bill
alimoni and child support
what secur collater if ani wa given for the
debt
what document exist for the transact and
where is it
wa the debt written off as a bad loan for tax
purpos
who wa the creditor or lender
