2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Common Reporting Mistakes/Conclusions and Opinions


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Conclusions and Opinions 
In a report-writing context, conclusions and opinions are similar, but not identical. 
Conclusions  are based on observations of the evidence, whereas opinions  call for an 
interpretation of the facts.  
 
The fraud examiner must be very circumspect about drawing conclusions. In most 
situations, the conclusions from the examination should be self-evident and should not need 
to be pointed out in the report. If the conclusions are not obvious, the report might need to 
be clarified. 
 
The fraud examiner must also avoid stating opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any 
person or party. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics specifically 
prohibits statements of opinions regarding guilt or innocence, as this is the job of the judge 
or jury (see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Opinions regarding technical matters are permitted  if the fraud examiner is qualified as an 
expert in the matter being considered. For example, a permissible expert opinion might be in 
regard to the relative adequacy of an entity’s internal controls. Another opinion might 
discuss whether financial transactions conform to generally accepted accounting principles. 
 



:


conclus and opinion
in a reportwrit context conclus and opinion ar similar but not ident
conclus ar base on observ of the evid wherea opinion call for an
interpret of the fact
the fraud examin must be veri circumspect about draw conclus in most
situat the conclus from the examin should be selfevid and should not need
to be point out in the report if the conclus ar not obviou the report might need to
be clarifi
the fraud examin must also avoid state opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic specif
prohibit statement of opinion regard guilt or innoc as thi is the job of the judg
or juri see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
opinion regard technic matter ar permit if the fraud examin is qualifi as an
expert in the matter be consid for exampl a permiss expert opinion might be in
regard to the rel adequaci of an entiti intern control anoth opinion might
discuss whether financi transact conform to gener accept account principl
