2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Engagement Contracts/Opinions


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Opinions 
The Certified Fraud Examiner is often asked for an opinion about the existence of fraud. He 
might be engaged to perform fraud deterrence services or to resolve a fraud allegation.  
 
In the former instance, the opinion will address the strengths and weaknesses of the  
client’s current fraud deterrence system and include recommendations to strengthen that 
system. If specific instances of possible fraudulent conduct are uncovered, those should also 
be addressed. 
 
In the latter situation, the examiner must be attentive to the Certified Fraud Examiner’s 
Code of Professional Ethics, in that: 
 
“no opinion shall be expressed regarding the gu ilt or innocence of any person or party.” 
 
There are three possible outcomes of a fraud examination: evidence was obtained that 
supports the allegation of fraud; evidence was gathered that does not support such an 
allegation; and inconclusive evidence was ga thered. In the first outcome, the opinion will 
vary depending on whether the perpetrator confessed to the alleged crime. In the second 
outcome, the examiner can state that the evidence does not support the fraud charge. The 
examiner is not able to declare that there was no fraud. In the final outcome, the examiner 
can state that the evidence is inconclusive; it neither supports nor refutes the allegation. 
Examples of opinions appear in the Appendix. 
 
 



:


opinion
the certifi fraud examin is often ask for an opinion about the exist of fraud he
might be engag to perform fraud deterr servic or to resolv a fraud alleg
in the former instanc the opinion will address the strength and weak of the
client current fraud deterr system and includ recommend to strengthen that
system if specif instanc of possibl fraudul conduct ar uncov those should also
be address
in the latter situat the examin must be attent to the certifi fraud examin
code of profession ethic in that
no opinion shall be express regard the gu ilt or innoc of ani person or parti
there ar three possibl outcom of a fraud examin evid wa obtain that
support the alleg of fraud evid wa gather that doe not support such an
alleg and inconclus evid wa ga there in the first outcom the opinion will
vari depend on whether the perpetr confess to the alleg crime in the second
outcom the examin can state that the evid doe not support the fraud charg the
examin is not abl to declar that there wa no fraud in the final outcom the examin
can state that the evid is inconclus it neither support nor refut the alleg
exampl of opinion appear in the appendix
