2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION 
 
Bribery
Generally, bribery and corruption are off-book frauds that occur in the form of kickbacks, 
gifts, or gratuities to government employees from contractors or to private business 
employees from vendors. For a detailed discussion of the legal elements of bribery and 
corruption, please see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
At its heart, a bribe is a business transaction, albeit an illegal or unethical one. A person 
“buys” something with the bribes he pays. What he buys is the influence of the recipient. 
Bribery schemes can be difficult and expensive. Though they are not nearly as common as 
other forms of occupational fraud such as asset misappropriations, bribery schemes tend to 
be much more costly.  
 
Bribery may be defined as the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting anything of value to 
influence an official act. The term official act means that traditional bribery statutes only 
proscribe payments made to influence the decisions of government agents or employees.  
 
Many occupational fraud schemes, however, involve commercial bribery, which is similar to the 
traditional definition of bribery except that something of value is offered to influence a 
business decision rather than an official act of government. Commercial bribery may or may 
not be a criminal offense. For example, in the United States there is no general federal law 
prohibiting commercial bribery in all instances. However, there are statutes prohibiting 
bribery of employees of financial institutions to influence a loan. Therefore, the law of your 
particular jurisdiction and the facts of the case will determine whether bribery in the private 
sector may be prosecuted criminally. Commercial bribery can often be pursued in the civil 
courts as breach of fiduciary duty or conflict of interest. See the Legal section for  
more information. 
 
According to Ernst & Young’s 11th global fraud survey, Driving Ethical Growth—New Markets, 
New Challenges, corruption is still a significant problem for businesses and executives, 
particularly due to the drive for company growth. Despite the multitude of anti-corruption 
legislation and increased enforcement efforts around the world, corruption is still prevalent.  
 
Bribery schemes generally fall into two broad categories: kickbacks  and bid-rigging schemes. 
Kickbacks are undisclosed payments made by vendors to employees of purchasing 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.702                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
companies. The purpose of a kickback is usually to enlist the corrupt employee in an 
overbilling scheme. Sometimes vendors pay kickbacks simply to get extra business from the 
purchasing company. Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a 
vendor in winning a contract through the competitive bidding process.  
 
Kickback Schemes  
Kickbacks, in the commercial sense, are the giving or receiving anything of value to influence 
a business decision without the employer’s knowledge and consent. Kickback schemes are 
usually very similar to the billing schemes described in the Asset Misappropriation section. 
They involve the submission of invoices for goods and services that are either overpriced or 
completely fictitious. (See “Kickbacks” flowchart.) 
 
Kickbacks are classified as corruption schemes rather than asset misappropriations because 
they involve collusion between employees and vendors. In a common type of kickback 
scheme, a vendor submits a fraudulent or inflated invoice to the victim organization and an 
employee of that organization helps make sure that a payment is made on the false invoice. 
For his assistance, the employee-fraudster receives a payment from the vendor. This 
payment is the kickback.  
 
Kickback schemes almost always attack the purchasing function of the victim company, so it 
stands to reason that these frauds are often undertaken by employees with purchasing 
responsibilities. Purchasing employees often have direct contact with vendors and therefore 
have an opportunity to establish a collusive relationship.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing agent redirected a number of orders to a comp any owned by a supplier with 
whom he was conspiring. In return for the additional business, the supplier paid the 
purchasing agent over half the profits from the additional orders. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.703 
  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.704                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Diverting Business to Vendors 
In some instances, an employee-fraudster receives a kickback simply for directing excess 
business to a vendor. There might be no overbilling involved in these cases; the vendor 
simply pays the kickbacks to ensure a steady stream of business from the purchasing 
company.  
 
If no overbilling is involved in a kickback scheme, one might wonder where the harm lies. 
Assuming the vendor simply wants to get the buyer’s business and does not increase his 
prices or bill for undelivered goods and services, how is the buyer harmed? The problem is 
that, having bought off an employee of the purchasing company, a vendor is no longer 
subject to the normal economic pressures of the marketplace. This vendor does not have to 
compete with other suppliers for the purchasing company’s business, and so has no 
incentive to provide a low price or quality merchandise. In these circumstances the 
purchasing company almost always ends up overpaying for goods or services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A travel agency provided free travel and entertainment to the purchasing agent of a retail 
company. In return, the purchasing agent agr eed to book all corporate trips through the 
travel agent. The victim company estimated that it paid $10,000 more for airfare over a 
two-year period by booking through the corrupt travel agency than if it had used a different 
company.  
 
Once a vendor knows it has an exclusive purchasing arrangement, its incentive is to raise 
prices to cover the cost of the kickback. Most bribery schemes end up as overbilling 
schemes even if they do not start that way. This is one reason why most business codes of 
ethics prohibit employees from accepting undisclosed gifts from vendors. In the long run, 
the employee’s company is sure to pay for his unethical conduct.   
 
Overbilling Schemes 
EMPLOYEES WITH APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
In most instances, kickback schemes begin as overbilling schemes in which a vendor submits 
inflated invoices to the victim organization. The false invoices either overstate the cost of 
actual goods and services, or reflect fictitious sales. The vendor in a kickback scheme 
generally seeks to enlist the help of an employee with the authority to approve payment of 
the fraudulent invoices. This authority ensures payment of the false billings without  
undue hassles.  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.705 
EXAMPLE 
A manager was authorized to purchase fixed assets for his company as part of a leasehold 
improvement. The materials he or dered were of a cheaper quality and lower price than what 
was specified, but the contract he negotiated did not reflect this. Therefore, the victim 
company paid for high-quality materials, but received low-quality materials. The difference 
in price between the true cost of the low-quality materials and what the company paid was 
diverted back to the manager as a kickback.  
  
The ability of the employee to authorize purchases (and thus to authorize fraudulent  
purchases) is usually a key to kickback schemes. If the fraudster can authorize payments 
himself, he does not have to submit purchase requisitions to an honest superior who might 
question the validity of the transaction. 
 
FRAUDSTERS LACKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
While the majority of kickback schemes involve persons with authority to approve 
purchases, this authority is not an absolute necessity. When an employee cannot approve 
fraudulent purchases himself, he can still orchestrate a kickback scheme if he can circumvent 
accounts payable controls. In some cases, all that is required is the filing of a false purchase 
requisition. If a trusted employee tells his superior that the company needs certain materials 
or services, this is sometimes sufficient to get a false invoice approved for payment. Such 
schemes are generally successful when the person with approval authority is inattentive or 
when he is forced to rely on his subordinate’s guidance in purchasing matters.  
 
Corrupt employees might also prepare false vouchers to make it appear that fraudulent 
invoices are legitimate. Where proper controls are in place, a completed voucher is required 
before accounts payable will pay an invoice. One key is for the fraudster to create a purchase 
order that corresponds to the vendor’s fraudulent invoice. The fraudster might forge the 
signature of an authorized party on the purchase order to show that the acquisition has been 
approved. Where the payables system is computerized, an employee with access to a 
restricted password can enter the system and authorize payments on fraudulent invoices.  
 
In less sophisticated schemes, a corrupt employee might simply take a fraudulent invoice 
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepared invoices before they are input into the 
accounts payable system. A more detailed description of how false invoices are processed 
can be found in the Billing Schemes section.  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.706                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Kickback schemes can be very difficult to detect. In a sense, the victim company is being 
attacked from two directions. Externally, a corrupt vendor submits false invoices that induce 
the victim organization to unknowingly pay for goods or services that it does not receive. 
Internally, one or more of the victim company’s employees waits to corroborate the false 
information provided by the vendor.  
 
Other Kickback Schemes 
Bribes are not always paid to employees to process phony invoices. Some outsiders seek 
other fraudulent assistance from employees of the victim organization. For instance, 
inspectors are sometimes paid off to accept substandard materials, or to accept short 
shipments of goods.  
 
Representatives of companies wishing to purchase goods or services from the victim 
organization at unauthorized discounts sometimes bribe employees with billing authority. 
The corrupt employees make sales to their accomplices at greatly reduced rates?sometimes 
even selling items at a loss?and in return they receive a portion of the discount.  
 
Kickback Payments 
It should also be noted that every bribe is a two-sided transaction. In every case where a 
vendor bribes a purchaser, there is someone on the vendor’s side of the transaction who is 
making  an illicit payment. It is therefore just as likely that your employees are paying bribes as 
accepting them.  
 
In order to obtain the funds to make these payments, employees usually divert company 
money into a slush fund, a noncompany account from whic h bribes can be made. Assuming 
that bribes are not authorized by the briber’s company, he must find a way to generate the 
funds necessary to illegally influence someone in another organization. Therefore, the key to 
the crime from the briber’s perspective is the di version of money into the slush fund. This is 
a fraudulent disbursement of company funds, which is usually accomplished by the writing 
of company checks to a fictitious entity or the submitting of false invoices in the name of a 
false entity. Payments to a slush fund are commonly coded as “fees” for consulting or other 
services.  
 
It is common to charge fraudulent disbursements to nebulous accounts like “consulting 
fees.” The purchase of goods can be verified by a check of inventory, but there is no 
inventory for these kinds of services. It is therefore more difficult to prove that the 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.707 
payments are fraudulent. The discussion of exactly how fraudulent disbursements are made 
can be found in the sections on Check Tampering and Invoices.  
 
Bid-Rigging Schemes 
As we have said, when one person pays a bribe to another, he does so to gain the benefit of 
the recipient’s influence. The competitive bidding process, in which several suppliers or 
contractors are vying for contracts in what can be a very cutthroat environment, is tailor-made 
for bribery. Any advantage one vendor can gain over his competitors in this arena is 
extremely valuable. The benefit of “inside influence” can ensure that a vendor will win a 
sought-after contract. Many vendors are willing to pay for this influence.  
 
In the competitive bidding process, all bidders are legally supposed to be placed on the same 
plane of equality, bidding on the same terms and conditions. Each bidder competes for a 
contract based on the specifications set forth by the purchasing company. Vendors submit 
confidential bids stating the price at which they will complete a project in accordance with 
the purchaser’s specifications. 
 
The way competitive bidding is rigged depends largely upon the level of influence of the 
corrupt employee. The more power a person has over the bidding process, the more likely 
the person can influence the selection of a supplier. Therefore, employees involved in bid-
 rigging schemes, like those in kickback schemes, tend to have a good measure of influence 
or access to the competitive bidding process. Potential targets for accepting bribes include 
buyers, contracting officials, engineers and technical representatives, quality or product 
assurance representatives, subcontractor liaison employees, or anyone else with authority 
over the awarding of contracts. 
 
Bid-rigging schemes can be categorized based on the stage of bidding at which the fraudster 
exerts his influence. Bid-rigging schemes usually occur in the presolicitation phase, the 
solicitation phase, or the submission phase of the bidding process. (See “Bid-Rigging” 
flowchart.) 
 
The Presolicitation Phase 
In the presolicitation phase of the competitive bidding process—before bids are officially 
sought for a project—bribery schemes can be brok en down into two distinct types. The first 
is the need recognition scheme, where an employee of a purchasing company is paid to 
convince his company that a particular project is necessary. The second reason to bribe 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.708                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
someone in the presolicitation phase is to have the specifications of the contract tailored to 
the strengths of a particular supplier.  
 
NEED RECOGNITION SCHEMES 
The typical fraud in the need recognition phase of the contract negotiation is a conspiracy 
between the buyer and contractor where an employee of the buyer receives something of 
value and in return recognizes a “need” for a particular product or service. The result of 
such a scheme is that the victim organization purchases unnecessary goods or services from 
a supplier at the direction of the corrupt employee.  
 
There are several trends that may indicate a need recognition fraud. Unusually high 
requirements for stock and inventory levels may reveal a situation in which a corrupt 
employee is seeking to justify unnecessary purchase activity from a certain supplier. An 
employee might also justify unnecessary purchases of inventory by writing off large numbers 
of surplus items to scrap. As these items leave the inventory, they open up spaces to justify 
additional purchases. Another indicator of a need recognition scheme is the defining of a 
“need” that can only be met by a certain supplier or contractor. In addition, the failure to 
develop a satisfactory list of backup suppliers may reveal an unusually strong attachment to a 
primary supplier — an attachment that is explainable by the acceptance of bribes from that 
supplier.  
 
SPECIFICATIONS SCHEMES 
The other type of presolicitation fraud is a specifications scheme. The specifications of a 
contract are a list of the elements, materials, dimensions, and other relevant requirements for 
completion of the project. Specifications are prepared to assist vendors in the bidding 
process, telling them what they are required to do and providing a firm basis for making and 
accepting bids.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.709 
 
 
  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.710                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One corruption scheme that occurs in this process is the fraudulent tailoring of 
specifications to a particular vendor. In these cases, the vendor pays off an employee of the 
buyer who is involved in preparing specifications for the contract. In return, the employee 
tailors the specifications to accommodate that vendor’s capabilities so that the contractor is 
effectively assured of winning the contract.  
 
The methods used to restrict competition in the bidding process may include the use of 
“prequalification” procedures that are known to eliminate certain competitors. For instance, 
the bid may require potential contractors to have a certain percentage of female or minority 
ownership. There is nothing illegal with such a requirement, but if it is placed in the 
specifications as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factors, then the 
employee has sold his influence to benefit a dishonest vendor, a clear case of corruption.  
 
Some employees distort the requirements of contracts by claiming the specifications called 
for a sole-source provider or noncompetitive procurement. This causes competitive bidding 
to be disregarded and the contract to be awarded to a particular supplier. The supplier 
typically charges a much higher price than the company could have obtained through 
bidding. Sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications may also be used to 
eliminate competition and steer contracts to a particular vendor.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A requisitioner distorted the requirements of a contract up for bid, claiming the 
specifications called for a sole-source provider. Based on the requisitioner’s information, 
competitive bidding was disregarded and the cont ract was awarded to a particular supplier. 
A review of other bids received at a later date showed that certain materials were available 
for up to $70,000 less than what the company paid in the sole-source arrangement. The 
employee had helped divert the job to the contractor in return for a promise of future 
employment. 
 
Another form of specifications fraud is bid splitting. Entities are often required to solicit 
bids on projects over a certain dollar amount. In order to avoid this requirement, employees 
might break a large project up into several small projects that fall below the mandatory 
bidding level. Once the contract is split, the employee can award some or all of the 
component parts to a contractor with whom he is conspiring.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.711 
A less egregious but nevertheless unfair form of bid-rigging occurs when a vendor pays an 
employee of the buyer for the right to see the specifications earlier than his competitors. The 
employee does not alter the specifications to suit the vendor, but instead simply gives him a 
head start on planning his bid and preparing for the job.  
 
The Solicitation Phase 
In the solicitation phase of the competitive bidding process, fraudsters attempt to influence 
the selection of a contractor by restricting the pool of competitors from whom bids are 
sought. In other words, a corrupt vendor pays an employee of the purchasing company to 
ensure that one or more of the vendor’s competitors do not get to bid on the contract. In 
this manner, the corrupt vendor is able to improve his chances of winning the job.  
 
One type of scheme involves the sales representative who deals on behalf of a number of 
potential bidders. The sales representative bribes a contracting official to rig the solicitation, 
ensuring that only those companies represented by him get to submit bids. It is not 
uncommon in some sectors for buyers to “require” bidders to be represented by certain sales 
or manufacturing representatives. These representatives pay a kickback to the buyer to 
protect their clients’ interests. The result of this transaction is that the purchasing company is 
deprived of the ability to get the best price on its contract. Typically, the group of 
“protected” vendors will not actually compete against each other for the purchaser’s 
contracts, but instead engage in “bid pooling.”   
 
BID POOLING 
Bid pooling is a process by which several bidders conspire to split contracts up and ensure 
that each gets a certain amount of work. Instead of submitting confidential bids, the vendors 
discuss what their bids will be so they can guarantee that each vendor will win a share of the 
purchasing company’s business. For example, if vendors A, B, and C are up for three 
separate jobs, they may agree that A’s bid will be the lowest on the first contract, B’s bid will 
be the lowest on the second contract, and C’s bid will be the lowest on the third contract. 
None of the vendors gets all three jobs, but on the other hand, they are all guaranteed to get 
at least one. Furthermore, since they plan their bids ahead of time, the vendors can conspire 
to raise their prices. Thus the purchasing company suffers as a result of the scheme.  
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.712                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FICTITIOUS SUPPLIERS 
Another way to eliminate competition in the solicitation phase of the selection process is to 
solicit bids from fictitious suppliers. This gives the appearance of a competitive bidding 
situation, when in fact only one real supplier bids on the job. Furthermore, the real 
contractor can raise his prices, since the other bids are fraudulent and sure to be higher than 
his own. In effect, the bids from fictitious suppliers serve to validate the exaggerated quote 
from the real contractor. 
 
OTHER METHODS    
In some cases, competition for a contract can be limited by severely restricting the time for 
submitting bids. Certain suppliers are given advanced notice of contracts before bids are 
solicited. These suppliers are therefore able to begin preparing their bids ahead of time. With 
the short time frame for developing bid proposals, the supplier with advance knowledge of 
the contract will have a decided advantage over his competition.  
 
Bribed purchasing officials can also restrict competition for their coconspirators by soliciting 
bids in obscure publications where other vendors are unlikely to see them. Again, this is 
done to eliminate potential rivals and create an advantage for the corrupt suppliers. Some 
schemes have also involved the publication of bid solicitations during holiday periods when 
those suppliers not “in the know” are unlikely to be looking for potential contracts. In more 
blatant cases, the bids of outsiders are accepted but are “lost” or improperly disqualified by 
the corrupt employee of the purchaser.  
 
Frequently, when a vendor bribes an employee of the purchasing company to assist him in 
any kind of solicitation scheme, the cost of the bribe is included in the corrupt vendor’s bid. 
Therefore, the purchasing company ends up bearing the cost of the illicit payment in the 
form of a higher contract price.  
 
The Submission Phase 
In the actual submission phase of the process, where bids are proffered to the buyer, several 
schemes may be used to win a contract for a particular supplier. The principal offense tends 
to be abuse of the sealed bid process. Competitive bids are confidential; they are, of course, 
supposed to remain sealed until a specified date at which all bids are opened and reviewed by 
the purchasing company. The person or persons who have access to sealed bids are often 
the targets of unethical vendors seeking an advantage in the process.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.713 
EXAMPLE 
Gifts and cash payments were given to a majority owner of a company in exchange for 
preferential treatment during the bidding process. The supplier who paid the bribes was 
allowed to submit his bids last, knowing what prices his competitors had quoted, or in the 
alternative, he was allowed to actually see his competitors’ bids and adjust his own 
accordingly.  
 
Vendors also bribe employees of the purchaser for confidential information that will help 
them prepare their bid. Other reasons to bribe employees of the purchaser include ensuring 
receipt of a late bid or falsify the bid log, to extend the bid opening date, and to control bid 
openings.  
 
Economic Extortion 
Economic extortion cases are the “Pay up or else …” corruption schemes; basically the flip 
side of bribery schemes. Instead of a vendor offering a payment to influence a decision, an 
employee demands that a vendor pay him in order to make a decision in that vendor’s favor. 
If the vendor refuses to pay, he faces some harm such as a loss of business with the 
extorter’s company. In any situation where an employee might accept bribes to favor a 
particular company or person, the situation could be reversed to a point where the employee 
extorts money from a potential purchaser or supplier.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A plant manager for a utility company started his own business on the side. Vendors who 
wanted to do work for the utility company were  forced by the manager to divert some of 
their business to his own compan y. Those that did not “play ball” lost their business with 
the utility.  
 
Illegal Gratuities 
Illegal gratuities are similar to bribery schemes except there is not necessarily an intent to 
influence a particular business decision before the fact. In the typical illegal gratuities 
scenario, a decision is made that happens to benefit a certain person or company. The party 
who benefited from the decision then gives a gift to the person who made the decision. The 
gift could be anything of value. An illegal gratuity does not require proof of an intent  
to influence. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.714                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A city commissioner negotiated a land developm ent deal with a group of private investors. 
After the deal was approved, the commissioner and his wife were rewarded with a free 
international vacation, all expenses paid.  
 
At first glance, it may seem that illegal gratuities schemes are harmless as long as the business 
decisions in question are not influenced by the promise of payment. But most company 
ethics policies forbid employees from accepting unreported gifts from vendors. One reason 
is that illegal gratuities schemes can (and do) evolve into bribery schemes. Once an employee 
has been rewarded for an act such as directing business to a particular supplier, an 
understanding might be reached that future decisions beneficial to the supplier will also be 
rewarded. Additionally, even though an outright promise of payment has not been made, 
employees may direct business to certain companies in the hope that they will be rewarded 
with money or gifts. 
 
Methods of Making Illegal Payments 
Certain traditional methods of making illegal payments fall into the hierarchical pattern 
described below. 
 
Gifts, Travel, and Entertainment 
Most bribery (corruption) schemes begin with gifts and favors. Commonly encountered 
items include: 
• Wine and liquor (consumable) 
• Clothes and jewelry for the recipient or spouse 
• Sexual favors 
• Lavish entertainment 
• Paid vacations 
• Free transportation on corporate jets 
• Free use of resort facilities 
• Gifts of the briber’s inventory or services, such as construction of home improvements 
by a contractor 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.715 
Cash Payments 
The next step usually involves cash payments. However, cash is not practical when dealing 
with large sums, because large amounts are difficult to generate, and they draw attention 
when they are deposited or spent. The use of currency in major transactions might itself be 
incriminating. 
 
Checks and Other Financial Instruments 
As the scheme grows, illicit payments are often made by normal business check, cashier’s 
check, or wire transfer. Disguised payments on the payer’s books appear as some sort of 
legitimate business expense, often as consulting fees. Payments can be made directly or 
through an intermediary. 
 
Hidden Interests 
In the latter stages of sophisticated schemes, the payer might give a hidden interest in a joint 
venture or other profit-making enterprise. The recipient’s interest might be concealed 
through a straw nominee, hidden in a trust or other business entity, or merely included by an 
undocumented verbal agreement. Such arrangements are very difficult to detect, and even if 
identified, proof of corrupt intent might be difficult to demonstrate.  
 
Loans  
Three types of “loans” often turn up in fraud cases: 
• A prior outright payment falsely described as an innocent loan. 
• Payments on a legitimate loan guaranteed or actually made by someone else. 
• An actual loan made on favorable terms, such as interest-free. 
 
Payment of Credit Card Bills  
The recipient’s transportation, vacation, and en tertainment expenses might be paid with the 
payer’s credit card, or the recipient might forward his own credit card bills to the payer for 
payment. In some instances, the payer simply lets the recipient carry and use the payer’s card. 
 
Transfers at Other than Fair Market Value  
The corrupt payer might sell or lease property to the recipient at far less than its market 
value, or might agree to buy or rent property at inflated prices. The recipient might also 
“sell” an asset to the payer, but retain title or the use of the property. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.716                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Promises of Favorable Treatment  
Promises of favorable treatment commonly take the following forms: 
• A payer might promise a governmental official lucrative employment when the recipient 
leaves government service. 
• An executive leaving a private company for a related government position might be 
given favorable or inflated retirement and separation benefits. 
• The spouse or other relative of the intended recipient might also be employed by the 
payer company at an inflated salary or with little actual responsibility. 
 
 
Detection of Bribery Schemes 
 
Red Flags of Bribery Schemes 
Most bribery schemes are detected thr ough tips from honest and disgruntled coworkers or 
vendors. These allegations can be evaluated through analysis of the “red flags” associated 
with the suspect people or transactions.  
 
The Corrupt Recipient 
A person taking payoffs or embezzling funds often exhibits the following characteristics: 
• The Big Spender — This is the most common way to detect corrupt recipients. Some 
recipients spend their money less conspicuously by paying off debts or paying down 
mortgages.  
• The Gift Taker — An official or executive who regularly accepts inappropriate gifts is often 
one susceptible to larger payments. 
• The “Odd Couple” — Corrupt payers and recipients often  appear to have very friendly 
social relationships. Frequent outside contacts, particularly between parties who do not 
appear to have much in common, might be a sign of deeper and more troublesome ties 
between the parties. 
• The Rule Breaker — This is often the most significant characteristic. A person taking 
payoffs will often take action on his own, or direct a subordinate to bend, break, or 
ignore standard operating procedures or rules to benefit the payer. Particular attention 
should be directed toward those who insert themselves into areas in which they are 
normally not involved or attempt to assert authority or make decisions for which they 
are not responsible. 
• The Complainer — A corrupt recipient often makes excuses for deficiencies in the payer’s 
services, such as poor quality, late deliveries, or high prices. Look for higher prices, 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.717 
“extra” payments, or commissions approved by the suspect, because these might be the 
source of kickback fraud. 
• Genuine Need — Greed, rather than need, seems to be the motivating factor in most cases. 
Occasionally, however, legitimate pressures, such as illness of family members or drug 
addiction, can induce participation in an illegal scheme. 
 
The Corrupt Payer 
Like the recipients of bribery payments, the payer will also demonstrate certain identifiable 
characteristics: 
• The Gift Bearer — The businessperson who routinely offers inappropriate gifts, provides 
lavish business entertainment, or otherwise tries to ingratiate himself is often the one 
offering still more valuable inducements. 
• The Sleaze Factor — The corrupt payer is frequently a person known or suspected in the 
industry to be involved in payoffs or other fraudulent activities. 
• The Too-Successful Bidder — A supplier who is consistently awarded work, without any 
apparent competitive advantage, might be providing under-the-table incentives. 
• Poor Quality, Higher Prices — Particularly after the corrupt relationship has been sealed, the 
quality of product and service provided by the payer might deteriorate and prices 
increase. 
• The One-Person Operation — In certain industries, small, closely held companies that do not 
have the reporting and internal control requirements of their larger, publicly held 
competitors resort to payoffs as a means of marketing advantage. Be alert for 
independent sales representatives, consultants, or other middlemen, because they are 
favored conduits for funneling and concealing illegal payments. 
 
General Purchasing  
The following practices may indicate that single (sole) source vendors are being favored, or 
competitive bidding policies are not being followed:  
• Materials are not being ordered at the optimal reorder point.  
• Orders are consistently made from the same vendor. 
• Established bidding policies are not being followed. 
• The costs of materials are out of line. 
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.718                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Presolicitation  
Restrictions in an organization’s solicitation documents that tend to restrict competition are 
a red flag. Examples of restrictive conditions include: 
• Specifications and statements of work that are tailored to fit the products or capabilities 
of a single contractor. 
• “Prequalification” procedures that restrict competition. 
• Unnecessary sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications: 
? Containing false statements 
? Signed by unauthorized officials 
? Bypassing necessary review procedures 
 
Other red flags in the presolicitation phase include:   
• A buyer who provides information or advice to a contractor on a preferential basis. 
• New vendors that are added to the “qualified” list for no apparent reason. 
• Statements of work, specifications, or sole-source justifications that are developed by, or 
in consultation with, a contractor who will be permitted to bid. 
• Consultants who assisted in the preparation of the statements of work, specifications, or 
design, and are later permitted to work on the contract as subcontractors or consultants. 
• Projects that are split into smaller contracts to avoid review. 
• Information that is released by firms participating in the design and engineering to 
contractors competing for the prime contract. 
• Requirements that are split up so contractors can each get a “fair share” and can rotate 
bids. 
• Specifications that are not consistent with similar procurements in the past. 
 
Bid Solicitation 
The following are examples of suspicious activity that might signal fraud in the bid 
solicitation phase:   
• The time for submitting bids is limited so that only those with advance information have 
adequate time to prepare bids or proposals. 
• One contractor receives confidential information that is not revealed to his competitors. 
• The conducting of a bidders’ conference, which permits improper communications 
between contractors, who then are in a position to rig bids. 
• The failure to ensure that a sufficient number of potential competitors are aware of the 
solicitation by: 
? Using obscure publications to publish bid solicitations. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.719 
? Publishing bid solicitations during holiday periods. 
• Bid solicitations that are vague as to the time, place, or other requirements for submitting 
acceptable bids. 
• Inadequate internal controls over the number and destination of bid packages sent to 
interested bidders. 
• Improper communication between purchasers and contractors at trade or professional 
meetings. 
• Improper social contact between purchasers and contractor representatives. 
• A purchasing agent who has a financial interest in the business of a contractor. 
• A purchaser who discusses possible employment with a contractor. 
• The purchaser assisting a contractor in the preparation of his bid. 
• A contractor being referred to a specific subcontractor, expert, or source of supply by an 
employee of the purchasing organization. 
• The failure to amend a solicitation to include necessary changes or clarifications in the 
bid, such as telling one contractor of changes that can be made after the bid. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts so that a late bid is accepted. 
• Any indications of collusion between bidders. 
• The falsification of a contractor’s qualifications, work history, facilities, equipment,  
or personnel. 
 
Bid Submission or Contract Acceptance  
Red flags in the submission and post-submission phase of the bidding process include the 
following: 
• Procurement that has been restricted to exclude or hamper any qualified contractor. 
• The improper acceptance of a late bid. 
• A bidder who always bids last on contracts and consistently wins them. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts to get a late bid accepted. 
• Bids that are changed after other bidders’ pri ces are known. This is sometimes done by 
mistakes deliberately “planted” in a bid. 
• A low bidder who withdraws to become a subcontractor of a higher bidder who gets  
the contract. 
• Collusion between bidders. 
• Bidders who reveal their prices to one another. 
• Bids tend to be awarded in a geographic pattern or in a noticeable rotation. 
• Bids for a particular type of work are always awarded to a particular company. 
• False certifications by a contractor. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.720                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The falsification of information concerning contractor qualifications, financial capability, 
facilities, ownership of equipment and supplies, qualifications of personnel, and 
successful performance of previous jobs, etc. 
 
Methods of Proving Corrupt Payments 
There are three basic ways to prove illegal payments: identify and trace them by audit steps, 
turn an inside witness, or secretly infiltrate or record ongoing transactions. An audit might 
focus on the point of suspected payment or receipt, or both. As a very general proposition, 
suspected on-book schemes are best approached from the point of payment, and off-book 
schemes are most easily identified at the suspected point of receipt, or through the use of an 
inside witness, or surveillance. 
 
The Business Profile — Analysis 
The business profile  begins the examination process. It identifies prospective witnesses and 
targets, as well as relevant documents and transactions, and should provide leads as to 
whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being used. 
 
Information of the suspect business should be obtained about the organization, personnel, 
money flow pattern (source of available funds, related expenditures, etc.), location of bank 
accounts, financial condition, and recordkeeping system. This information can be obtained 
through interviews of employees, customers, and competitors; business bank account and 
loan records; financial statements; tax returns; business reporting companies; and business 
public filings. 
 
HOW IS THE BUSINESS ORGANIZED, LEGALLY AND STRUCTURALLY? 
Knowing this information helps determine what records are available (corporate, 
partnership, etc.) and where to go to get them. 
 
WHO ARE THE KEY PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH THE ENTERPRISE? 
This helps to identify potential witnesses and informants, as well as possible subjects. Key 
positions include the owners of the business; the people directly involved in the suspect 
transactions, including secretarial and clerical staff, present and former employees; the 
“number crunchers”; the bookkeeper, outside accountants, and tax preparers; outside 
consultants, sales representatives, and independent contractors (a popular conduit for 
payoffs); and competitors (often eager witnesses who can identify leads to sources of off-
 book funds such as customers and rebate practices). 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.721 
WHAT IS THE MONEY FLOW PATTERN INVOLVED IN THE SUSPECT TRANSACTION? 
Tracing the flow of funds in the suspect transactions is important. Where does the money 
come from and where does it go? Information about the source of funds can provide leads 
as to whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being employed, and the location of  
off-book accounts. Expenditures related to the suspect transactions might cover  
on-book payments. 
 
Determine all sources of funds with the following questions: 
• What goods or services does the business provide? 
• Who are its customers or clients? 
• What mode of payment is used: cash or check? 
• What other sources of funds are available, such as rebates from suppliers and shippers, 
or proceeds of insurance claims, liquidation sales, sale of assets, and loans? 
 
Identify all expenditures associated with the suspect transactions with the following: 
• What disbursements are made to third parties, such as commissioned sales agents, 
consultants, subcontractors, suppliers, and shippers? 
• Did the business have any extraordinary expenses during the suspect time period, such 
as extra commissions, advertising allowances (payments made by a manufacturer to the 
retail customer to assist the customer in meeting its advertising expenses), or inventory 
losses? 
• How are the expenses and disbursements paid: by cash, or by check? From which 
accounts? 
• Does the business maintain an account or fund used to pay miscellaneous expenses? If 
so, where is it located, who keeps the records, and who signs the checks or authorizes 
payments? 
• How are travel and entertainment expenses reimbursed? From which account? 
• What is the company’s policy toward business gifts? What gifts were given to the suspect 
and/or recipients? How were they paid for? Which records are maintained regarding 
them? 
 
WHERE ARE THE COMPANY’S BANK ACCOUNTS? 
Find out where the business deposits its receipts. This is quickly determined from the bank 
stamp on checks deposited from customers. Identify all company accounts by bank, account 
number, and authorized signature. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.722                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHAT IS THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE BUSINESS? 
This data might provide evidence of a motive for the fraud, or the fruits thereof. 
 
WHAT IS THE COMPANY’S RECORD-KEEPING SYSTEM? 
What kind of records does the company keep? For how long, and where are they kept? Who 
maintains them? 
 
Sources of Information for the Business Profile 
PRINCIPALS, EMPLOYEES, AND RECORDS OF SUSPECT BUSINESS 
People suspected of making illegal payments might submit to an interview, particularly if 
they are confident that the payments are well hidden. Interviews should also include other 
key employees (including the financial personnel) involved in the suspect transactions, 
particularly those who have since left the company. Use the Business Profile as a guide to 
questioning.  
 
CUSTOMERS AND COMPETITORS 
In a kickback case, the “customer” (agency) is the employer of the person taking payoffs, 
and is also the victim of the crime. Customers and competitors can provide valuable 
information about the payer’s business operation, particularly concerning the payer’s regular 
bank account, which can be identified through canceled checks. The customer might also 
have invoices and shipping documents that might lead to off-book funds. 
 
BANKS AND LENDING INSTITUTIONS 
The business’s banker might have credit applications, financial statements, loan files, and 
bank account information that might help the examiner. 
 
BUSINESS REPORTING COMPANIES 
Dun & Bradstreet and other commercial reporting companies disseminate basic information 
about the size, structure, sales, and employees of the business. Information about larger 
companies is found in Standard & Poors and other business directories. Other information 
on public record information is located in the “Sources of Information” chapter in the 
Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.723 
Proving On-Book Payments 
There are three basic methods for concealing on-book payments of bribes and/or kickbacks. 
They are fictitious payables, ghost employees, and overbilling. The following are the 
examination steps for identifying and tracing these payments.  
 
Fictitious Disbursement Schemes 
In order to examine on-book payments, obtain the following records from the entity 
suspected of making the illegal payments: 
 
BANK ACCOUNT INFORMATION 
• All records of payments, canceled checks, wire transfer receipts, receipts for the 
purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders, and withdrawal slips 
• Check registers 
• Account statements 
 
SALES BACKUP DOCUMENTATION 
• Purchase orders 
• Invoices 
• Documents showing receipt of goods ordered 
 
ACCOUNTING BOOKS AND RECORDS 
Examine the cash disbursement journals and ledgers. The most important of the above 
information (and often the only information needed) is the bank account information. Begin 
by examining the checks, check register, and/or the cash disbursement journal and paying 
particular attention to the following: 
• Payables and expenses charged to the account (cust omer) on which the illicit payments were made — If 
the examiner suspects that kickbacks were paid on sales to the ABC Corporation, for 
example, look at the payables and expenses charged to that account/customer. 
• Payments for services — Check payments for services such as sales commissions or 
consulting fees, which do not require the delivery of goods and need relatively little 
documentation to obtain payment. 
• Anomalous charges — For the business, an example of anomalous payments can be those 
for design fees paid by a company that is engaged in business that normally would not 
require such services.  
• The endorsement on the check — This might be by signature, or more commonly, by a stamp 
in the name of the business payee. Note the identity of the endorser. (Some corrupt 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.724                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
recipients have been known to endorse such checks in their own name.) 
• The location where the check was negotiated —If not obvious from the endorsement, identify 
the bank where the deposit was made by checking the depository bank’s stamp on the 
back of the check. The geographical location of the depository bank is an important lead 
that can connect the check to the suspected recipient. Determining the depository bank’s 
identity is critical to obtaining the recipient’s bank account information. 
• Checks with a second endorsement — A typical indication of a phony payable check is one paid 
to, and endorsed by, a business, which is then endorsed by an individual, thereby 
permitting it to be cashed or deposited in a personal account. In similar fashion, a check 
payable to a third party can be signed over to the issuer of the check. 
• Cashed (not deposited) checks payable to a business — Generally, a “For Deposit Only” stamp 
appears on the back of deposited checks, although this is not always the case. Most 
banks have a code stamp that indicates whether the check was cashed or not. These 
codes vary, and can be obtained from the bank where the check was negotiated. 
• Checks that fall into an unexplained pattern — An example of a suspicious payable scheme is 
one where checks are drawn once a month in an amount equal to some percentage of 
the sales against which they are charged, and are not otherwise explained. Such a pattern 
might indicate a kickback scheme. If an examination of the checks themselves does not 
yield any clear leads, compare the various records of payment with the backup 
documentation. Note particularly the following circumstances: 
• The absence of documentation — The absence of documentation to support a particular 
payment can include: 
? No invoice appearing in the files for a payment to a supplier or contractor. 
? No receipt to indicate that materials paid for were delivered. 
? No consultant’s work product to substantiate consulting fees paid. 
• Discrepancies — Discrepancies between payment information and backup documentation 
can include: 
? A check payable to a supplier in an amount different than his invoice. 
? A check payable to a person or entity different than that identified on the invoice. 
• Anomalies in support documents — Anomalies in the backup documentation can include 
invoices from several suppliers in different names that: 
? Have the same business address. 
? Are signed by the same person. 
? Returned to a post office box.  
• Unnumbered or sequentially numbered invoices — An example of an invoice scam uses invoices 
numbered 101, 102, and 103, which are dated 30 days apart. Of course, it is highly 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.725 
unlikely that a legitimate business would refrain from issuing invoices in the interim. 
• Alterations — Copies of originals can be made for concealing alterations of original 
documents. Examples can include alterations or photocopies of backup papers.  
• Location and other information on the invoices that tie it to the suspected recipient — If the above 
steps still do not yield any suspect payments, return to the check registers and cash 
disbursement journals to look for discrepancies between the entries and the checks or 
backup documentation, or their absence. The register and journals might also indicate 
the purpose of payments made by wire, cashier’s check, or cash. 
 
TRACING PROCEDURES  
When a suspect payment has been isolated, begin the tracing process. Remember that the 
phony payable might go directly to the recipient (deposited in a shell account), or through an 
intermediary account, person, or entity. It might even be converted to cash by the payer, and 
the cash given to the recipient. 
 
In instances where the identity of the individual recipient is not clear from the face of the 
check (as in checks payable to a business entity), do the following: 
• Examine the back of the check. Note where the check was deposited, and the account 
number, if available. If the check is not endorsed, the bank will still be able to locate the 
account to which it was deposited through its own internal records.  
• Obtain the records of the account where the check was deposited. The signature card 
and the monthly account statement will show the nominal account holder. In the case of 
business accounts, the bank should also have a copy of the corporate resolution or 
partnership agreement authorizing the account. 
• If the identity of the individual recipient is still not clear, check the public filings required 
of business entities to determine ownership. Corporate documents (articles of 
incorporation, annual reports, and some other basic documents) and limited partnerships 
might also be filed in some jurisdictions at the county level. The fictitious name index, 
business license files, telephone billing records, and even utility billing records can also 
lead to the identity of the principals.  
• If the original check is missing or has been destroyed, a microfilm copy can be obtained 
from the bank on which the check was drawn. (The bank where the check was deposited 
will also have a microfilm copy of the check. Unless the exact date of deposit and the 
identity of the depository bank are known, it will be very difficult to locate it.) 
• Payments by wire transfer or cashier’s check  can be traced to the recipient. A wire 
transfer from an account appears on that account statement as a debit memo (often 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.726                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
abbreviated as DM ). The Wire Transfer Request should show the name of the purchaser, 
the payee, and the bank and account number to which the funds were transferred. The 
sender receives a copy of this request, and the bank also maintains a copy, which is 
usually filed by date. 
• The bank’s retained copy of a cashier’s check will identify the payee. The bank also keeps 
the negotiated check when it is returned for payment. It will contain the endorsement 
and show where it was negotiated. Banks usually file cashier’s checks by number, making 
it necessary to know the approximate date they were issued to link them to the 
purchasers. Look for a cashier’s check or wire transfer on the dates of suspect cash 
withdrawals, checks to cash, or checks to the issuing bank. Remember that such 
instruments can be purchased for cash from any bank, not only from the bank where the 
payer’s account is located. 
• If the trail described above leads to an intermediary, the entire process must be repeated.  
 
Ghost Employee Schemes 
Illicit funds can be generated by funneling phony salary payments to fictitious or former 
employees, or by making extra payments to presently salaried employees who then either 
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipient. This is in addition to ghost 
employee schemes used for embezzlement, described previously. To trace such payments, 
payroll and employee lists, personnel files, employment applications, tax withholding forms, 
and payroll checks should be obtained from the suspect payer company. 
 
Attempt to identify the ghost through the following steps: 
• Compare a list of all current and former employees from the personnel office to the 
payroll list. Note discrepancies. Determine whether any employees have failed to execute 
tax withholding forms, or have not elected to receive any health benefits or other 
optional withdrawals, such as enforced savings plans. The absence of such elections is 
often an indication that the employee does not exist. 
• A regular employee’s normal salary might also  be inflated, or, more commonly, travel 
and expense reimbursements might be padded to generate illicit funds. Look for unusual 
disbursements from the accounts in which such checks are deposited. 
 
Once a suspect paycheck has been identified, determine whether the check was cashed or 
deposited. Note the endorsement, the bank, and account where the check was deposited. 
Determine whether there are any second endorsements that might transfer the check to the 
ultimate recipient. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.727 
Overbilling Schemes 
As described above, illicit funds might be added to legitimate payments for goods or services 
provided by actual suppliers, subcontractors, engineers, and agents, with the additional 
amounts being passed on by the supplier or returned to the payer (usually in cash) for 
distribution. 
 
Obtain the same records required for tracing phony payables—bank account information, 
backup documentation, and accounting records—from both the original payer and the 
intermediary. Note the following indicators of suspect payments to the intermediary: 
• Notations on invoices or other billing documents breaking out “extra” or “special” 
charges, particularly those that require no delivery of goods for payment. 
• Discrepancies between the purchase order or invoice amounts and the amount of 
payment. Particularly note invoices that appear to have been altered or copied. 
• Unusually large amounts appearing on particular bills, or bills that break a consistent 
pattern of amounts, schedule, or purpose. 
 
Disbursements from the intermediary might be covered in the same ways as in other on-
 book schemes, such as by means of phony payables, direct cash withdrawals, or 
disbursements charged to miscellaneous accounts, such as travel or entertainment. The 
tracing process is the same as in any on-book scheme. Remember that the overbilling entity 
will usually add its own fee for providing such services. Therefore, the disbursements 
coming from its account might not be in the same amount as the additional payments made 
to it. 
 
Proving Off-Book Payments 
Identifying and tracing off-book payments is usually more difficult than locating on-book 
schemes. Success generally depends upon identifying the source of the funds or accounts 
(from which payments can be traced out), using an inside witness, and focusing on the point 
of receipt. The source of off-book funds might be located by the following: 
 
Indirect Evidence of Unrecorded Sales on the Suspect Company’s Books and Records 
The suspect company’s books and records might reflect unusual costs and expenses not 
associated with the business’s known sales, such as rental payments for an undisclosed 
warehouse, shipping documents reflecting deliveries to an unlisted customer, and 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.728                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
commissions paid to sales agents in a region where sales are not reported. These indicate 
possible unrecorded sales. 
 
Unbalanced Ratios of Costs to Sales 
The cost of producing and selling a particular item usually bears some fixed relationship to 
the revenue it generates. A significant imbalance in such a ratio, such as in a situation where 
twice the supplies are ordered than are needed to produce the reported sales (and the extra is 
not located in inventory), indicates possible unrecorded transactions. This technique is used 
to identify unreported sales by bars and restaurants. 
 
Investigation in the Marketplace 
Customers of the suspect business whose payments might have been diverted to off-book 
accounts might have records, including canceled checks, which would reflect such sales, and 
the bank and account to which the funds were deposited. Customers might also reveal cash 
payments that could be used to create a slush fund. Additionally, competitors might be 
aware of other customers and transactions that could lead to evidence of off-book sales. 
 
Proving Payments in Cash  
The following techniques can be used to prove cash payments circumstantially, or to 
corroborate testimony of such payments by an inside witness: 
• Match evidence of cash withdrawals or disb ursements by the payer with corresponding 
deposits, expenditures, or visits to a safe deposit box by the recipient. 
• Look for the purchase of cashier’s checks, trav eler’s checks, or wire transfers payable to 
the recipient at, or shortly after, cash withdrawals or disbursements. Also look for a 
correlation between cash-generating transactions and money wires or courier services, 
which are sometimes used to send cash. 
• If the scheme is ongoing, consider the use of visual or electronic surveillance (if you’re a 
member of law enforcement), or try to introduce an undercover agent or implement a 
sting operation. 
• Unexplained or unusual cash disbursements or withdrawals, particularly from a business 
that does not normally deal in cash, might itself indicate illicit transactions, or 
corroborate such testimony. To be effective, the examiner must identify and rebut all 
legitimate explanations, which usually requires interviewing the payer. 
• Focus the investigation on the suspected recipient, as discussed below. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.729 
EXAMINATION FROM THE POINT OF RECEIPT 
Often, the only practical approach to identifying and tracing illegal payments is to focus on 
the suspected recipient, particularly if the person making the payments is unknown, one 
person is suspected of taking from many, the payments are in cash or from off-book funds, 
and so on. 
 
THE FINANCIAL/BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The Financial/Behavioral Profile is outlined in the “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. The Financial Profile will identify 
most illicit funds deposited to accounts or expended in significant amounts. It will not reveal 
relatively small currency transactions, particularly if they were for concealed activities, 
consumables, or unusual one-time expenses, such as medical bills. The Financial Profile 
might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless such activities are identified. This is 
done through preparation of the Behavioral Profile. During the interview be alert and review 
documents for signs that the target has: 
• A drug and/or alcohol addiction 
• A gambling habit 
• Loan shark or other private debts 
• A girlfriend (or boyfriend) supported by the target 
• Extraordinary medical expenses 
• Significant, regular cash expenses for entertainment and/or travel 
 
The Behavioral Profile might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such 
as large debts, as well as additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent 
significant amounts of cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from disclosed 
bank accounts or no admitted sources of cash income, there must be other, undisclosed 
sources of income. 
 
THE SUSPECT RECIPIENT 
An interview should almost always be requested with the target. Use the 
Financial/Behavioral Profile as a guide. Pin down the target’s income, assets, and accounts. 
If the witness claims to have legitimate sources of large sums of currency, determine the 
following: 
• What was the source of the cash? 
• What was the amount of cash on hand at the starting point of the investigation, at the 
end of each year thereafter, and on the date of the interview? 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.730                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Where was the cash kept? 
• Why was the cash not deposited in a financial institution or invested? 
• Who knew about the cash? 
• What records of the cash exist? 
• What were the denominations? 
• When and for what was any of the cash spent? 
• Will the subject consent to an inventory of the remaining cash during the interview? If 
not, why not? If so, the cash should be counted at least twice in the presence of another 
examiner. A list of serial and series numbers should also be made.  
 
If the witness testifies that suspect funds were legitimate loan proceeds, ask: 
• Who was the lender? 
• When was the loan made? 
• What was the amount of the loan? 
• What was the purpose of the loan? 
• Was the loan repaid? 
• How was the loan documented? 
 
Also attempt to interview the subject’s spouse separately. Although one spouse generally will 
not be required to testify against the other, spouses can be an important source of lead 
information—if handled carefully. 
 
THIRD-PARTY WITNESSES 
Potential third-party sources include business colleagues, personal associates, bankers, 
brokers, real estate agents, accountants and tax preparers, ex-spouses, and romantic interests 
(particularly former romantic interests). Subjects often boast to their close associates of their 
new wealth, or entertain them with the fruits thereof. Casual remarks by a subject to a 
colleague (and repeated to an examiner) have undone the suspect, even when intensive 
audits have failed. Follow the Financial/Behavioral Profile format to the extent feasible. Of 
course, no single third-party witness is likely to possess all this information, but a complete 
picture can be assembled from bits and pieces provided by a number of such sources. 
 
TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS 
Other techniques for tracing illicit payments can be found in the “Tracing Illicit 
Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.731 
Conflicts of Interest 
Conflict of interest schemes generally constitute violations of the legal principle that a 
fiduciary, agent, or employee must act in good faith, with full disclosure, and in the best 
interest of the principal or employer. A conflict of interest occurs when an employee, 
manager, or executive has an undisclosed economic or personal interest in a transaction that 
adversely affects that person’s employer. As with other corruption frauds, conflict schemes 
involve the exertion of an employee’s influence to the detriment of his company. In bribery 
schemes, fraudsters are paid to exercise their influence on behalf of a third party. Conflict of 
interest cases instead involve self-dealing by an employee.  
 
If an employee engages in a transaction that involves a conflict of interest, then the 
employee might also have breached his fiduciary duty  to his employer. An agent (employee) 
owes a fiduciary duty (duty of loyalty) to the principal (employer). The agent must act solely in 
the best interest of the principal and cannot seek to advance personal interest to the 
detriment of the principal. 
 
Breach of fiduciary duty is a civil action that can be used to redress a wide variety of conduct 
that might also constitute fraud, commercial bribery, and conflicts of interest. The elements 
of proof of breach of fiduciary duty are considerably simpler than fraud, and do not require 
proof of wrongful intent. As in conflicts of interest, the wrongdoer must reimburse the 
principal for any losses and pay over profits earned, even if the principal suffered no loss. 
 
The vast majority of conflict of interest cases occur because the fraudster has an undisclosed 
economic interest in a transaction. But the fraudster’s hidden interest is not necessarily 
economic. In some scenarios an employee acts in a manner detrimental to his company in 
order to provide a benefit to a friend or relative, even though the fraudster receives no 
financial benefit from the transaction himself.  
 
In order to be classified as a conflict of interest scheme, the employee’s interest in the 
transaction must be undisclosed. The crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster takes 
advantage of his employer; the victim organization is unaware that its employee has divided 
loyalties. If an employer knows of the employee’s interest in a business deal or negotiation, 
there can be no conflict of interest, no matter how favorable the arrangement is for  
the employee.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.732                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Any bribery scheme we discussed in the previous section could occur as a conflict of 
interest. The only difference is the fraudster’s motive. For instance, if an employee approves 
payment on a fraudulent invoice submitted by a vendor in return for a kickback, this is 
bribery. If, on the other hand, an employee approves payment on invoices submitted by his 
own company (and if his ownership is undisclosed), this is a conflict of interest.  
 
The distinction between the two schemes is obvious. In the bribery case the fraudster 
approves the invoice in return for a kickback, while in a conflict case he approves the invoice 
because of his own hidden interest in the vendor. Aside from the employee’s motive for 
committing the crime, the mechanics of the two transactions are practically identical. The 
same duality can be found in bid-rigging cases, where an employee influences the selection 
of a company in which he has a hidden interest instead of influencing the selection of a 
vendor who has bribed him.  
 
Conflict schemes do not always simply mirror bribery schemes, though. There are a numbers 
of ways in which an employee can use his influence to benefit a company in which he has a 
hidden interest. This section will discuss some of the more common conflict schemes.  
 
Purchase Schemes 
Purchase schemes are very similar to the billing schemes discussed in the Asset 
Misappropriation section, so it will be helpful at  this point to discuss the distinction we have 
drawn between traditional billing schemes and purchasing schemes that are conflicts of 
interest.  
 
While it is true that any time an employee assists in the overbilling of his company there is 
probably some conflict of interest (the employee causes harm to his employer because of a 
hidden financial interest in the transaction), this does not necessarily mean that every false 
billing will be categorized as a conflict scheme. In order for the scheme to be classified as a 
conflict of interest, the employee (or a friend or relative of the employee) must have some 
kind of ownership or employment interest in the vendor that submits the invoice.  
 
This distinction is easy to understand if we look at the nature of the fraud. Why does the 
fraudster overbill his employer? If he engages in  the scheme only for the cash, the scheme is 
a fraudulent disbursement billing scheme. If, on the other hand, he seeks to better the 
financial condition of his business at the expense of his employer, this is a conflict of 
interest. In other words, the fraudster’s interests  lie with a company other than his employer. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.733 
When an employee falsifies the invoices of a third-party vendor to whom he has no relation, 
this is not a conflict of interest scheme because the employee has no interest in that vendor. 
The sole purpose of the scheme is to generate a fraudulent disbursement.  
 
One might wonder, then, why shell company schemes are classified as fraudulent 
disbursements rather than conflicts of interest. After all, the fraudster in a shell company 
scheme owns the fictitious company and therefore must have an interest in it. Remember, 
though, that shell companies are created for the sole purpose of defrauding the employer. 
The company is not so much an entity in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool. In fact, a 
shell company is usually little more than a post office box and a bank account. The fraudster 
has no interest in the shell company that would cause a division of loyalty; he simply uses the 
shell company to bilk his employer. Shell company schemes are therefore classified as false 
billing schemes. 
 
A short rule of thumb can be used to distinguish between overbilling schemes that are 
classified as asset misappropriations and those that are conflicts of interest: if the bill 
originates from a real company  in which the fraudster has an economic or personal interest, 
and if the fraudster’s interest in the company is  undisclosed to the victim company, then the 
scheme is a conflict of interest.  
 
Now that we know what kinds of billing schemes are classified as conflicts of interest, the 
question is, how do these schemes work? After  our lengthy discussion about distinguishing 
between conflicts and fraudulent disbursements, the answer is somewhat anticlimactic. The 
schemes work the same either way. The mechanics of a billing scheme, whether conflicts or 
fraudulent disbursement, do not change. (See “Conflicts of Interest” flowchart.) 
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing superintendent de frauded his employer by purc hasing items from a certain 
vendor at inflated prices. The vendor in this case was owned by the purchasing 
superintendent but established in his wife’s name and run by his brother. The perpetrator’s 
interest in the company was undisclosed. The vendor would buy items on the open market, 
then inflate the prices and resell the items to the victim company. The purchasing 
superintendent used his influence to ensure that his employer continued doing business with 
the vendor and paying the exorbitant prices.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.734                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fraudsters also engage in bid-rigging on behalf of their own companies. The methods used 
to rig bids are discussed in detail in the Bribery section and will not be dealt with in depth 
here. Briefly stated, an employee of the purchasing company is in a perfect position to rig 
bids if he has access to the bids of his competitors. Since he can find out what prices other 
vendors have bid, the fraudster can easily tailor his own company’s bid to win the contract. 
Fraudsters also sometimes use bid waivers to avoid competitive bidding outright.  
 
EXAMPLE   
A manager processed several unsubstantiated bid waivers in order to direct purchases to a 
vendor in which one of his employees had an interest. The conflict was undisclosed and the 
scheme cost the victim company over $150,000.  
 
In other cases a fraudster might ignore his employer’s purchasing rotation and direct an 
inordinate number of purchases or contracts to his own company. Any way in which a 
fraudster exerts his influence to divert business to a company in which he has a hidden 
interest is a conflict of interest.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.735 
Unique Assets 
Not all conflict schemes occur in the traditional vendor-buyer relationship. Sometimes 
schemes involve employees negotiating for the purchase of some unique, typically large asset 
such as land or a building in which the employee had an undisclosed interest. It is in the 
process of these negotiations that the fraudster violates his duty of loyalty to his employer. 
Because he stands to profit from the sale of the asset, the employee does not negotiate in 
good faith to his employer; he does not attempt to get the best price possible. The fraudster 
will reap a greater financial benefit if the purchase price is high.  
 
For example, an employee in charge of negotiating mineral leases on land that he secretly 
owns is obviously in a position of compromise. There will be no financial motive for this 
employee to negotiate a favorable lease on behalf of his employer.  
 
Turnaround Sales  
A special kind of purchasing scheme sometimes used by fraudsters is called the turnaround 
sale or the flip. In this type of scheme an employee knows his employer is seeking to purchase 
a certain asset and takes advantage of the situation by purchasing the asset himself (usually in 
the name of an accomplice or shell company). The fraudster then turns around and resells 
the item to his employer at an inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A chief executive officer, conspiring with a former employee, sold an office building to the 
CEO’s company. What made the transaction suspicious was that the building had been 
purchased by the former employee on the same day that it was resold to the victim company, 
and for $1.2 million less than the price charged to the CEO’s company.  
 
Sales Schemes 
There are two principal types of conflict schemes associated with sales of goods or services 
by the victim company. The first and most harmful is the underselling of goods or services. 
Just as a corrupt employee can cause his employer to overpay  for goods or services sold by a 
company in which he has a hidden interest, so too can he cause the employer to undersell to a 
company in which he maintains a hidden interest. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.736                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Underbillings 
Many employees who have hidden interests in outside companies sell goods or services to 
these companies at below-market prices. This results in a diminished profit margin or even a 
loss for the victim organization, depending upon the size of the discount.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee disposed of his employer’s real esta te by selling it below fair market value to a 
company in which he had a hidden interest, causing a loss of approximately $500,000.  
 
Writing Off Sales 
The other type of sales scheme involves tampering with the books of the victim company to 
decrease or write off the amount owed by the company in which the employee has a hidden 
interest. For instance, after an employee’s company purchases goods or services from the 
victim organization, credit memos may be issued against the sale, causing it to be written off 
to contra accounts such as Discounts and Allowances. A large number of reversing entries to 
sales may be a sign that fraud is occurring in an organization.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A plant manager assisted favored clients by delaying billing on their purchases for up to 60 
days. When the receivable on these clients’ accounts became delinquent, the perpetrator 
issued credit memos against the sales to delete them. The plant manager issued new invoices 
on the sales after the “old” receivables were taken off the books. In this way, the receivables 
could be carried indefinitely on the books without ever becoming past due.  
  
Other Schemes  
In other cases, the perpetrator might not write off the scheme, but simply delay billing. This 
is sometimes done as a “favor” to a friendly client and is not an outright avoidance of the bill 
but rather a dilatory tactic. The victim organization eventually gets paid, but loses time value 
on the payment, which arrives later than it should.  
 
Business Diversions 
A number of employees end up starting their own businesses, which compete directly with 
their employers. While still employed by the victim organization, these employees might 
begin siphoning off clients for their own business. This activity clearly violates the 
employee’s duty of loyalty to the employer, and frequently violates the company’s internal 
policies. There is nothing unscrupulous about free competition, but while a person acts as a 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.737 
representative of his employer, it is certainly improper to try to undercut the employer and 
take his clients. Normal standards of business ethics require employees to act in the best 
interests of their employers.  
 
Resource Diversions 
Some employees divert the funds and other resources of their employers to the development 
of their own business. This kind of scheme involves elements of both conflicts of interest 
and fraudulent disbursements. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A vice president of a company authorized large expenditures to develop a unique type of 
new equipment used by a certain contractor. Another firm subsequently took over the 
contractor, as well as the new equipment. Shortly after that, the vice president retired and 
went to work for the firm that had bought out the contractor. The fraudster had managed 
to use his employer’s money to fund a company in which he eventually developed an interest.  
 
While these schemes are clearly corruption schemes, the funds are diverted through the use 
of a fraudulent disbursement. The money could be drained from the victim organization 
through a check tampering scheme, a billing scheme, a payroll scheme, or an expense 
reimbursement scheme. For a discussion of the methods used to generate fraudulent 
disbursements, please refer to the Asset Misappropriation section.  
 
Financial Interest in Companies Under Perpetrator's Supervision 
Sometimes an employee will have a direct or indirect financial interest in a company under 
his supervision. For example, accountants sometimes hold stock in a company they audit. 
These problems often occur in government. 
 
Financial Disclosure 
Management has an obligation to disclose to the shareholders significant fraud committed by 
officers, executives, and others in positions of trust. Management does not have the 
responsibility of disclosing uncharged criminal conduct of its officers and executives. 
However, if and when officers, executives, or other persons in trusted positions become 
subjects of a criminal indictment, disclosure is required. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.738                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The inadequate disclosure of conflicts of interest is among the most serious of frauds. 
Inadequate disclosure of related-party transactions is not limited to any specific industry; it 
transcends all business types and relationships. 
 
Appearance of Conflict of Interest 
A final type of conflict of interest is the appearance of such. Examples include ownership in a 
blind trust, in which the employee has no authority to make investment decisions, or an 
external auditor owning a minority interest in a company that is audited by the auditor’s firm. 
Such matters are rarely prosecuted as criminal offenses. 
 
Detection of Conflicts of Interest 
Conflicts of interest are probably one of the most difficult schemes to uncover. Therefore, 
no fast and easy detection methods exist for this type of fraud. Some of the more common 
methods that can be used are tips and complaints, comparisons of vendor addresses with 
employee addresses, review of vendor ownership files, review of exit interviews, 
comparisons of vendor addresses to addresses of subsequent employers, policies requiring 
certain employees to provide the names and employers of immediate family members, and 
interviews with purchasing personnel for favorable treatment of one or more vendors. 
 
Tips and Complaints 
If a particular vendor is being favored, then competing vendors may file complaints. 
Additionally, employee complaints about the service of a favored vendor may lead to the 
discovery of a conflict of interest. 
 
Comparison of Vendor Addresses with Employee Addresses 
If nominee or related parties are used as owners of vendors, then the business address of the 
vendor may match that of the employee. Also, look for post office box addresses for 
vendors. This detection method is similar to that used for locating phony vendors. 
 
Review of Vendor Ownership Files 
When a vendor is selected, a complete file of the ownership of that vendor should be kept. 
This is particularly important for closely held businesses. If the vendor is required to update 
the file annually then changes in ownership will also be disclosed. A computer comparison 
of the vendor ownership and the employee file may reveal conflicts of interest. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.739 
Review of Exit Interviews and Comparisons of Vendor Addresses to Addresses of Subsequent Employers 
If a review of an employee’s exit interview yields the name and address of the subsequent 
employer, then a simple comparison of that name and address with the vendor file may 
reveal conflicts of interest wherein the employee has obtained employment from  
a contractor. 
 
Interviews of Purchasing Personnel for Favorable Treatment of One or More Vendors 
Employees are generally the first to observe that a vendor is receiving favorable treatment. 
Therefore, by asking employees if any vendor is receiving favorable treatment, the examiner 
may discover conflicts of interest that would otherwise have gone unnoticed. Another 
question that may be asked of employees is whether any vendor’s service (or product) has 
recently become substandard.  
 
Policies Requiring Certain Employees to Provide the Names and Employers of Immediate Family Members 
Where acceptable by law, a productive audit test may be to require members of management, 
as well as members of the procurement department, to provide detailed information 
regarding the names and employers of all immediate family members and household 
members. Comparing the names and employers of family members to the current position 
of the employee may lead to information that would require further investigation to 
determine whether a conflict of interest exists. 
 
Prevention of Conflicts of Interest 
Organizations should establish policies clearly de fining what constitutes a conflict of interest, 
and prohibiting any such entanglements by officers, directors, employees, or other agents of 
the organization. A policy requiring employees to complete an annual disclosure statement is 
an excellent proactive approach to dealing with potential conflicts. Comparing the disclosed 
names and addresses with vendor and customer lists may reveal real conflicts of interest or 
the appearance of such. Furthermore, these statements will reinforce in employees the idea 
that engaging in conflicts of interests is unacceptable and will result in severe consequences.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.801 



:


briberi and corrupt
briberi
gener briberi and corrupt ar offbook fraud that occur in the form of kickback
gift or gratuiti to govern employe from contractor or to privat busi
employe from vendor for a detail discuss of the legal element of briberi and
corrupt pleas see the law section of the fraud examin manual
at it heart a bribe is a busi transact albeit an illeg or uneth on a person
bui someth with the bribe he pai what he bui is the influenc of the recipi
briberi scheme can be difficult and expens though thei ar not nearli as common as
other form of occup fraud such as asset misappropri briberi scheme tend to
be much more costli
briberi mai be defin as the offer give receiv or solicit anyth of valu to
influenc an offici act the term offici act mean that tradit briberi statut onli
proscrib payment made to influenc the decis of govern agent or employe
mani occup fraud scheme howev involv commerci briberi which is similar to the
tradit definit of briberi except that someth of valu is offer to influenc a
busi decis rather than an offici act of govern commerci briberi mai or mai
not be a crimin offens for exampl in the unit state there is no gener feder law
prohibit commerci briberi in all instanc howev there ar statut prohibit
briberi of employe of financi institut to influenc a loan therefor the law of your
particular jurisdict and the fact of the case will determin whether briberi in the privat
sector mai be prosecut crimin commerci briberi can often be pursu in the civil
court as breach of fiduciari duti or conflict of interest see the legal section for
more inform
accord to ernst young 11th global fraud survei drive ethic growthnew market
new challeng corrupt is still a signific problem for busi and execut
particularli due to the drive for compani growth despit the multitud of anticorrupt
legisl and increas enforc effort around the world corrupt is still preval
briberi scheme gener fall into two broad categori kickback and bidrig scheme
kickback ar undisclos payment made by vendor to employe of purchas
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1702 2011 fraud examin manual
compani the purpos of a kickback is usual to enlist the corrupt employe in an
overbil scheme sometim vendor pai kickback simpli to get extra busi from the
purchas compani bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a
vendor in win a contract through the competit bid process
kickback scheme
kickback in the commerci sens ar the give or receiv anyth of valu to influenc
a busi decis without the employ knowledg and consent kickback scheme ar
usual veri similar to the bill scheme describ in the asset misappropri section
thei involv the submiss of invoic for good and servic that ar either overpr or
complet fictiti see kickback flowchart
kickback ar classifi as corrupt scheme rather than asset misappropri becaus
thei involv collus between employe and vendor in a common type of kickback
scheme a vendor submit a fraudul or inflat invoic to the victim organ and an
employe of that organ help make sure that a payment is made on the fals invoic
for hi assist the employeefraudst receiv a payment from the vendor thi
payment is the kickback
kickback scheme almost alwai attack the purchas function of the victim compani so it
stand to reason that these fraud ar often undertaken by employe with purchas
respons purchas employe often have direct contact with vendor and therefor
have an opportun to establish a collus relationship
exampl
a purchas agent redirect a number of order to a comp ani own by a supplier with
whom he wa conspir in return for the addit busi the supplier paid the
purchas agent over half the profit from the addit order
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1703
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1704 2011 fraud examin manual
divert busi to vendor
in some instanc an employeefraudst receiv a kickback simpli for direct excess
busi to a vendor there might be no overbil involv in these case the vendor
simpli pai the kickback to ensur a steadi stream of busi from the purchas
compani
if no overbil is involv in a kickback scheme on might wonder where the harm li
assum the vendor simpli want to get the buyer busi and doe not increas hi
price or bill for undeliv good and servic how is the buyer harm the problem is
that have bought off an employe of the purchas compani a vendor is no longer
subject to the normal econom pressur of the marketplac thi vendor doe not have to
compet with other supplier for the purchas compani busi and so ha no
incent to provid a low price or qualiti merchandis in these circumst the
purchas compani almost alwai end up overpai for good or servic
exampl
a travel agenc provid free travel and entertain to the purchas agent of a retail
compani in return the purchas agent agr eed to book all corpor trip through the
travel agent the victim compani estim that it paid 10000 more for airfar over a
twoyear period by book through the corrupt travel agenc than if it had us a differ
compani
onc a vendor know it ha an exclus purchas arrang it incent is to rais
price to cover the cost of the kickback most briberi scheme end up as overbil
scheme even if thei do not start that wai thi is on reason why most busi code of
ethic prohibit employe from accept undisclos gift from vendor in the long run
the employe compani is sure to pai for hi uneth conduct
overbil scheme
employe with approv author
in most instanc kickback scheme begin as overbil scheme in which a vendor submit
inflat invoic to the victim organ the fals invoic either overst the cost of
actual good and servic or reflect fictiti sale the vendor in a kickback scheme
gener seek to enlist the help of an employe with the author to approv payment of
the fraudul invoic thi author ensur payment of the fals bill without
undu hassl
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1705
exampl
a manag wa author to purchas fix asset for hi compani as part of a leasehold
improv the materi he or dere were of a cheaper qualiti and lower price than what
wa specifi but the contract he negoti did not reflect thi therefor the victim
compani paid for highqual materi but receiv lowqual materi the differ
in price between the true cost of the lowqual materi and what the compani paid wa
divert back to the manag as a kickback
the abil of the employe to author purchas and thu to author fraudul
purchas is usual a kei to kickback scheme if the fraudster can author payment
himself he doe not have to submit purchas requisit to an honest superior who might
question the valid of the transact
fraudster lack approv author
while the major of kickback scheme involv person with author to approv
purchas thi author is not an absolut necess when an employe cannot approv
fraudul purchas himself he can still orchestr a kickback scheme if he can circumv
account payabl control in some case all that is requir is the file of a fals purchas
requisit if a trust employe tell hi superior that the compani need certain materi
or servic thi is sometim suffici to get a fals invoic approv for payment such
scheme ar gener success when the person with approv author is inattent or
when he is forc to reli on hi subordin guidanc in purchas matter
corrupt employe might also prepar fals voucher to make it appear that fraudul
invoic ar legitim where proper control ar in place a complet voucher is requir
befor account payabl will pai an invoic on kei is for the fraudster to creat a purchas
order that correspond to the vendor fraudul invoic the fraudster might forg the
signatur of an author parti on the purchas order to show that the acquisit ha been
approv where the payabl system is computer an employe with access to a
restrict password can enter the system and author payment on fraudul invoic
in less sophist scheme a corrupt employe might simpli take a fraudul invoic
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepar invoic befor thei ar input into the
account payabl system a more detail descript of how fals invoic ar process
can be found in the bill scheme section
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1706 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback scheme can be veri difficult to detect in a sens the victim compani is be
attack from two direct extern a corrupt vendor submit fals invoic that induc
the victim organ to unknowingli pai for good or servic that it doe not receiv
intern on or more of the victim compani employe wait to corrobor the fals
inform provid by the vendor
other kickback scheme
bribe ar not alwai paid to employe to process phoni invoic some outsid seek
other fraudul assist from employe of the victim organ for instanc
inspector ar sometim paid off to accept substandard materi or to accept short
shipment of good
repres of compani wish to purchas good or servic from the victim
organ at unauthor discount sometim bribe employe with bill author
the corrupt employe make sale to their accomplic at greatli reduc ratessometim
even sell item at a lossand in return thei receiv a portion of the discount
kickback payment
it should also be note that everi bribe is a twosid transact in everi case where a
vendor bribe a purchas there is someon on the vendor side of the transact who is
make an illicit payment it is therefor just as like that your employe ar pai bribe as
accept them
in order to obtain the fund to make these payment employe usual divert compani
monei into a slush fund a noncompani account from whic h bribe can be made assum
that bribe ar not author by the briber compani he must find a wai to gener the
fund necessari to illeg influenc someon in anoth organ therefor the kei to
the crime from the briber perspect is the di version of monei into the slush fund thi is
a fraudul disburs of compani fund which is usual accomplish by the write
of compani check to a fictiti entiti or the submit of fals invoic in the name of a
fals entiti payment to a slush fund ar commonli code as fee for consult or other
servic
it is common to charg fraudul disburs to nebul account like consult
fee the purchas of good can be verifi by a check of inventori but there is no
inventori for these kind of servic it is therefor more difficult to prove that the
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1707
payment ar fraudul the discuss of exactli how fraudul disburs ar made
can be found in the section on check tamper and invoic
bidrig scheme
as we have said when on person pai a bribe to anoth he doe so to gain the benefit of
the recipi influenc the competit bid process in which sever supplier or
contractor ar vy for contract in what can be a veri cutthroat environ is tailormad
for briberi ani advantag on vendor can gain over hi competitor in thi arena is
extrem valuabl the benefit of insid influenc can ensur that a vendor will win a
soughtaft contract mani vendor ar will to pai for thi influenc
in the competit bid process all bidder ar legal suppos to be place on the same
plane of equal bid on the same term and condit each bidder compet for a
contract base on the specif set forth by the purchas compani vendor submit
confidenti bid state the price at which thei will complet a project in accord with
the purchas specif
the wai competit bid is rig depend larg upon the level of influenc of the
corrupt employe the more power a person ha over the bid process the more like
the person can influenc the select of a supplier therefor employe involv in bid
rig scheme like those in kickback scheme tend to have a good measur of influenc
or access to the competit bid process potenti target for accept bribe includ
buyer contract offici engin and technic repres qualiti or product
assur repres subcontractor liaison employe or anyon els with author
over the award of contract
bidrig scheme can be categor base on the stage of bid at which the fraudster
exert hi influenc bidrig scheme usual occur in the presolicit phase the
solicit phase or the submiss phase of the bid process see bidrig
flowchart
the presolicit phase
in the presolicit phase of the competit bid processbefor bid ar offici
sought for a projectbriberi scheme can be brok en down into two distinct type the first
is the need recognit scheme where an employe of a purchas compani is paid to
convinc hi compani that a particular project is necessari the second reason to bribe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1708 2011 fraud examin manual
someon in the presolicit phase is to have the specif of the contract tailor to
the strength of a particular supplier
need recognit scheme
the typic fraud in the need recognit phase of the contract negoti is a conspiraci
between the buyer and contractor where an employe of the buyer receiv someth of
valu and in return recogn a need for a particular product or servic the result of
such a scheme is that the victim organ purchas unnecessari good or servic from
a supplier at the direct of the corrupt employe
there ar sever trend that mai indic a need recognit fraud unusu high
requir for stock and inventori level mai reveal a situat in which a corrupt
employe is seek to justifi unnecessari purchas activ from a certain supplier an
employe might also justifi unnecessari purchas of inventori by write off larg number
of surplu item to scrap as these item leav the inventori thei open up space to justifi
addit purchas anoth indic of a need recognit scheme is the defin of a
need that can onli be met by a certain supplier or contractor in addit the failur to
develop a satisfactori list of backup supplier mai reveal an unusu strong attach to a
primari supplier an attach that is explain by the accept of bribe from that
supplier
specif scheme
the other type of presolicit fraud is a specif scheme the specif of a
contract ar a list of the element materi dimens and other relev requir for
complet of the project specif ar prepar to assist vendor in the bid
process tell them what thei ar requir to do and provid a firm basi for make and
accept bid
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1709
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1710 2011 fraud examin manual
on corrupt scheme that occur in thi process is the fraudul tailor of
specif to a particular vendor in these case the vendor pai off an employe of the
buyer who is involv in prepar specif for the contract in return the employe
tailor the specif to accommod that vendor capabl so that the contractor is
effect assur of win the contract
the method us to restrict competit in the bid process mai includ the us of
prequalif procedur that ar known to elimin certain competitor for instanc
the bid mai requir potenti contractor to have a certain percentag of femal or minor
ownership there is noth illeg with such a requir but if it is place in the
specif as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factor then the
employe ha sold hi influenc to benefit a dishonest vendor a clear case of corrupt
some employe distort the requir of contract by claim the specif call
for a solesourc provid or noncompetit procur thi caus competit bid
to be disregard and the contract to be award to a particular supplier the supplier
typic charg a much higher price than the compani could have obtain through
bid solesourc or noncompetit procur justif mai also be us to
elimin competit and steer contract to a particular vendor
exampl
a requisition distort the requir of a contract up for bid claim the
specif call for a solesourc provid base on the requisition inform
competit bid wa disregard and the cont ract wa award to a particular supplier
a review of other bid receiv at a later date show that certain materi were avail
for up to 70000 less than what the compani paid in the solesourc arrang the
employe had help divert the job to the contractor in return for a promis of futur
employ
anoth form of specif fraud is bid split entiti ar often requir to solicit
bid on project over a certain dollar amount in order to avoid thi requir employe
might break a larg project up into sever small project that fall below the mandatori
bid level onc the contract is split the employe can award some or all of the
compon part to a contractor with whom he is conspir
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1711
a less egregi but nevertheless unfair form of bidrig occur when a vendor pai an
employe of the buyer for the right to see the specif earlier than hi competitor the
employe doe not alter the specif to suit the vendor but instead simpli give him a
head start on plan hi bid and prepar for the job
the solicit phase
in the solicit phase of the competit bid process fraudster attempt to influenc
the select of a contractor by restrict the pool of competitor from whom bid ar
sought in other word a corrupt vendor pai an employe of the purchas compani to
ensur that on or more of the vendor competitor do not get to bid on the contract in
thi manner the corrupt vendor is abl to improv hi chanc of win the job
on type of scheme involv the sale repres who deal on behalf of a number of
potenti bidder the sale repres bribe a contract offici to rig the solicit
ensur that onli those compani repres by him get to submit bid it is not
uncommon in some sector for buyer to requir bidder to be repres by certain sale
or manufactur repres these repres pai a kickback to the buyer to
protect their client interest the result of thi transact is that the purchas compani is
depriv of the abil to get the best price on it contract typic the group of
protect vendor will not actual compet against each other for the purchas
contract but instead engag in bid pool
bid pool
bid pool is a process by which sever bidder conspir to split contract up and ensur
that each get a certain amount of work instead of submit confidenti bid the vendor
discuss what their bid will be so thei can guarante that each vendor will win a share of the
purchas compani busi for exampl if vendor a b and c ar up for three
separ job thei mai agre that as bid will be the lowest on the first contract bs bid will
be the lowest on the second contract and cs bid will be the lowest on the third contract
none of the vendor get all three job but on the other hand thei ar all guarante to get
at least on furthermor sinc thei plan their bid ahead of time the vendor can conspir
to rais their price thu the purchas compani suffer as a result of the scheme
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1712 2011 fraud examin manual
fictiti supplier
anoth wai to elimin competit in the solicit phase of the select process is to
solicit bid from fictiti supplier thi give the appear of a competit bid
situat when in fact onli on real supplier bid on the job furthermor the real
contractor can rais hi price sinc the other bid ar fraudul and sure to be higher than
hi own in effect the bid from fictiti supplier serv to valid the exagger quot
from the real contractor
other method
in some case competit for a contract can be limit by sever restrict the time for
submit bid certain supplier ar given advanc notic of contract befor bid ar
solicit these supplier ar therefor abl to begin prepar their bid ahead of time with
the short time frame for develop bid propos the supplier with advanc knowledg of
the contract will have a decid advantag over hi competit
bribe purchas offici can also restrict competit for their coconspir by solicit
bid in obscur public where other vendor ar unlik to see them again thi is
done to elimin potenti rival and creat an advantag for the corrupt supplier some
scheme have also involv the public of bid solicit dure holidai period when
those supplier not in the know ar unlik to be look for potenti contract in more
blatant case the bid of outsid ar accept but ar lost or improperli disqualifi by
the corrupt employe of the purchas
frequent when a vendor bribe an employe of the purchas compani to assist him in
ani kind of solicit scheme the cost of the bribe is includ in the corrupt vendor bid
therefor the purchas compani end up bear the cost of the illicit payment in the
form of a higher contract price
the submiss phase
in the actual submiss phase of the process where bid ar proffer to the buyer sever
scheme mai be us to win a contract for a particular supplier the princip offens tend
to be abus of the seal bid process competit bid ar confidenti thei ar of cours
suppos to remain seal until a specifi date at which all bid ar open and review by
the purchas compani the person or person who have access to seal bid ar often
the target of uneth vendor seek an advantag in the process
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1713
exampl
gift and cash payment were given to a major owner of a compani in exchang for
preferenti treatment dure the bid process the supplier who paid the bribe wa
allow to submit hi bid last know what price hi competitor had quot or in the
altern he wa allow to actual see hi competitor bid and adjust hi own
accordingli
vendor also bribe employe of the purchas for confidenti inform that will help
them prepar their bid other reason to bribe employe of the purchas includ ensur
receipt of a late bid or falsifi the bid log to extend the bid open date and to control bid
open
econom extort
econom extort case ar the pai up or els corrupt scheme basic the flip
side of briberi scheme instead of a vendor offer a payment to influenc a decis an
employe demand that a vendor pai him in order to make a decis in that vendor favor
if the vendor refus to pai he face some harm such as a loss of busi with the
extort compani in ani situat where an employe might accept bribe to favor a
particular compani or person the situat could be revers to a point where the employe
extort monei from a potenti purchas or supplier
exampl
a plant manag for a util compani start hi own busi on the side vendor who
want to do work for the util compani were forc by the manag to divert some of
their busi to hi own compan y those that did not plai ball lost their busi with
the util
illeg gratuiti
illeg gratuiti ar similar to briberi scheme except there is not necessarili an intent to
influenc a particular busi decis befor the fact in the typic illeg gratuiti
scenario a decis is made that happen to benefit a certain person or compani the parti
who benefit from the decis then give a gift to the person who made the decis the
gift could be anyth of valu an illeg gratuiti doe not requir proof of an intent
to influenc
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1714 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a citi commission negoti a land developm ent deal with a group of privat investor
after the deal wa approv the commission and hi wife were reward with a free
intern vacat all expens paid
at first glanc it mai seem that illeg gratuiti scheme ar harmless as long as the busi
decis in question ar not influenc by the promis of payment but most compani
ethic polici forbid employe from accept unreport gift from vendor on reason
is that illeg gratuiti scheme can and do evolv into briberi scheme onc an employe
ha been reward for an act such as direct busi to a particular supplier an
understand might be reach that futur decis benefici to the supplier will also be
reward addition even though an outright promis of payment ha not been made
employe mai direct busi to certain compani in the hope that thei will be reward
with monei or gift
method of make illeg payment
certain tradit method of make illeg payment fall into the hierarch pattern
describ below
gift travel and entertain
most briberi corrupt scheme begin with gift and favor commonli encount
item includ
wine and liquor consum
cloth and jewelri for the recipi or spous
sexual favor
lavish entertain
paid vacat
free transport on corpor jet
free us of resort facil
gift of the briber inventori or servic such as construct of home improv
by a contractor
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1715
cash payment
the next step usual involv cash payment howev cash is not practic when deal
with larg sum becaus larg amount ar difficult to gener and thei draw attent
when thei ar deposit or spent the us of currenc in major transact might itself be
incrimin
check and other financi instrument
as the scheme grow illicit payment ar often made by normal busi check cashier
check or wire transfer disguis payment on the payer book appear as some sort of
legitim busi expens often as consult fee payment can be made directli or
through an intermediari
hidden interest
in the latter stage of sophist scheme the payer might give a hidden interest in a joint
ventur or other profitmak enterpris the recipi interest might be conceal
through a straw nomine hidden in a trust or other busi entiti or mere includ by an
undocu verbal agreement such arrang ar veri difficult to detect and even if
identifi proof of corrupt intent might be difficult to demonstr
loan
three type of loan often turn up in fraud case
a prior outright payment fals describ as an innoc loan
payment on a legitim loan guarante or actual made by someon els
an actual loan made on favor term such as interestfre
payment of credit card bill
the recipi transport vacat and en tertain expens might be paid with the
payer credit card or the recipi might forward hi own credit card bill to the payer for
payment in some instanc the payer simpli let the recipi carri and us the payer card
transfer at other than fair market valu
the corrupt payer might sell or leas properti to the recipi at far less than it market
valu or might agre to bui or rent properti at inflat price the recipi might also
sell an asset to the payer but retain titl or the us of the properti
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1716 2011 fraud examin manual
promis of favor treatment
promis of favor treatment commonli take the follow form
a payer might promis a government offici lucr employ when the recipi
leav govern servic
an execut leav a privat compani for a relat govern posit might be
given favor or inflat retir and separ benefit
the spous or other rel of the intend recipi might also be emploi by the
payer compani at an inflat salari or with littl actual respons
detect of briberi scheme
red flag of briberi scheme
most briberi scheme ar detect thr ough tip from honest and disgruntl cowork or
vendor these alleg can be evalu through analysi of the red flag associ
with the suspect peopl or transact
the corrupt recipi
a person take payoff or embezzl fund often exhibit the follow characterist
the big spender thi is the most common wai to detect corrupt recipi some
recipi spend their monei less conspicu by pai off debt or pai down
mortgag
the gift taker an offici or execut who regularli accept inappropri gift is often
on suscept to larger payment
the odd coupl corrupt payer and recipi often appear to have veri friendli
social relationship frequent outsid contact particularli between parti who do not
appear to have much in common might be a sign of deeper and more troublesom ti
between the parti
the rule breaker thi is often the most signific characterist a person take
payoff will often take action on hi own or direct a subordin to bend break or
ignor standard oper procedur or rule to benefit the payer particular attent
should be direct toward those who insert themselv into area in which thei ar
normal not involv or attempt to assert author or make decis for which thei
ar not respons
the complain a corrupt recipi often make excus for defici in the payer
servic such as poor qualiti late deliveri or high price look for higher price
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1717
extra payment or commiss approv by the suspect becaus these might be the
sourc of kickback fraud
genuin need greed rather than need seem to be the motiv factor in most case
occasion howev legitim pressur such as ill of famili member or drug
addict can induc particip in an illeg scheme
the corrupt payer
like the recipi of briberi payment the payer will also demonstr certain identifi
characterist
the gift bearer the businessperson who routin offer inappropri gift provid
lavish busi entertain or otherwis tri to ingrati himself is often the on
offer still more valuabl induc
the sleaz factor the corrupt payer is frequent a person known or suspect in the
industri to be involv in payoff or other fraudul activ
the toosuccess bidder a supplier who is consist award work without ani
appar competit advantag might be provid underthet incent
poor qualiti higher price particularli after the corrupt relationship ha been seal the
qualiti of product and servic provid by the payer might deterior and price
increas
the oneperson oper in certain industri small close held compani that do not
have the report and intern control requir of their larger publicli held
competitor resort to payoff as a mean of market advantag be alert for
independ sale repres consult or other middlemen becaus thei ar
favor conduit for funnel and conceal illeg payment
gener purchas
the follow practic mai indic that singl sole sourc vendor ar be favor or
competit bid polici ar not be follow
materi ar not be order at the optim reorder point
order ar consist made from the same vendor
establish bid polici ar not be follow
the cost of materi ar out of line
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1718 2011 fraud examin manual
presolicit
restrict in an organ solicit document that tend to restrict competit ar
a red flag exampl of restrict condit includ
specif and statement of work that ar tailor to fit the product or capabl
of a singl contractor
prequalif procedur that restrict competit
unnecessari solesourc or noncompetit procur justif
contain fals statement
sign by unauthor offici
bypass necessari review procedur
other red flag in the presolicit phase includ
a buyer who provid inform or advic to a contractor on a preferenti basi
new vendor that ar ad to the qualifi list for no appar reason
statement of work specif or solesourc justif that ar develop by or
in consult with a contractor who will be permit to bid
consult who assist in the prepar of the statement of work specif or
design and ar later permit to work on the contract as subcontractor or consult
project that ar split into smaller contract to avoid review
inform that is releas by firm particip in the design and engin to
contractor compet for the prime contract
requir that ar split up so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat
bid
specif that ar not consist with similar procur in the past
bid solicit
the follow ar exampl of suspici activ that might signal fraud in the bid
solicit phase
the time for submit bid is limit so that onli those with advanc inform have
adequ time to prepar bid or propos
on contractor receiv confidenti inform that is not reveal to hi competitor
the conduct of a bidder confer which permit improp commun
between contractor who then ar in a posit to rig bid
the failur to ensur that a suffici number of potenti competitor ar awar of the
solicit by
us obscur public to publish bid solicit
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1719
publish bid solicit dure holidai period
bid solicit that ar vagu as to the time place or other requir for submit
accept bid
inadequ intern control over the number and destin of bid packag sent to
interest bidder
improp commun between purchas and contractor at trade or profession
meet
improp social contact between purchas and contractor repres
a purchas agent who ha a financi interest in the busi of a contractor
a purchas who discuss possibl employ with a contractor
the purchas assist a contractor in the prepar of hi bid
a contractor be refer to a specif subcontractor expert or sourc of suppli by an
employe of the purchas organ
the failur to amend a solicit to includ necessari chang or clarif in the
bid such as tell on contractor of chang that can be made after the bid
the falsif of document or receipt so that a late bid is accept
ani indic of collus between bidder
the falsif of a contractor qualif work histori facil equip
or personnel
bid submiss or contract accept
red flag in the submiss and postsubmiss phase of the bid process includ the
follow
procur that ha been restrict to exclud or hamper ani qualifi contractor
the improp accept of a late bid
a bidder who alwai bid last on contract and consist win them
the falsif of document or receipt to get a late bid accept
bid that ar chang after other bidder pri ce ar known thi is sometim done by
mistak deliber plant in a bid
a low bidder who withdraw to becom a subcontractor of a higher bidder who get
the contract
collus between bidder
bidder who reveal their price to on anoth
bid tend to be award in a geograph pattern or in a notic rotat
bid for a particular type of work ar alwai award to a particular compani
fals certif by a contractor
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1720 2011 fraud examin manual
the falsif of inform concern contractor qualif financi capabl
facil ownership of equip and suppli qualif of personnel and
success perform of previou job etc
method of prove corrupt payment
there ar three basic wai to prove illeg payment identifi and trace them by audit step
turn an insid wit or secretli infiltr or record ongo transact an audit might
focu on the point of suspect payment or receipt or both as a veri gener proposit
suspect onbook scheme ar best approach from the point of payment and offbook
scheme ar most easili identifi at the suspect point of receipt or through the us of an
insid wit or surveil
the busi profil analysi
the busi profil begin the examin process it identifi prospect wit and
target as well as relev document and transact and should provid lead as to
whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be us
inform of the suspect busi should be obtain about the organ personnel
monei flow pattern sourc of avail fund relat expenditur etc locat of bank
account financi condit and recordkeep system thi inform can be obtain
through interview of employe custom and competitor busi bank account and
loan record financi statement tax return busi report compani and busi
public file
how is the busi organ legal and structur
know thi inform help determin what record ar avail corpor
partnership etc and where to go to get them
who ar the kei personnel associ with the enterpris
thi help to identifi potenti wit and inform as well as possibl subject kei
posit includ the owner of the busi the peopl directli involv in the suspect
transact includ secretari and cleric staff present and former employe the
number cruncher the bookkeep outsid account and tax prepar outsid
consult sale repres and independ contractor a popular conduit for
payoff and competitor often eager wit who can identifi lead to sourc of off
book fund such as custom and rebat practic
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1721
what is the monei flow pattern involv in the suspect transact
trace the flow of fund in the suspect transact is import where doe the monei
come from and where doe it go inform about the sourc of fund can provid lead
as to whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be emploi and the locat of
offbook account expenditur relat to the suspect transact might cover
onbook payment
determin all sourc of fund with the follow question
what good or servic doe the busi provid
who ar it custom or client
what mode of payment is us cash or check
what other sourc of fund ar avail such as rebat from supplier and shipper
or proce of insur claim liquid sale sale of asset and loan
identifi all expenditur associ with the suspect transact with the follow
what disburs ar made to third parti such as commiss sale agent
consult subcontractor supplier and shipper
did the busi have ani extraordinari expens dure the suspect time period such
as extra commiss advertis allow payment made by a manufactur to the
retail custom to assist the custom in meet it advertis expens or inventori
loss
how ar the expens and disburs paid by cash or by check from which
account
doe the busi maintain an account or fund us to pai miscellan expens if
so where is it locat who keep the record and who sign the check or author
payment
how ar travel and entertain expens reimburs from which account
what is the compani polici toward busi gift what gift were given to the suspect
andor recipi how were thei paid for which record ar maintain regard
them
where ar the compani bank account
find out where the busi deposit it receipt thi is quickli determin from the bank
stamp on check deposit from custom identifi all compani account by bank account
number and author signatur
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1722 2011 fraud examin manual
what is the financi condit of the busi
thi data might provid evid of a motiv for the fraud or the fruit thereof
what is the compani recordkeep system
what kind of record doe the compani keep for how long and where ar thei kept who
maintain them
sourc of inform for the busi profil
princip employe and record of suspect busi
peopl suspect of make illeg payment might submit to an interview particularli if
thei ar confid that the payment ar well hidden interview should also includ other
kei employe includ the financi personnel involv in the suspect transact
particularli those who have sinc left the compani us the busi profil as a guid to
question
custom and competitor
in a kickback case the custom agenc is the employ of the person take payoff
and is also the victim of the crime custom and competitor can provid valuabl
inform about the payer busi oper particularli concern the payer regular
bank account which can be identifi through cancel check the custom might also
have invoic and ship document that might lead to offbook fund
bank and lend institut
the businesss banker might have credit applic financi statement loan file and
bank account inform that might help the examin
busi report compani
dun bradstreet and other commerci report compani dissemin basic inform
about the size structur sale and employe of the busi inform about larger
compani is found in standard poor and other busi directori other inform
on public record inform is locat in the sourc of inform chapter in the
investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1723
prove onbook payment
there ar three basic method for conceal onbook payment of bribe andor kickback
thei ar fictiti payabl ghost employe and overbil the follow ar the
examin step for identifi and trace these payment
fictiti disburs scheme
in order to examin onbook payment obtain the follow record from the entiti
suspect of make the illeg payment
bank account inform
all record of payment cancel check wire transfer receipt receipt for the
purchas of cashier check and monei order and withdraw slip
check regist
account statement
sale backup document
purchas order
invoic
document show receipt of good order
account book and record
examin the cash disburs journal and ledger the most import of the abov
inform and often the onli inform need is the bank account inform begin
by examin the check check regist andor the cash disburs journal and pai
particular attent to the follow
payabl and expens charg to the account cust omer on which the illicit payment were made if
the examin suspect that kickback were paid on sale to the abc corpor for
exampl look at the payabl and expens charg to that accountcustom
payment for servic check payment for servic such as sale commiss or
consult fee which do not requir the deliveri of good and need rel littl
document to obtain payment
anomal charg for the busi an exampl of anomal payment can be those
for design fee paid by a compani that is engag in busi that normal would not
requir such servic
the endors on the check thi might be by signatur or more commonli by a stamp
in the name of the busi paye note the ident of the endors some corrupt
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1724 2011 fraud examin manual
recipi have been known to endors such check in their own name
the locat where the check wa negoti if not obviou from the endors identifi
the bank where the deposit wa made by check the depositori bank stamp on the
back of the check the geograph locat of the depositori bank is an import lead
that can connect the check to the suspect recipi determin the depositori bank
ident is critic to obtain the recipi bank account inform
check with a second endors a typic indic of a phoni payabl check is on paid
to and endors by a busi which is then endors by an individu therebi
permit it to be cash or deposit in a person account in similar fashion a check
payabl to a third parti can be sign over to the issuer of the check
cash not deposit check payabl to a busi gener a for deposit onli stamp
appear on the back of deposit check although thi is not alwai the case most
bank have a code stamp that indic whether the check wa cash or not these
code vari and can be obtain from the bank where the check wa negoti
check that fall into an unexplain pattern an exampl of a suspici payabl scheme is
on where check ar drawn onc a month in an amount equal to some percentag of
the sale against which thei ar charg and ar not otherwis explain such a pattern
might indic a kickback scheme if an examin of the check themselv doe not
yield ani clear lead compar the variou record of payment with the backup
document note particularli the follow circumst
the absenc of document the absenc of document to support a particular
payment can includ
no invoic appear in the file for a payment to a supplier or contractor
no receipt to indic that materi paid for were deliv
no consult work product to substanti consult fee paid
discrep discrep between payment inform and backup document
can includ
a check payabl to a supplier in an amount differ than hi invoic
a check payabl to a person or entiti differ than that identifi on the invoic
anomali in support document anomali in the backup document can includ
invoic from sever supplier in differ name that
have the same busi address
ar sign by the same person
return to a post offic box
unnumb or sequenti number invoic an exampl of an invoic scam us invoic
number 101 102 and 103 which ar date 30 dai apart of cours it is highli
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1725
unlik that a legitim busi would refrain from issu invoic in the interim
alter copi of origin can be made for conceal alter of origin
document exampl can includ alter or photocopi of backup paper
locat and other inform on the invoic that tie it to the suspect recipi if the abov
step still do not yield ani suspect payment return to the check regist and cash
disburs journal to look for discrep between the entri and the check or
backup document or their absenc the regist and journal might also indic
the purpos of payment made by wire cashier check or cash
trace procedur
when a suspect payment ha been isol begin the trace process rememb that the
phoni payabl might go directli to the recipi deposit in a shell account or through an
intermediari account person or entiti it might even be convert to cash by the payer and
the cash given to the recipi
in instanc where the ident of the individu recipi is not clear from the face of the
check as in check payabl to a busi entiti do the follow
examin the back of the check note where the check wa deposit and the account
number if avail if the check is not endors the bank will still be abl to locat the
account to which it wa deposit through it own intern record
obtain the record of the account where the check wa deposit the signatur card
and the monthli account statement will show the nomin account holder in the case of
busi account the bank should also have a copi of the corpor resolut or
partnership agreement author the account
if the ident of the individu recipi is still not clear check the public file requir
of busi entiti to determin ownership corpor document articl of
incorpor annual report and some other basic document and limit partnership
might also be file in some jurisdict at the counti level the fictiti name index
busi licens file telephon bill record and even util bill record can also
lead to the ident of the princip
if the origin check is miss or ha been destroi a microfilm copi can be obtain
from the bank on which the check wa drawn the bank where the check wa deposit
will also have a microfilm copi of the check unless the exact date of deposit and the
ident of the depositori bank ar known it will be veri difficult to locat it
payment by wire transfer or cashier check can be trace to the recipi a wire
transfer from an account appear on that account statement as a debit memo often
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1726 2011 fraud examin manual
abbrevi as dm the wire transfer request should show the name of the purchas
the paye and the bank and account number to which the fund were transfer the
sender receiv a copi of thi request and the bank also maintain a copi which is
usual file by date
the bank retain copi of a cashier check will identifi the paye the bank also keep
the negoti check when it is return for payment it will contain the endors
and show where it wa negoti bank usual file cashier check by number make
it necessari to know the approxim date thei were issu to link them to the
purchas look for a cashier check or wire transfer on the date of suspect cash
withdraw check to cash or check to the issu bank rememb that such
instrument can be purchas for cash from ani bank not onli from the bank where the
payer account is locat
if the trail describ abov lead to an intermediari the entir process must be repeat
ghost employe scheme
illicit fund can be gener by funnel phoni salari payment to fictiti or former
employe or by make extra payment to present salari employe who then either
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipi thi is in addit to ghost
employe scheme us for embezzl describ previous to trace such payment
payrol and employe list personnel file employ applic tax withhold form
and payrol check should be obtain from the suspect payer compani
attempt to identifi the ghost through the follow step
compar a list of all current and former employe from the personnel offic to the
payrol list note discrep determin whether ani employe have fail to execut
tax withhold form or have not elect to receiv ani health benefit or other
option withdraw such as enforc save plan the absenc of such elect is
often an indic that the employe doe not exist
a regular employe normal salari might also be inflat or more commonli travel
and expens reimburs might be pad to gener illicit fund look for unusu
disburs from the account in which such check ar deposit
onc a suspect paycheck ha been identifi determin whether the check wa cash or
deposit note the endors the bank and account where the check wa deposit
determin whether there ar ani second endors that might transfer the check to the
ultim recipi
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1727
overbil scheme
as describ abov illicit fund might be ad to legitim payment for good or servic
provid by actual supplier subcontractor engin and agent with the addit
amount be pass on by the supplier or return to the payer usual in cash for
distribut
obtain the same record requir for trace phoni payablesbank account inform
backup document and account recordsfrom both the origin payer and the
intermediari note the follow indic of suspect payment to the intermediari
notat on invoic or other bill document break out extra or special
charg particularli those that requir no deliveri of good for payment
discrep between the purchas order or invoic amount and the amount of
payment particularli note invoic that appear to have been alter or copi
unusu larg amount appear on particular bill or bill that break a consist
pattern of amount schedul or purpos
disburs from the intermediari might be cover in the same wai as in other on
book scheme such as by mean of phoni payabl direct cash withdraw or
disburs charg to miscellan account such as travel or entertain the
trace process is the same as in ani onbook scheme rememb that the overbil entiti
will usual add it own fee for provid such servic therefor the disburs
come from it account might not be in the same amount as the addit payment made
to it
prove offbook payment
identifi and trace offbook payment is usual more difficult than locat onbook
scheme success gener depend upon identifi the sourc of the fund or account
from which payment can be trace out us an insid wit and focus on the point
of receipt the sourc of offbook fund might be locat by the follow
indirect evid of unrecord sale on the suspect compani book and record
the suspect compani book and record might reflect unusu cost and expens not
associ with the businesss known sale such as rental payment for an undisclos
warehous ship document reflect deliveri to an unlist custom and
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1728 2011 fraud examin manual
commiss paid to sale agent in a region where sale ar not report these indic
possibl unrecord sale
unbalanc ratio of cost to sale
the cost of produc and sell a particular item usual bear some fix relationship to
the revenu it gener a signific imbal in such a ratio such as in a situat where
twice the suppli ar order than ar need to produc the report sale and the extra is
not locat in inventori indic possibl unrecord transact thi techniqu is us
to identifi unreport sale by bar and restaur
investig in the marketplac
custom of the suspect busi whose payment might have been divert to offbook
account might have record includ cancel check which would reflect such sale and
the bank and account to which the fund were deposit custom might also reveal cash
payment that could be us to creat a slush fund addition competitor might be
awar of other custom and transact that could lead to evid of offbook sale
prove payment in cash
the follow techniqu can be us to prove cash payment circumstanti or to
corrobor testimoni of such payment by an insid wit
match evid of cash withdraw or disb ursement by the payer with correspond
deposit expenditur or visit to a safe deposit box by the recipi
look for the purchas of cashier check trav eler check or wire transfer payabl to
the recipi at or shortli after cash withdraw or disburs also look for a
correl between cashgener transact and monei wire or courier servic
which ar sometim us to send cash
if the scheme is ongo consid the us of visual or electron surveil if your a
member of law enforc or try to introduc an undercov agent or implement a
sting oper
unexplain or unusu cash disburs or withdraw particularli from a busi
that doe not normal deal in cash might itself indic illicit transact or
corrobor such testimoni to be effect the examin must identifi and rebut all
legitim explan which usual requir interview the payer
focu the investig on the suspect recipi as discuss below
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1729
examin from the point of receipt
often the onli practic approach to identifi and trace illeg payment is to focu on
the suspect recipi particularli if the person make the payment is unknown on
person is suspect of take from mani the payment ar in cash or from offbook fund
and so on
the financialbehavior profil
the financialbehavior profil is outlin in the trace illicit transact chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual the financi profil will identifi
most illicit fund deposit to account or expend in signific amount it will not reveal
rel small currenc transact particularli if thei were for conceal activ
consum or unusu onetim expens such as medic bill the financi profil
might give inaccur or fals neg read unless such activ ar identifi thi is
done through prepar of the behavior profil dure the interview be alert and review
document for sign that the target ha
a drug andor alcohol addict
a gambl habit
loan shark or other privat debt
a girlfriend or boyfriend support by the target
extraordinari medic expens
signific regular cash expens for entertain andor travel
the behavior profil might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such
as larg debt as well as addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent
signific amount of cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from disclos
bank account or no admit sourc of cash incom there must be other undisclos
sourc of incom
the suspect recipi
an interview should almost alwai be request with the target us the
financialbehavior profil as a guid pin down the target incom asset and account
if the wit claim to have legitim sourc of larg sum of currenc determin the
follow
what wa the sourc of the cash
what wa the amount of cash on hand at the start point of the investig at the
end of each year thereaft and on the date of the interview
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1730 2011 fraud examin manual
where wa the cash kept
why wa the cash not deposit in a financi institut or invest
who knew about the cash
what record of the cash exist
what were the denomin
when and for what wa ani of the cash spent
will the subject consent to an inventori of the remain cash dure the interview if
not why not if so the cash should be count at least twice in the presenc of anoth
examin a list of serial and seri number should also be made
if the wit testifi that suspect fund were legitim loan proce ask
who wa the lender
when wa the loan made
what wa the amount of the loan
what wa the purpos of the loan
wa the loan repaid
how wa the loan document
also attempt to interview the subject spous separ although on spous gener will
not be requir to testifi against the other spous can be an import sourc of lead
informationif handl carefulli
thirdparti wit
potenti thirdparti sourc includ busi colleagu person associ banker
broker real estat agent account and tax prepar exspous and romant interest
particularli former romant interest subject often boast to their close associ of their
new wealth or entertain them with the fruit thereof casual remark by a subject to a
colleagu and repeat to an examin have undon the suspect even when intens
audit have fail follow the financialbehavior profil format to the extent feasibl of
cours no singl thirdparti wit is like to possess all thi inform but a complet
pictur can be assembl from bit and piec provid by a number of such sourc
trace illicit transact
other techniqu for trace illicit payment can be found in the trace illicit
transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1731
conflict of interest
conflict of interest scheme gener constitut violat of the legal principl that a
fiduciari agent or employe must act in good faith with full disclosur and in the best
interest of the princip or employ a conflict of interest occur when an employe
manag or execut ha an undisclos econom or person interest in a transact that
advers affect that person employ as with other corrupt fraud conflict scheme
involv the exert of an employe influenc to the detriment of hi compani in briberi
scheme fraudster ar paid to exercis their influenc on behalf of a third parti conflict of
interest case instead involv selfdeal by an employe
if an employe engag in a transact that involv a conflict of interest then the
employe might also have breach hi fiduciari duti to hi employ an agent employe
ow a fiduciari duti duti of loyalti to the princip employ the agent must act sole in
the best interest of the princip and cannot seek to advanc person interest to the
detriment of the princip
breach of fiduciari duti is a civil action that can be us to redress a wide varieti of conduct
that might also constitut fraud commerci briberi and conflict of interest the element
of proof of breach of fiduciari duti ar consider simpler than fraud and do not requir
proof of wrong intent as in conflict of interest the wrongdoer must reimburs the
princip for ani loss and pai over profit earn even if the princip suffer no loss
the vast major of conflict of interest case occur becaus the fraudster ha an undisclos
econom interest in a transact but the fraudster hidden interest is not necessarili
econom in some scenario an employe act in a manner detriment to hi compani in
order to provid a benefit to a friend or rel even though the fraudster receiv no
financi benefit from the transact himself
in order to be classifi as a conflict of interest scheme the employe interest in the
transact must be undisclos the crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster take
advantag of hi employ the victim organ is unawar that it employe ha divid
loyalti if an employ know of the employe interest in a busi deal or negoti
there can be no conflict of interest no matter how favor the arrang is for
the employe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1732 2011 fraud examin manual
ani briberi scheme we discuss in the previou section could occur as a conflict of
interest the onli differ is the fraudster motiv for instanc if an employe approv
payment on a fraudul invoic submit by a vendor in return for a kickback thi is
briberi if on the other hand an employe approv payment on invoic submit by hi
own compani and if hi ownership is undisclos thi is a conflict of interest
the distinct between the two scheme is obviou in the briberi case the fraudster
approv the invoic in return for a kickback while in a conflict case he approv the invoic
becaus of hi own hidden interest in the vendor asid from the employe motiv for
commit the crime the mechan of the two transact ar practic ident the
same dualiti can be found in bidrig case where an employe influenc the select
of a compani in which he ha a hidden interest instead of influenc the select of a
vendor who ha bribe him
conflict scheme do not alwai simpli mirror briberi scheme though there ar a number
of wai in which an employe can us hi influenc to benefit a compani in which he ha a
hidden interest thi section will discuss some of the more common conflict scheme
purchas scheme
purchas scheme ar veri similar to the bill scheme discuss in the asset
misappropri section so it will be help at thi point to discuss the distinct we have
drawn between tradit bill scheme and purchas scheme that ar conflict of
interest
while it is true that ani time an employe assist in the overbil of hi compani there is
probabl some conflict of interest the employe caus harm to hi employ becaus of a
hidden financi interest in the transact thi doe not necessarili mean that everi fals
bill will be categor as a conflict scheme in order for the scheme to be classifi as a
conflict of interest the employe or a friend or rel of the employe must have some
kind of ownership or employ interest in the vendor that submit the invoic
thi distinct is easi to understand if we look at the natur of the fraud why doe the
fraudster overbil hi employ if he engag in the scheme onli for the cash the scheme is
a fraudul disburs bill scheme if on the other hand he seek to better the
financi condit of hi busi at the expens of hi employ thi is a conflict of
interest in other word the fraudster interest lie with a compani other than hi employ
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1733
when an employe falsifi the invoic of a thirdparti vendor to whom he ha no relat
thi is not a conflict of interest scheme becaus the employe ha no interest in that vendor
the sole purpos of the scheme is to gener a fraudul disburs
on might wonder then why shell compani scheme ar classifi as fraudul
disburs rather than conflict of interest after all the fraudster in a shell compani
scheme own the fictiti compani and therefor must have an interest in it rememb
though that shell compani ar creat for the sole purpos of defraud the employ
the compani is not so much an entiti in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool in fact a
shell compani is usual littl more than a post offic box and a bank account the fraudster
ha no interest in the shell compani that would caus a divis of loyalti he simpli us the
shell compani to bilk hi employ shell compani scheme ar therefor classifi as fals
bill scheme
a short rule of thumb can be us to distinguish between overbil scheme that ar
classifi as asset misappropri and those that ar conflict of interest if the bill
origin from a real compani in which the fraudster ha an econom or person interest
and if the fraudster interest in the compani is undisclos to the victim compani then the
scheme is a conflict of interest
now that we know what kind of bill scheme ar classifi as conflict of interest the
question is how do these scheme work after our lengthi discuss about distinguish
between conflict and fraudul disburs the answer is somewhat anticlimact the
scheme work the same either wai the mechan of a bill scheme whether conflict or
fraudul disburs do not chang see conflict of interest flowchart
exampl
a purchas superintend de fraud hi employ by purc hase item from a certain
vendor at inflat price the vendor in thi case wa own by the purchas
superintend but establish in hi wife name and run by hi brother the perpetr
interest in the compani wa undisclos the vendor would bui item on the open market
then inflat the price and resel the item to the victim compani the purchas
superintend us hi influenc to ensur that hi employ continu do busi with
the vendor and pai the exorbit price
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1734 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster also engag in bidrig on behalf of their own compani the method us
to rig bid ar discuss in detail in the briberi section and will not be dealt with in depth
here briefli state an employe of the purchas compani is in a perfect posit to rig
bid if he ha access to the bid of hi competitor sinc he can find out what price other
vendor have bid the fraudster can easili tailor hi own compani bid to win the contract
fraudster also sometim us bid waiver to avoid competit bid outright
exampl
a manag process sever unsubstanti bid waiver in order to direct purchas to a
vendor in which on of hi employe had an interest the conflict wa undisclos and the
scheme cost the victim compani over 150000
in other case a fraudster might ignor hi employ purchas rotat and direct an
inordin number of purchas or contract to hi own compani ani wai in which a
fraudster exert hi influenc to divert busi to a compani in which he ha a hidden
interest is a conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1735
uniqu asset
not all conflict scheme occur in the tradit vendorbuy relationship sometim
scheme involv employe negoti for the purchas of some uniqu typic larg asset
such as land or a build in which the employe had an undisclos interest it is in the
process of these negoti that the fraudster violat hi duti of loyalti to hi employ
becaus he stand to profit from the sale of the asset the employe doe not negoti in
good faith to hi employ he doe not attempt to get the best price possibl the fraudster
will reap a greater financi benefit if the purchas price is high
for exampl an employe in charg of negoti miner leas on land that he secretli
own is obvious in a posit of compromis there will be no financi motiv for thi
employe to negoti a favor leas on behalf of hi employ
turnaround sale
a special kind of purchas scheme sometim us by fraudster is call the turnaround
sale or the flip in thi type of scheme an employe know hi employ is seek to purchas
a certain asset and take advantag of the situat by purchas the asset himself usual in
the name of an accomplic or shell compani the fraudster then turn around and resel
the item to hi employ at an inflat price
exampl
a chief execut offic conspir with a former employe sold an offic build to the
ceo compani what made the transact suspici wa that the build had been
purchas by the former employe on the same dai that it wa resold to the victim compani
and for 12 million less than the price charg to the ceo compani
sale scheme
there ar two princip type of conflict scheme associ with sale of good or servic
by the victim compani the first and most harm is the undersel of good or servic
just as a corrupt employe can caus hi employ to overpai for good or servic sold by a
compani in which he ha a hidden interest so too can he caus the employ to undersel to a
compani in which he maintain a hidden interest
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1736 2011 fraud examin manual
underbil
mani employe who have hidden interest in outsid compani sell good or servic to
these compani at belowmarket price thi result in a diminish profit margin or even a
loss for the victim organ depend upon the size of the discount
exampl
an employe dispos of hi employ real esta te by sell it below fair market valu to a
compani in which he had a hidden interest caus a loss of approxim 500000
write off sale
the other type of sale scheme involv tamper with the book of the victim compani to
decreas or write off the amount ow by the compani in which the employe ha a hidden
interest for instanc after an employe compani purchas good or servic from the
victim organ credit memo mai be issu against the sale caus it to be written off
to contra account such as discount and allow a larg number of revers entri to
sale mai be a sign that fraud is occur in an organ
exampl
a plant manag assist favor client by delai bill on their purchas for up to 60
dai when the receiv on these client account becam delinqu the perpetr
issu credit memo against the sale to delet them the plant manag issu new invoic
on the sale after the old receiv were taken off the book in thi wai the receiv
could be carri indefinit on the book without ever becom past due
other scheme
in other case the perpetr might not write off the scheme but simpli delai bill thi
is sometim done as a favor to a friendli client and is not an outright avoid of the bill
but rather a dilatori tactic the victim organ eventu get paid but lose time valu
on the payment which arriv later than it should
busi divers
a number of employe end up start their own busi which compet directli with
their employ while still emploi by the victim organ these employe might
begin siphon off client for their own busi thi activ clearli violat the
employe duti of loyalti to the employ and frequent violat the compani intern
polici there is noth unscrupul about free competit but while a person act as a
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1737
repres of hi employ it is certainli improp to try to undercut the employ and
take hi client normal standard of busi ethic requir employe to act in the best
interest of their employ
resourc divers
some employe divert the fund and other resourc of their employ to the develop
of their own busi thi kind of scheme involv element of both conflict of interest
and fraudul disburs
exampl
a vice presid of a compani author larg expenditur to develop a uniqu type of
new equip us by a certain contractor anoth firm subsequ took over the
contractor as well as the new equip shortli after that the vice presid retir and
went to work for the firm that had bought out the contractor the fraudster had manag
to us hi employ monei to fund a compani in which he eventu develop an interest
while these scheme ar clearli corrupt scheme the fund ar divert through the us
of a fraudul disburs the monei could be drain from the victim organ
through a check tamper scheme a bill scheme a payrol scheme or an expens
reimburs scheme for a discuss of the method us to gener fraudul
disburs pleas refer to the asset misappropri section
financi interest in compani under perpetr supervis
sometim an employe will have a direct or indirect financi interest in a compani under
hi supervis for exampl account sometim hold stock in a compani thei audit
these problem often occur in govern
financi disclosur
manag ha an oblig to disclos to the sharehold signific fraud commit by
offic execut and other in posit of trust manag doe not have the
respons of disclos uncharg crimin conduct of it offic and execut
howev if and when offic execut or other person in trust posit becom
subject of a crimin indict disclosur is requir
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1738 2011 fraud examin manual
the inadequ disclosur of conflict of interest is among the most seriou of fraud
inadequ disclosur of relatedparti transact is not limit to ani specif industri it
transcend all busi type and relationship
appear of conflict of interest
a final type of conflict of interest is the appear of such exampl includ ownership in a
blind trust in which the employe ha no author to make invest decis or an
extern auditor own a minor interest in a compani that is audit by the auditor firm
such matter ar rare prosecut as crimin offens
detect of conflict of interest
conflict of interest ar probabl on of the most difficult scheme to uncov therefor
no fast and easi detect method exist for thi type of fraud some of the more common
method that can be us ar tip and complaint comparison of vendor address with
employe address review of vendor ownership file review of exit interview
comparison of vendor address to address of subsequ employ polici requir
certain employe to provid the name and employ of immedi famili member and
interview with purchas personnel for favor treatment of on or more vendor
tip and complaint
if a particular vendor is be favor then compet vendor mai file complaint
addition employe complaint about the servic of a favor vendor mai lead to the
discoveri of a conflict of interest
comparison of vendor address with employe address
if nomine or relat parti ar us as owner of vendor then the busi address of the
vendor mai match that of the employe also look for post offic box address for
vendor thi detect method is similar to that us for locat phoni vendor
review of vendor ownership file
when a vendor is select a complet file of the ownership of that vendor should be kept
thi is particularli import for close held busi if the vendor is requir to updat
the file annual then chang in ownership will also be disclos a comput comparison
of the vendor ownership and the employe file mai reveal conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1739
review of exit interview and comparison of vendor address to address of subsequ employ
if a review of an employe exit interview yield the name and address of the subsequ
employ then a simpl comparison of that name and address with the vendor file mai
reveal conflict of interest wherein the employe ha obtain employ from
a contractor
interview of purchas personnel for favor treatment of on or more vendor
employe ar gener the first to observ that a vendor is receiv favor treatment
therefor by ask employe if ani vendor is receiv favor treatment the examin
mai discov conflict of interest that would otherwis have gone unnot anoth
question that mai be ask of employe is whether ani vendor servic or product ha
recent becom substandard
polici requir certain employe to provid the name and employ of immedi famili member
where accept by law a product audit test mai be to requir member of manag
as well as member of the procur depart to provid detail inform
regard the name and employ of all immedi famili member and household
member compar the name and employ of famili member to the current posit
of the employe mai lead to inform that would requir further investig to
determin whether a conflict of interest exist
prevent of conflict of interest
organ should establish polici clearli de fine what constitut a conflict of interest
and prohibit ani such entangl by offic director employe or other agent of
the organ a polici requir employe to complet an annual disclosur statement is
an excel proactiv approach to deal with potenti conflict compar the disclos
name and address with vendor and custom list mai reveal real conflict of interest or
the appear of such furthermor these statement will reinforc in employe the idea
that engag in conflict of interest is unaccept and will result in sever consequ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1801
