2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Bribery
Generally, bribery and corruption are off-book frauds that occur in the form of kickbacks, 
gifts, or gratuities to government employees from contractors or to private business 
employees from vendors. For a detailed discussion of the legal elements of bribery and 
corruption, please see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
At its heart, a bribe is a business transaction, albeit an illegal or unethical one. A person 
“buys” something with the bribes he pays. What he buys is the influence of the recipient. 
Bribery schemes can be difficult and expensive. Though they are not nearly as common as 
other forms of occupational fraud such as asset misappropriations, bribery schemes tend to 
be much more costly.  
 
Bribery may be defined as the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting anything of value to 
influence an official act. The term official act means that traditional bribery statutes only 
proscribe payments made to influence the decisions of government agents or employees.  
 
Many occupational fraud schemes, however, involve commercial bribery, which is similar to the 
traditional definition of bribery except that something of value is offered to influence a 
business decision rather than an official act of government. Commercial bribery may or may 
not be a criminal offense. For example, in the United States there is no general federal law 
prohibiting commercial bribery in all instances. However, there are statutes prohibiting 
bribery of employees of financial institutions to influence a loan. Therefore, the law of your 
particular jurisdiction and the facts of the case will determine whether bribery in the private 
sector may be prosecuted criminally. Commercial bribery can often be pursued in the civil 
courts as breach of fiduciary duty or conflict of interest. See the Legal section for  
more information. 
 
According to Ernst & Young’s 11th global fraud survey, Driving Ethical Growth—New Markets, 
New Challenges, corruption is still a significant problem for businesses and executives, 
particularly due to the drive for company growth. Despite the multitude of anti-corruption 
legislation and increased enforcement efforts around the world, corruption is still prevalent.  
 
Bribery schemes generally fall into two broad categories: kickbacks  and bid-rigging schemes. 
Kickbacks are undisclosed payments made by vendors to employees of purchasing 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.702                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
companies. The purpose of a kickback is usually to enlist the corrupt employee in an 
overbilling scheme. Sometimes vendors pay kickbacks simply to get extra business from the 
purchasing company. Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a 
vendor in winning a contract through the competitive bidding process.  
 
Kickback Schemes  
Kickbacks, in the commercial sense, are the giving or receiving anything of value to influence 
a business decision without the employer’s knowledge and consent. Kickback schemes are 
usually very similar to the billing schemes described in the Asset Misappropriation section. 
They involve the submission of invoices for goods and services that are either overpriced or 
completely fictitious. (See “Kickbacks” flowchart.) 
 
Kickbacks are classified as corruption schemes rather than asset misappropriations because 
they involve collusion between employees and vendors. In a common type of kickback 
scheme, a vendor submits a fraudulent or inflated invoice to the victim organization and an 
employee of that organization helps make sure that a payment is made on the false invoice. 
For his assistance, the employee-fraudster receives a payment from the vendor. This 
payment is the kickback.  
 
Kickback schemes almost always attack the purchasing function of the victim company, so it 
stands to reason that these frauds are often undertaken by employees with purchasing 
responsibilities. Purchasing employees often have direct contact with vendors and therefore 
have an opportunity to establish a collusive relationship.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing agent redirected a number of orders to a comp any owned by a supplier with 
whom he was conspiring. In return for the additional business, the supplier paid the 
purchasing agent over half the profits from the additional orders. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.703 
  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.704                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Diverting Business to Vendors 
In some instances, an employee-fraudster receives a kickback simply for directing excess 
business to a vendor. There might be no overbilling involved in these cases; the vendor 
simply pays the kickbacks to ensure a steady stream of business from the purchasing 
company.  
 
If no overbilling is involved in a kickback scheme, one might wonder where the harm lies. 
Assuming the vendor simply wants to get the buyer’s business and does not increase his 
prices or bill for undelivered goods and services, how is the buyer harmed? The problem is 
that, having bought off an employee of the purchasing company, a vendor is no longer 
subject to the normal economic pressures of the marketplace. This vendor does not have to 
compete with other suppliers for the purchasing company’s business, and so has no 
incentive to provide a low price or quality merchandise. In these circumstances the 
purchasing company almost always ends up overpaying for goods or services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A travel agency provided free travel and entertainment to the purchasing agent of a retail 
company. In return, the purchasing agent agr eed to book all corporate trips through the 
travel agent. The victim company estimated that it paid $10,000 more for airfare over a 
two-year period by booking through the corrupt travel agency than if it had used a different 
company.  
 
Once a vendor knows it has an exclusive purchasing arrangement, its incentive is to raise 
prices to cover the cost of the kickback. Most bribery schemes end up as overbilling 
schemes even if they do not start that way. This is one reason why most business codes of 
ethics prohibit employees from accepting undisclosed gifts from vendors. In the long run, 
the employee’s company is sure to pay for his unethical conduct.   
 
Overbilling Schemes 
EMPLOYEES WITH APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
In most instances, kickback schemes begin as overbilling schemes in which a vendor submits 
inflated invoices to the victim organization. The false invoices either overstate the cost of 
actual goods and services, or reflect fictitious sales. The vendor in a kickback scheme 
generally seeks to enlist the help of an employee with the authority to approve payment of 
the fraudulent invoices. This authority ensures payment of the false billings without  
undue hassles.  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.705 
EXAMPLE 
A manager was authorized to purchase fixed assets for his company as part of a leasehold 
improvement. The materials he or dered were of a cheaper quality and lower price than what 
was specified, but the contract he negotiated did not reflect this. Therefore, the victim 
company paid for high-quality materials, but received low-quality materials. The difference 
in price between the true cost of the low-quality materials and what the company paid was 
diverted back to the manager as a kickback.  
  
The ability of the employee to authorize purchases (and thus to authorize fraudulent  
purchases) is usually a key to kickback schemes. If the fraudster can authorize payments 
himself, he does not have to submit purchase requisitions to an honest superior who might 
question the validity of the transaction. 
 
FRAUDSTERS LACKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
While the majority of kickback schemes involve persons with authority to approve 
purchases, this authority is not an absolute necessity. When an employee cannot approve 
fraudulent purchases himself, he can still orchestrate a kickback scheme if he can circumvent 
accounts payable controls. In some cases, all that is required is the filing of a false purchase 
requisition. If a trusted employee tells his superior that the company needs certain materials 
or services, this is sometimes sufficient to get a false invoice approved for payment. Such 
schemes are generally successful when the person with approval authority is inattentive or 
when he is forced to rely on his subordinate’s guidance in purchasing matters.  
 
Corrupt employees might also prepare false vouchers to make it appear that fraudulent 
invoices are legitimate. Where proper controls are in place, a completed voucher is required 
before accounts payable will pay an invoice. One key is for the fraudster to create a purchase 
order that corresponds to the vendor’s fraudulent invoice. The fraudster might forge the 
signature of an authorized party on the purchase order to show that the acquisition has been 
approved. Where the payables system is computerized, an employee with access to a 
restricted password can enter the system and authorize payments on fraudulent invoices.  
 
In less sophisticated schemes, a corrupt employee might simply take a fraudulent invoice 
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepared invoices before they are input into the 
accounts payable system. A more detailed description of how false invoices are processed 
can be found in the Billing Schemes section.  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.706                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Kickback schemes can be very difficult to detect. In a sense, the victim company is being 
attacked from two directions. Externally, a corrupt vendor submits false invoices that induce 
the victim organization to unknowingly pay for goods or services that it does not receive. 
Internally, one or more of the victim company’s employees waits to corroborate the false 
information provided by the vendor.  
 
Other Kickback Schemes 
Bribes are not always paid to employees to process phony invoices. Some outsiders seek 
other fraudulent assistance from employees of the victim organization. For instance, 
inspectors are sometimes paid off to accept substandard materials, or to accept short 
shipments of goods.  
 
Representatives of companies wishing to purchase goods or services from the victim 
organization at unauthorized discounts sometimes bribe employees with billing authority. 
The corrupt employees make sales to their accomplices at greatly reduced rates?sometimes 
even selling items at a loss?and in return they receive a portion of the discount.  
 
Kickback Payments 
It should also be noted that every bribe is a two-sided transaction. In every case where a 
vendor bribes a purchaser, there is someone on the vendor’s side of the transaction who is 
making  an illicit payment. It is therefore just as likely that your employees are paying bribes as 
accepting them.  
 
In order to obtain the funds to make these payments, employees usually divert company 
money into a slush fund, a noncompany account from whic h bribes can be made. Assuming 
that bribes are not authorized by the briber’s company, he must find a way to generate the 
funds necessary to illegally influence someone in another organization. Therefore, the key to 
the crime from the briber’s perspective is the di version of money into the slush fund. This is 
a fraudulent disbursement of company funds, which is usually accomplished by the writing 
of company checks to a fictitious entity or the submitting of false invoices in the name of a 
false entity. Payments to a slush fund are commonly coded as “fees” for consulting or other 
services.  
 
It is common to charge fraudulent disbursements to nebulous accounts like “consulting 
fees.” The purchase of goods can be verified by a check of inventory, but there is no 
inventory for these kinds of services. It is therefore more difficult to prove that the 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.707 
payments are fraudulent. The discussion of exactly how fraudulent disbursements are made 
can be found in the sections on Check Tampering and Invoices.  
 
Bid-Rigging Schemes 
As we have said, when one person pays a bribe to another, he does so to gain the benefit of 
the recipient’s influence. The competitive bidding process, in which several suppliers or 
contractors are vying for contracts in what can be a very cutthroat environment, is tailor-made 
for bribery. Any advantage one vendor can gain over his competitors in this arena is 
extremely valuable. The benefit of “inside influence” can ensure that a vendor will win a 
sought-after contract. Many vendors are willing to pay for this influence.  
 
In the competitive bidding process, all bidders are legally supposed to be placed on the same 
plane of equality, bidding on the same terms and conditions. Each bidder competes for a 
contract based on the specifications set forth by the purchasing company. Vendors submit 
confidential bids stating the price at which they will complete a project in accordance with 
the purchaser’s specifications. 
 
The way competitive bidding is rigged depends largely upon the level of influence of the 
corrupt employee. The more power a person has over the bidding process, the more likely 
the person can influence the selection of a supplier. Therefore, employees involved in bid-
 rigging schemes, like those in kickback schemes, tend to have a good measure of influence 
or access to the competitive bidding process. Potential targets for accepting bribes include 
buyers, contracting officials, engineers and technical representatives, quality or product 
assurance representatives, subcontractor liaison employees, or anyone else with authority 
over the awarding of contracts. 
 
Bid-rigging schemes can be categorized based on the stage of bidding at which the fraudster 
exerts his influence. Bid-rigging schemes usually occur in the presolicitation phase, the 
solicitation phase, or the submission phase of the bidding process. (See “Bid-Rigging” 
flowchart.) 
 
The Presolicitation Phase 
In the presolicitation phase of the competitive bidding process—before bids are officially 
sought for a project—bribery schemes can be brok en down into two distinct types. The first 
is the need recognition scheme, where an employee of a purchasing company is paid to 
convince his company that a particular project is necessary. The second reason to bribe 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.708                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
someone in the presolicitation phase is to have the specifications of the contract tailored to 
the strengths of a particular supplier.  
 
NEED RECOGNITION SCHEMES 
The typical fraud in the need recognition phase of the contract negotiation is a conspiracy 
between the buyer and contractor where an employee of the buyer receives something of 
value and in return recognizes a “need” for a particular product or service. The result of 
such a scheme is that the victim organization purchases unnecessary goods or services from 
a supplier at the direction of the corrupt employee.  
 
There are several trends that may indicate a need recognition fraud. Unusually high 
requirements for stock and inventory levels may reveal a situation in which a corrupt 
employee is seeking to justify unnecessary purchase activity from a certain supplier. An 
employee might also justify unnecessary purchases of inventory by writing off large numbers 
of surplus items to scrap. As these items leave the inventory, they open up spaces to justify 
additional purchases. Another indicator of a need recognition scheme is the defining of a 
“need” that can only be met by a certain supplier or contractor. In addition, the failure to 
develop a satisfactory list of backup suppliers may reveal an unusually strong attachment to a 
primary supplier — an attachment that is explainable by the acceptance of bribes from that 
supplier.  
 
SPECIFICATIONS SCHEMES 
The other type of presolicitation fraud is a specifications scheme. The specifications of a 
contract are a list of the elements, materials, dimensions, and other relevant requirements for 
completion of the project. Specifications are prepared to assist vendors in the bidding 
process, telling them what they are required to do and providing a firm basis for making and 
accepting bids.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.709 
 
 
  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.710                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One corruption scheme that occurs in this process is the fraudulent tailoring of 
specifications to a particular vendor. In these cases, the vendor pays off an employee of the 
buyer who is involved in preparing specifications for the contract. In return, the employee 
tailors the specifications to accommodate that vendor’s capabilities so that the contractor is 
effectively assured of winning the contract.  
 
The methods used to restrict competition in the bidding process may include the use of 
“prequalification” procedures that are known to eliminate certain competitors. For instance, 
the bid may require potential contractors to have a certain percentage of female or minority 
ownership. There is nothing illegal with such a requirement, but if it is placed in the 
specifications as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factors, then the 
employee has sold his influence to benefit a dishonest vendor, a clear case of corruption.  
 
Some employees distort the requirements of contracts by claiming the specifications called 
for a sole-source provider or noncompetitive procurement. This causes competitive bidding 
to be disregarded and the contract to be awarded to a particular supplier. The supplier 
typically charges a much higher price than the company could have obtained through 
bidding. Sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications may also be used to 
eliminate competition and steer contracts to a particular vendor.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A requisitioner distorted the requirements of a contract up for bid, claiming the 
specifications called for a sole-source provider. Based on the requisitioner’s information, 
competitive bidding was disregarded and the cont ract was awarded to a particular supplier. 
A review of other bids received at a later date showed that certain materials were available 
for up to $70,000 less than what the company paid in the sole-source arrangement. The 
employee had helped divert the job to the contractor in return for a promise of future 
employment. 
 
Another form of specifications fraud is bid splitting. Entities are often required to solicit 
bids on projects over a certain dollar amount. In order to avoid this requirement, employees 
might break a large project up into several small projects that fall below the mandatory 
bidding level. Once the contract is split, the employee can award some or all of the 
component parts to a contractor with whom he is conspiring.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.711 
A less egregious but nevertheless unfair form of bid-rigging occurs when a vendor pays an 
employee of the buyer for the right to see the specifications earlier than his competitors. The 
employee does not alter the specifications to suit the vendor, but instead simply gives him a 
head start on planning his bid and preparing for the job.  
 
The Solicitation Phase 
In the solicitation phase of the competitive bidding process, fraudsters attempt to influence 
the selection of a contractor by restricting the pool of competitors from whom bids are 
sought. In other words, a corrupt vendor pays an employee of the purchasing company to 
ensure that one or more of the vendor’s competitors do not get to bid on the contract. In 
this manner, the corrupt vendor is able to improve his chances of winning the job.  
 
One type of scheme involves the sales representative who deals on behalf of a number of 
potential bidders. The sales representative bribes a contracting official to rig the solicitation, 
ensuring that only those companies represented by him get to submit bids. It is not 
uncommon in some sectors for buyers to “require” bidders to be represented by certain sales 
or manufacturing representatives. These representatives pay a kickback to the buyer to 
protect their clients’ interests. The result of this transaction is that the purchasing company is 
deprived of the ability to get the best price on its contract. Typically, the group of 
“protected” vendors will not actually compete against each other for the purchaser’s 
contracts, but instead engage in “bid pooling.”   
 
BID POOLING 
Bid pooling is a process by which several bidders conspire to split contracts up and ensure 
that each gets a certain amount of work. Instead of submitting confidential bids, the vendors 
discuss what their bids will be so they can guarantee that each vendor will win a share of the 
purchasing company’s business. For example, if vendors A, B, and C are up for three 
separate jobs, they may agree that A’s bid will be the lowest on the first contract, B’s bid will 
be the lowest on the second contract, and C’s bid will be the lowest on the third contract. 
None of the vendors gets all three jobs, but on the other hand, they are all guaranteed to get 
at least one. Furthermore, since they plan their bids ahead of time, the vendors can conspire 
to raise their prices. Thus the purchasing company suffers as a result of the scheme.  
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.712                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FICTITIOUS SUPPLIERS 
Another way to eliminate competition in the solicitation phase of the selection process is to 
solicit bids from fictitious suppliers. This gives the appearance of a competitive bidding 
situation, when in fact only one real supplier bids on the job. Furthermore, the real 
contractor can raise his prices, since the other bids are fraudulent and sure to be higher than 
his own. In effect, the bids from fictitious suppliers serve to validate the exaggerated quote 
from the real contractor. 
 
OTHER METHODS    
In some cases, competition for a contract can be limited by severely restricting the time for 
submitting bids. Certain suppliers are given advanced notice of contracts before bids are 
solicited. These suppliers are therefore able to begin preparing their bids ahead of time. With 
the short time frame for developing bid proposals, the supplier with advance knowledge of 
the contract will have a decided advantage over his competition.  
 
Bribed purchasing officials can also restrict competition for their coconspirators by soliciting 
bids in obscure publications where other vendors are unlikely to see them. Again, this is 
done to eliminate potential rivals and create an advantage for the corrupt suppliers. Some 
schemes have also involved the publication of bid solicitations during holiday periods when 
those suppliers not “in the know” are unlikely to be looking for potential contracts. In more 
blatant cases, the bids of outsiders are accepted but are “lost” or improperly disqualified by 
the corrupt employee of the purchaser.  
 
Frequently, when a vendor bribes an employee of the purchasing company to assist him in 
any kind of solicitation scheme, the cost of the bribe is included in the corrupt vendor’s bid. 
Therefore, the purchasing company ends up bearing the cost of the illicit payment in the 
form of a higher contract price.  
 
The Submission Phase 
In the actual submission phase of the process, where bids are proffered to the buyer, several 
schemes may be used to win a contract for a particular supplier. The principal offense tends 
to be abuse of the sealed bid process. Competitive bids are confidential; they are, of course, 
supposed to remain sealed until a specified date at which all bids are opened and reviewed by 
the purchasing company. The person or persons who have access to sealed bids are often 
the targets of unethical vendors seeking an advantage in the process.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.713 
EXAMPLE 
Gifts and cash payments were given to a majority owner of a company in exchange for 
preferential treatment during the bidding process. The supplier who paid the bribes was 
allowed to submit his bids last, knowing what prices his competitors had quoted, or in the 
alternative, he was allowed to actually see his competitors’ bids and adjust his own 
accordingly.  
 
Vendors also bribe employees of the purchaser for confidential information that will help 
them prepare their bid. Other reasons to bribe employees of the purchaser include ensuring 
receipt of a late bid or falsify the bid log, to extend the bid opening date, and to control bid 
openings.  
 
Economic Extortion 
Economic extortion cases are the “Pay up or else …” corruption schemes; basically the flip 
side of bribery schemes. Instead of a vendor offering a payment to influence a decision, an 
employee demands that a vendor pay him in order to make a decision in that vendor’s favor. 
If the vendor refuses to pay, he faces some harm such as a loss of business with the 
extorter’s company. In any situation where an employee might accept bribes to favor a 
particular company or person, the situation could be reversed to a point where the employee 
extorts money from a potential purchaser or supplier.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A plant manager for a utility company started his own business on the side. Vendors who 
wanted to do work for the utility company were  forced by the manager to divert some of 
their business to his own compan y. Those that did not “play ball” lost their business with 
the utility.  
 
Illegal Gratuities 
Illegal gratuities are similar to bribery schemes except there is not necessarily an intent to 
influence a particular business decision before the fact. In the typical illegal gratuities 
scenario, a decision is made that happens to benefit a certain person or company. The party 
who benefited from the decision then gives a gift to the person who made the decision. The 
gift could be anything of value. An illegal gratuity does not require proof of an intent  
to influence. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.714                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A city commissioner negotiated a land developm ent deal with a group of private investors. 
After the deal was approved, the commissioner and his wife were rewarded with a free 
international vacation, all expenses paid.  
 
At first glance, it may seem that illegal gratuities schemes are harmless as long as the business 
decisions in question are not influenced by the promise of payment. But most company 
ethics policies forbid employees from accepting unreported gifts from vendors. One reason 
is that illegal gratuities schemes can (and do) evolve into bribery schemes. Once an employee 
has been rewarded for an act such as directing business to a particular supplier, an 
understanding might be reached that future decisions beneficial to the supplier will also be 
rewarded. Additionally, even though an outright promise of payment has not been made, 
employees may direct business to certain companies in the hope that they will be rewarded 
with money or gifts. 
 
Methods of Making Illegal Payments 
Certain traditional methods of making illegal payments fall into the hierarchical pattern 
described below. 
 
Gifts, Travel, and Entertainment 
Most bribery (corruption) schemes begin with gifts and favors. Commonly encountered 
items include: 
• Wine and liquor (consumable) 
• Clothes and jewelry for the recipient or spouse 
• Sexual favors 
• Lavish entertainment 
• Paid vacations 
• Free transportation on corporate jets 
• Free use of resort facilities 
• Gifts of the briber’s inventory or services, such as construction of home improvements 
by a contractor 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.715 
Cash Payments 
The next step usually involves cash payments. However, cash is not practical when dealing 
with large sums, because large amounts are difficult to generate, and they draw attention 
when they are deposited or spent. The use of currency in major transactions might itself be 
incriminating. 
 
Checks and Other Financial Instruments 
As the scheme grows, illicit payments are often made by normal business check, cashier’s 
check, or wire transfer. Disguised payments on the payer’s books appear as some sort of 
legitimate business expense, often as consulting fees. Payments can be made directly or 
through an intermediary. 
 
Hidden Interests 
In the latter stages of sophisticated schemes, the payer might give a hidden interest in a joint 
venture or other profit-making enterprise. The recipient’s interest might be concealed 
through a straw nominee, hidden in a trust or other business entity, or merely included by an 
undocumented verbal agreement. Such arrangements are very difficult to detect, and even if 
identified, proof of corrupt intent might be difficult to demonstrate.  
 
Loans  
Three types of “loans” often turn up in fraud cases: 
• A prior outright payment falsely described as an innocent loan. 
• Payments on a legitimate loan guaranteed or actually made by someone else. 
• An actual loan made on favorable terms, such as interest-free. 
 
Payment of Credit Card Bills  
The recipient’s transportation, vacation, and en tertainment expenses might be paid with the 
payer’s credit card, or the recipient might forward his own credit card bills to the payer for 
payment. In some instances, the payer simply lets the recipient carry and use the payer’s card. 
 
Transfers at Other than Fair Market Value  
The corrupt payer might sell or lease property to the recipient at far less than its market 
value, or might agree to buy or rent property at inflated prices. The recipient might also 
“sell” an asset to the payer, but retain title or the use of the property. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.716                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Promises of Favorable Treatment  
Promises of favorable treatment commonly take the following forms: 
• A payer might promise a governmental official lucrative employment when the recipient 
leaves government service. 
• An executive leaving a private company for a related government position might be 
given favorable or inflated retirement and separation benefits. 
• The spouse or other relative of the intended recipient might also be employed by the 
payer company at an inflated salary or with little actual responsibility. 
 
 



:


briberi
gener briberi and corrupt ar offbook fraud that occur in the form of kickback
gift or gratuiti to govern employe from contractor or to privat busi
employe from vendor for a detail discuss of the legal element of briberi and
corrupt pleas see the law section of the fraud examin manual
at it heart a bribe is a busi transact albeit an illeg or uneth on a person
bui someth with the bribe he pai what he bui is the influenc of the recipi
briberi scheme can be difficult and expens though thei ar not nearli as common as
other form of occup fraud such as asset misappropri briberi scheme tend to
be much more costli
briberi mai be defin as the offer give receiv or solicit anyth of valu to
influenc an offici act the term offici act mean that tradit briberi statut onli
proscrib payment made to influenc the decis of govern agent or employe
mani occup fraud scheme howev involv commerci briberi which is similar to the
tradit definit of briberi except that someth of valu is offer to influenc a
busi decis rather than an offici act of govern commerci briberi mai or mai
not be a crimin offens for exampl in the unit state there is no gener feder law
prohibit commerci briberi in all instanc howev there ar statut prohibit
briberi of employe of financi institut to influenc a loan therefor the law of your
particular jurisdict and the fact of the case will determin whether briberi in the privat
sector mai be prosecut crimin commerci briberi can often be pursu in the civil
court as breach of fiduciari duti or conflict of interest see the legal section for
more inform
accord to ernst young 11th global fraud survei drive ethic growthnew market
new challeng corrupt is still a signific problem for busi and execut
particularli due to the drive for compani growth despit the multitud of anticorrupt
legisl and increas enforc effort around the world corrupt is still preval
briberi scheme gener fall into two broad categori kickback and bidrig scheme
kickback ar undisclos payment made by vendor to employe of purchas
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1702 2011 fraud examin manual
compani the purpos of a kickback is usual to enlist the corrupt employe in an
overbil scheme sometim vendor pai kickback simpli to get extra busi from the
purchas compani bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a
vendor in win a contract through the competit bid process
kickback scheme
kickback in the commerci sens ar the give or receiv anyth of valu to influenc
a busi decis without the employ knowledg and consent kickback scheme ar
usual veri similar to the bill scheme describ in the asset misappropri section
thei involv the submiss of invoic for good and servic that ar either overpr or
complet fictiti see kickback flowchart
kickback ar classifi as corrupt scheme rather than asset misappropri becaus
thei involv collus between employe and vendor in a common type of kickback
scheme a vendor submit a fraudul or inflat invoic to the victim organ and an
employe of that organ help make sure that a payment is made on the fals invoic
for hi assist the employeefraudst receiv a payment from the vendor thi
payment is the kickback
kickback scheme almost alwai attack the purchas function of the victim compani so it
stand to reason that these fraud ar often undertaken by employe with purchas
respons purchas employe often have direct contact with vendor and therefor
have an opportun to establish a collus relationship
exampl
a purchas agent redirect a number of order to a comp ani own by a supplier with
whom he wa conspir in return for the addit busi the supplier paid the
purchas agent over half the profit from the addit order
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1703
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1704 2011 fraud examin manual
divert busi to vendor
in some instanc an employeefraudst receiv a kickback simpli for direct excess
busi to a vendor there might be no overbil involv in these case the vendor
simpli pai the kickback to ensur a steadi stream of busi from the purchas
compani
if no overbil is involv in a kickback scheme on might wonder where the harm li
assum the vendor simpli want to get the buyer busi and doe not increas hi
price or bill for undeliv good and servic how is the buyer harm the problem is
that have bought off an employe of the purchas compani a vendor is no longer
subject to the normal econom pressur of the marketplac thi vendor doe not have to
compet with other supplier for the purchas compani busi and so ha no
incent to provid a low price or qualiti merchandis in these circumst the
purchas compani almost alwai end up overpai for good or servic
exampl
a travel agenc provid free travel and entertain to the purchas agent of a retail
compani in return the purchas agent agr eed to book all corpor trip through the
travel agent the victim compani estim that it paid 10000 more for airfar over a
twoyear period by book through the corrupt travel agenc than if it had us a differ
compani
onc a vendor know it ha an exclus purchas arrang it incent is to rais
price to cover the cost of the kickback most briberi scheme end up as overbil
scheme even if thei do not start that wai thi is on reason why most busi code of
ethic prohibit employe from accept undisclos gift from vendor in the long run
the employe compani is sure to pai for hi uneth conduct
overbil scheme
employe with approv author
in most instanc kickback scheme begin as overbil scheme in which a vendor submit
inflat invoic to the victim organ the fals invoic either overst the cost of
actual good and servic or reflect fictiti sale the vendor in a kickback scheme
gener seek to enlist the help of an employe with the author to approv payment of
the fraudul invoic thi author ensur payment of the fals bill without
undu hassl
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1705
exampl
a manag wa author to purchas fix asset for hi compani as part of a leasehold
improv the materi he or dere were of a cheaper qualiti and lower price than what
wa specifi but the contract he negoti did not reflect thi therefor the victim
compani paid for highqual materi but receiv lowqual materi the differ
in price between the true cost of the lowqual materi and what the compani paid wa
divert back to the manag as a kickback
the abil of the employe to author purchas and thu to author fraudul
purchas is usual a kei to kickback scheme if the fraudster can author payment
himself he doe not have to submit purchas requisit to an honest superior who might
question the valid of the transact
fraudster lack approv author
while the major of kickback scheme involv person with author to approv
purchas thi author is not an absolut necess when an employe cannot approv
fraudul purchas himself he can still orchestr a kickback scheme if he can circumv
account payabl control in some case all that is requir is the file of a fals purchas
requisit if a trust employe tell hi superior that the compani need certain materi
or servic thi is sometim suffici to get a fals invoic approv for payment such
scheme ar gener success when the person with approv author is inattent or
when he is forc to reli on hi subordin guidanc in purchas matter
corrupt employe might also prepar fals voucher to make it appear that fraudul
invoic ar legitim where proper control ar in place a complet voucher is requir
befor account payabl will pai an invoic on kei is for the fraudster to creat a purchas
order that correspond to the vendor fraudul invoic the fraudster might forg the
signatur of an author parti on the purchas order to show that the acquisit ha been
approv where the payabl system is computer an employe with access to a
restrict password can enter the system and author payment on fraudul invoic
in less sophist scheme a corrupt employe might simpli take a fraudul invoic
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepar invoic befor thei ar input into the
account payabl system a more detail descript of how fals invoic ar process
can be found in the bill scheme section
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1706 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback scheme can be veri difficult to detect in a sens the victim compani is be
attack from two direct extern a corrupt vendor submit fals invoic that induc
the victim organ to unknowingli pai for good or servic that it doe not receiv
intern on or more of the victim compani employe wait to corrobor the fals
inform provid by the vendor
other kickback scheme
bribe ar not alwai paid to employe to process phoni invoic some outsid seek
other fraudul assist from employe of the victim organ for instanc
inspector ar sometim paid off to accept substandard materi or to accept short
shipment of good
repres of compani wish to purchas good or servic from the victim
organ at unauthor discount sometim bribe employe with bill author
the corrupt employe make sale to their accomplic at greatli reduc ratessometim
even sell item at a lossand in return thei receiv a portion of the discount
kickback payment
it should also be note that everi bribe is a twosid transact in everi case where a
vendor bribe a purchas there is someon on the vendor side of the transact who is
make an illicit payment it is therefor just as like that your employe ar pai bribe as
accept them
in order to obtain the fund to make these payment employe usual divert compani
monei into a slush fund a noncompani account from whic h bribe can be made assum
that bribe ar not author by the briber compani he must find a wai to gener the
fund necessari to illeg influenc someon in anoth organ therefor the kei to
the crime from the briber perspect is the di version of monei into the slush fund thi is
a fraudul disburs of compani fund which is usual accomplish by the write
of compani check to a fictiti entiti or the submit of fals invoic in the name of a
fals entiti payment to a slush fund ar commonli code as fee for consult or other
servic
it is common to charg fraudul disburs to nebul account like consult
fee the purchas of good can be verifi by a check of inventori but there is no
inventori for these kind of servic it is therefor more difficult to prove that the
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1707
payment ar fraudul the discuss of exactli how fraudul disburs ar made
can be found in the section on check tamper and invoic
bidrig scheme
as we have said when on person pai a bribe to anoth he doe so to gain the benefit of
the recipi influenc the competit bid process in which sever supplier or
contractor ar vy for contract in what can be a veri cutthroat environ is tailormad
for briberi ani advantag on vendor can gain over hi competitor in thi arena is
extrem valuabl the benefit of insid influenc can ensur that a vendor will win a
soughtaft contract mani vendor ar will to pai for thi influenc
in the competit bid process all bidder ar legal suppos to be place on the same
plane of equal bid on the same term and condit each bidder compet for a
contract base on the specif set forth by the purchas compani vendor submit
confidenti bid state the price at which thei will complet a project in accord with
the purchas specif
the wai competit bid is rig depend larg upon the level of influenc of the
corrupt employe the more power a person ha over the bid process the more like
the person can influenc the select of a supplier therefor employe involv in bid
rig scheme like those in kickback scheme tend to have a good measur of influenc
or access to the competit bid process potenti target for accept bribe includ
buyer contract offici engin and technic repres qualiti or product
assur repres subcontractor liaison employe or anyon els with author
over the award of contract
bidrig scheme can be categor base on the stage of bid at which the fraudster
exert hi influenc bidrig scheme usual occur in the presolicit phase the
solicit phase or the submiss phase of the bid process see bidrig
flowchart
the presolicit phase
in the presolicit phase of the competit bid processbefor bid ar offici
sought for a projectbriberi scheme can be brok en down into two distinct type the first
is the need recognit scheme where an employe of a purchas compani is paid to
convinc hi compani that a particular project is necessari the second reason to bribe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1708 2011 fraud examin manual
someon in the presolicit phase is to have the specif of the contract tailor to
the strength of a particular supplier
need recognit scheme
the typic fraud in the need recognit phase of the contract negoti is a conspiraci
between the buyer and contractor where an employe of the buyer receiv someth of
valu and in return recogn a need for a particular product or servic the result of
such a scheme is that the victim organ purchas unnecessari good or servic from
a supplier at the direct of the corrupt employe
there ar sever trend that mai indic a need recognit fraud unusu high
requir for stock and inventori level mai reveal a situat in which a corrupt
employe is seek to justifi unnecessari purchas activ from a certain supplier an
employe might also justifi unnecessari purchas of inventori by write off larg number
of surplu item to scrap as these item leav the inventori thei open up space to justifi
addit purchas anoth indic of a need recognit scheme is the defin of a
need that can onli be met by a certain supplier or contractor in addit the failur to
develop a satisfactori list of backup supplier mai reveal an unusu strong attach to a
primari supplier an attach that is explain by the accept of bribe from that
supplier
specif scheme
the other type of presolicit fraud is a specif scheme the specif of a
contract ar a list of the element materi dimens and other relev requir for
complet of the project specif ar prepar to assist vendor in the bid
process tell them what thei ar requir to do and provid a firm basi for make and
accept bid
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1709
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1710 2011 fraud examin manual
on corrupt scheme that occur in thi process is the fraudul tailor of
specif to a particular vendor in these case the vendor pai off an employe of the
buyer who is involv in prepar specif for the contract in return the employe
tailor the specif to accommod that vendor capabl so that the contractor is
effect assur of win the contract
the method us to restrict competit in the bid process mai includ the us of
prequalif procedur that ar known to elimin certain competitor for instanc
the bid mai requir potenti contractor to have a certain percentag of femal or minor
ownership there is noth illeg with such a requir but if it is place in the
specif as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factor then the
employe ha sold hi influenc to benefit a dishonest vendor a clear case of corrupt
some employe distort the requir of contract by claim the specif call
for a solesourc provid or noncompetit procur thi caus competit bid
to be disregard and the contract to be award to a particular supplier the supplier
typic charg a much higher price than the compani could have obtain through
bid solesourc or noncompetit procur justif mai also be us to
elimin competit and steer contract to a particular vendor
exampl
a requisition distort the requir of a contract up for bid claim the
specif call for a solesourc provid base on the requisition inform
competit bid wa disregard and the cont ract wa award to a particular supplier
a review of other bid receiv at a later date show that certain materi were avail
for up to 70000 less than what the compani paid in the solesourc arrang the
employe had help divert the job to the contractor in return for a promis of futur
employ
anoth form of specif fraud is bid split entiti ar often requir to solicit
bid on project over a certain dollar amount in order to avoid thi requir employe
might break a larg project up into sever small project that fall below the mandatori
bid level onc the contract is split the employe can award some or all of the
compon part to a contractor with whom he is conspir
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1711
a less egregi but nevertheless unfair form of bidrig occur when a vendor pai an
employe of the buyer for the right to see the specif earlier than hi competitor the
employe doe not alter the specif to suit the vendor but instead simpli give him a
head start on plan hi bid and prepar for the job
the solicit phase
in the solicit phase of the competit bid process fraudster attempt to influenc
the select of a contractor by restrict the pool of competitor from whom bid ar
sought in other word a corrupt vendor pai an employe of the purchas compani to
ensur that on or more of the vendor competitor do not get to bid on the contract in
thi manner the corrupt vendor is abl to improv hi chanc of win the job
on type of scheme involv the sale repres who deal on behalf of a number of
potenti bidder the sale repres bribe a contract offici to rig the solicit
ensur that onli those compani repres by him get to submit bid it is not
uncommon in some sector for buyer to requir bidder to be repres by certain sale
or manufactur repres these repres pai a kickback to the buyer to
protect their client interest the result of thi transact is that the purchas compani is
depriv of the abil to get the best price on it contract typic the group of
protect vendor will not actual compet against each other for the purchas
contract but instead engag in bid pool
bid pool
bid pool is a process by which sever bidder conspir to split contract up and ensur
that each get a certain amount of work instead of submit confidenti bid the vendor
discuss what their bid will be so thei can guarante that each vendor will win a share of the
purchas compani busi for exampl if vendor a b and c ar up for three
separ job thei mai agre that as bid will be the lowest on the first contract bs bid will
be the lowest on the second contract and cs bid will be the lowest on the third contract
none of the vendor get all three job but on the other hand thei ar all guarante to get
at least on furthermor sinc thei plan their bid ahead of time the vendor can conspir
to rais their price thu the purchas compani suffer as a result of the scheme
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1712 2011 fraud examin manual
fictiti supplier
anoth wai to elimin competit in the solicit phase of the select process is to
solicit bid from fictiti supplier thi give the appear of a competit bid
situat when in fact onli on real supplier bid on the job furthermor the real
contractor can rais hi price sinc the other bid ar fraudul and sure to be higher than
hi own in effect the bid from fictiti supplier serv to valid the exagger quot
from the real contractor
other method
in some case competit for a contract can be limit by sever restrict the time for
submit bid certain supplier ar given advanc notic of contract befor bid ar
solicit these supplier ar therefor abl to begin prepar their bid ahead of time with
the short time frame for develop bid propos the supplier with advanc knowledg of
the contract will have a decid advantag over hi competit
bribe purchas offici can also restrict competit for their coconspir by solicit
bid in obscur public where other vendor ar unlik to see them again thi is
done to elimin potenti rival and creat an advantag for the corrupt supplier some
scheme have also involv the public of bid solicit dure holidai period when
those supplier not in the know ar unlik to be look for potenti contract in more
blatant case the bid of outsid ar accept but ar lost or improperli disqualifi by
the corrupt employe of the purchas
frequent when a vendor bribe an employe of the purchas compani to assist him in
ani kind of solicit scheme the cost of the bribe is includ in the corrupt vendor bid
therefor the purchas compani end up bear the cost of the illicit payment in the
form of a higher contract price
the submiss phase
in the actual submiss phase of the process where bid ar proffer to the buyer sever
scheme mai be us to win a contract for a particular supplier the princip offens tend
to be abus of the seal bid process competit bid ar confidenti thei ar of cours
suppos to remain seal until a specifi date at which all bid ar open and review by
the purchas compani the person or person who have access to seal bid ar often
the target of uneth vendor seek an advantag in the process
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1713
exampl
gift and cash payment were given to a major owner of a compani in exchang for
preferenti treatment dure the bid process the supplier who paid the bribe wa
allow to submit hi bid last know what price hi competitor had quot or in the
altern he wa allow to actual see hi competitor bid and adjust hi own
accordingli
vendor also bribe employe of the purchas for confidenti inform that will help
them prepar their bid other reason to bribe employe of the purchas includ ensur
receipt of a late bid or falsifi the bid log to extend the bid open date and to control bid
open
econom extort
econom extort case ar the pai up or els corrupt scheme basic the flip
side of briberi scheme instead of a vendor offer a payment to influenc a decis an
employe demand that a vendor pai him in order to make a decis in that vendor favor
if the vendor refus to pai he face some harm such as a loss of busi with the
extort compani in ani situat where an employe might accept bribe to favor a
particular compani or person the situat could be revers to a point where the employe
extort monei from a potenti purchas or supplier
exampl
a plant manag for a util compani start hi own busi on the side vendor who
want to do work for the util compani were forc by the manag to divert some of
their busi to hi own compan y those that did not plai ball lost their busi with
the util
illeg gratuiti
illeg gratuiti ar similar to briberi scheme except there is not necessarili an intent to
influenc a particular busi decis befor the fact in the typic illeg gratuiti
scenario a decis is made that happen to benefit a certain person or compani the parti
who benefit from the decis then give a gift to the person who made the decis the
gift could be anyth of valu an illeg gratuiti doe not requir proof of an intent
to influenc
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1714 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a citi commission negoti a land developm ent deal with a group of privat investor
after the deal wa approv the commission and hi wife were reward with a free
intern vacat all expens paid
at first glanc it mai seem that illeg gratuiti scheme ar harmless as long as the busi
decis in question ar not influenc by the promis of payment but most compani
ethic polici forbid employe from accept unreport gift from vendor on reason
is that illeg gratuiti scheme can and do evolv into briberi scheme onc an employe
ha been reward for an act such as direct busi to a particular supplier an
understand might be reach that futur decis benefici to the supplier will also be
reward addition even though an outright promis of payment ha not been made
employe mai direct busi to certain compani in the hope that thei will be reward
with monei or gift
method of make illeg payment
certain tradit method of make illeg payment fall into the hierarch pattern
describ below
gift travel and entertain
most briberi corrupt scheme begin with gift and favor commonli encount
item includ
wine and liquor consum
cloth and jewelri for the recipi or spous
sexual favor
lavish entertain
paid vacat
free transport on corpor jet
free us of resort facil
gift of the briber inventori or servic such as construct of home improv
by a contractor
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1715
cash payment
the next step usual involv cash payment howev cash is not practic when deal
with larg sum becaus larg amount ar difficult to gener and thei draw attent
when thei ar deposit or spent the us of currenc in major transact might itself be
incrimin
check and other financi instrument
as the scheme grow illicit payment ar often made by normal busi check cashier
check or wire transfer disguis payment on the payer book appear as some sort of
legitim busi expens often as consult fee payment can be made directli or
through an intermediari
hidden interest
in the latter stage of sophist scheme the payer might give a hidden interest in a joint
ventur or other profitmak enterpris the recipi interest might be conceal
through a straw nomine hidden in a trust or other busi entiti or mere includ by an
undocu verbal agreement such arrang ar veri difficult to detect and even if
identifi proof of corrupt intent might be difficult to demonstr
loan
three type of loan often turn up in fraud case
a prior outright payment fals describ as an innoc loan
payment on a legitim loan guarante or actual made by someon els
an actual loan made on favor term such as interestfre
payment of credit card bill
the recipi transport vacat and en tertain expens might be paid with the
payer credit card or the recipi might forward hi own credit card bill to the payer for
payment in some instanc the payer simpli let the recipi carri and us the payer card
transfer at other than fair market valu
the corrupt payer might sell or leas properti to the recipi at far less than it market
valu or might agre to bui or rent properti at inflat price the recipi might also
sell an asset to the payer but retain titl or the us of the properti
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1716 2011 fraud examin manual
promis of favor treatment
promis of favor treatment commonli take the follow form
a payer might promis a government offici lucr employ when the recipi
leav govern servic
an execut leav a privat compani for a relat govern posit might be
given favor or inflat retir and separ benefit
the spous or other rel of the intend recipi might also be emploi by the
payer compani at an inflat salari or with littl actual respons
