2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Kickback Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Kickback Schemes  
Kickbacks, in the commercial sense, are the giving or receiving anything of value to influence 
a business decision without the employer’s knowledge and consent. Kickback schemes are 
usually very similar to the billing schemes described in the Asset Misappropriation section. 
They involve the submission of invoices for goods and services that are either overpriced or 
completely fictitious. (See “Kickbacks” flowchart.) 
 
Kickbacks are classified as corruption schemes rather than asset misappropriations because 
they involve collusion between employees and vendors. In a common type of kickback 
scheme, a vendor submits a fraudulent or inflated invoice to the victim organization and an 
employee of that organization helps make sure that a payment is made on the false invoice. 
For his assistance, the employee-fraudster receives a payment from the vendor. This 
payment is the kickback.  
 
Kickback schemes almost always attack the purchasing function of the victim company, so it 
stands to reason that these frauds are often undertaken by employees with purchasing 
responsibilities. Purchasing employees often have direct contact with vendors and therefore 
have an opportunity to establish a collusive relationship.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing agent redirected a number of orders to a comp any owned by a supplier with 
whom he was conspiring. In return for the additional business, the supplier paid the 
purchasing agent over half the profits from the additional orders. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.703 
  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.704                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


kickback scheme
kickback in the commerci sens ar the give or receiv anyth of valu to influenc
a busi decis without the employ knowledg and consent kickback scheme ar
usual veri similar to the bill scheme describ in the asset misappropri section
thei involv the submiss of invoic for good and servic that ar either overpr or
complet fictiti see kickback flowchart
kickback ar classifi as corrupt scheme rather than asset misappropri becaus
thei involv collus between employe and vendor in a common type of kickback
scheme a vendor submit a fraudul or inflat invoic to the victim organ and an
employe of that organ help make sure that a payment is made on the fals invoic
for hi assist the employeefraudst receiv a payment from the vendor thi
payment is the kickback
kickback scheme almost alwai attack the purchas function of the victim compani so it
stand to reason that these fraud ar often undertaken by employe with purchas
respons purchas employe often have direct contact with vendor and therefor
have an opportun to establish a collus relationship
exampl
a purchas agent redirect a number of order to a comp ani own by a supplier with
whom he wa conspir in return for the addit busi the supplier paid the
purchas agent over half the profit from the addit order
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1703
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1704 2011 fraud examin manual
