2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Overbilling Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Overbilling Schemes 
EMPLOYEES WITH APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
In most instances, kickback schemes begin as overbilling schemes in which a vendor submits 
inflated invoices to the victim organization. The false invoices either overstate the cost of 
actual goods and services, or reflect fictitious sales. The vendor in a kickback scheme 
generally seeks to enlist the help of an employee with the authority to approve payment of 
the fraudulent invoices. This authority ensures payment of the false billings without  
undue hassles.  
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.705 
EXAMPLE 
A manager was authorized to purchase fixed assets for his company as part of a leasehold 
improvement. The materials he or dered were of a cheaper quality and lower price than what 
was specified, but the contract he negotiated did not reflect this. Therefore, the victim 
company paid for high-quality materials, but received low-quality materials. The difference 
in price between the true cost of the low-quality materials and what the company paid was 
diverted back to the manager as a kickback.  
  
The ability of the employee to authorize purchases (and thus to authorize fraudulent  
purchases) is usually a key to kickback schemes. If the fraudster can authorize payments 
himself, he does not have to submit purchase requisitions to an honest superior who might 
question the validity of the transaction. 
 
FRAUDSTERS LACKING APPROVAL AUTHORITY 
While the majority of kickback schemes involve persons with authority to approve 
purchases, this authority is not an absolute necessity. When an employee cannot approve 
fraudulent purchases himself, he can still orchestrate a kickback scheme if he can circumvent 
accounts payable controls. In some cases, all that is required is the filing of a false purchase 
requisition. If a trusted employee tells his superior that the company needs certain materials 
or services, this is sometimes sufficient to get a false invoice approved for payment. Such 
schemes are generally successful when the person with approval authority is inattentive or 
when he is forced to rely on his subordinate’s guidance in purchasing matters.  
 
Corrupt employees might also prepare false vouchers to make it appear that fraudulent 
invoices are legitimate. Where proper controls are in place, a completed voucher is required 
before accounts payable will pay an invoice. One key is for the fraudster to create a purchase 
order that corresponds to the vendor’s fraudulent invoice. The fraudster might forge the 
signature of an authorized party on the purchase order to show that the acquisition has been 
approved. Where the payables system is computerized, an employee with access to a 
restricted password can enter the system and authorize payments on fraudulent invoices.  
 
In less sophisticated schemes, a corrupt employee might simply take a fraudulent invoice 
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepared invoices before they are input into the 
accounts payable system. A more detailed description of how false invoices are processed 
can be found in the Billing Schemes section.  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.706                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Kickback schemes can be very difficult to detect. In a sense, the victim company is being 
attacked from two directions. Externally, a corrupt vendor submits false invoices that induce 
the victim organization to unknowingly pay for goods or services that it does not receive. 
Internally, one or more of the victim company’s employees waits to corroborate the false 
information provided by the vendor.  
 



:


overbil scheme
employe with approv author
in most instanc kickback scheme begin as overbil scheme in which a vendor submit
inflat invoic to the victim organ the fals invoic either overst the cost of
actual good and servic or reflect fictiti sale the vendor in a kickback scheme
gener seek to enlist the help of an employe with the author to approv payment of
the fraudul invoic thi author ensur payment of the fals bill without
undu hassl
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1705
exampl
a manag wa author to purchas fix asset for hi compani as part of a leasehold
improv the materi he or dere were of a cheaper qualiti and lower price than what
wa specifi but the contract he negoti did not reflect thi therefor the victim
compani paid for highqual materi but receiv lowqual materi the differ
in price between the true cost of the lowqual materi and what the compani paid wa
divert back to the manag as a kickback
the abil of the employe to author purchas and thu to author fraudul
purchas is usual a kei to kickback scheme if the fraudster can author payment
himself he doe not have to submit purchas requisit to an honest superior who might
question the valid of the transact
fraudster lack approv author
while the major of kickback scheme involv person with author to approv
purchas thi author is not an absolut necess when an employe cannot approv
fraudul purchas himself he can still orchestr a kickback scheme if he can circumv
account payabl control in some case all that is requir is the file of a fals purchas
requisit if a trust employe tell hi superior that the compani need certain materi
or servic thi is sometim suffici to get a fals invoic approv for payment such
scheme ar gener success when the person with approv author is inattent or
when he is forc to reli on hi subordin guidanc in purchas matter
corrupt employe might also prepar fals voucher to make it appear that fraudul
invoic ar legitim where proper control ar in place a complet voucher is requir
befor account payabl will pai an invoic on kei is for the fraudster to creat a purchas
order that correspond to the vendor fraudul invoic the fraudster might forg the
signatur of an author parti on the purchas order to show that the acquisit ha been
approv where the payabl system is computer an employe with access to a
restrict password can enter the system and author payment on fraudul invoic
in less sophist scheme a corrupt employe might simpli take a fraudul invoic
from a vendor and slip it into a stack of prepar invoic befor thei ar input into the
account payabl system a more detail descript of how fals invoic ar process
can be found in the bill scheme section
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1706 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback scheme can be veri difficult to detect in a sens the victim compani is be
attack from two direct extern a corrupt vendor submit fals invoic that induc
the victim organ to unknowingli pai for good or servic that it doe not receiv
intern on or more of the victim compani employe wait to corrobor the fals
inform provid by the vendor
