2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/The Presolicitation Phase


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


The Presolicitation Phase 
In the presolicitation phase of the competitive bidding process—before bids are officially 
sought for a project—bribery schemes can be brok en down into two distinct types. The first 
is the need recognition scheme, where an employee of a purchasing company is paid to 
convince his company that a particular project is necessary. The second reason to bribe 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.708                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
someone in the presolicitation phase is to have the specifications of the contract tailored to 
the strengths of a particular supplier.  
 
NEED RECOGNITION SCHEMES 
The typical fraud in the need recognition phase of the contract negotiation is a conspiracy 
between the buyer and contractor where an employee of the buyer receives something of 
value and in return recognizes a “need” for a particular product or service. The result of 
such a scheme is that the victim organization purchases unnecessary goods or services from 
a supplier at the direction of the corrupt employee.  
 
There are several trends that may indicate a need recognition fraud. Unusually high 
requirements for stock and inventory levels may reveal a situation in which a corrupt 
employee is seeking to justify unnecessary purchase activity from a certain supplier. An 
employee might also justify unnecessary purchases of inventory by writing off large numbers 
of surplus items to scrap. As these items leave the inventory, they open up spaces to justify 
additional purchases. Another indicator of a need recognition scheme is the defining of a 
“need” that can only be met by a certain supplier or contractor. In addition, the failure to 
develop a satisfactory list of backup suppliers may reveal an unusually strong attachment to a 
primary supplier — an attachment that is explainable by the acceptance of bribes from that 
supplier.  
 
SPECIFICATIONS SCHEMES 
The other type of presolicitation fraud is a specifications scheme. The specifications of a 
contract are a list of the elements, materials, dimensions, and other relevant requirements for 
completion of the project. Specifications are prepared to assist vendors in the bidding 
process, telling them what they are required to do and providing a firm basis for making and 
accepting bids.  
 
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.709 
 
 
  
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.710                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One corruption scheme that occurs in this process is the fraudulent tailoring of 
specifications to a particular vendor. In these cases, the vendor pays off an employee of the 
buyer who is involved in preparing specifications for the contract. In return, the employee 
tailors the specifications to accommodate that vendor’s capabilities so that the contractor is 
effectively assured of winning the contract.  
 
The methods used to restrict competition in the bidding process may include the use of 
“prequalification” procedures that are known to eliminate certain competitors. For instance, 
the bid may require potential contractors to have a certain percentage of female or minority 
ownership. There is nothing illegal with such a requirement, but if it is placed in the 
specifications as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factors, then the 
employee has sold his influence to benefit a dishonest vendor, a clear case of corruption.  
 
Some employees distort the requirements of contracts by claiming the specifications called 
for a sole-source provider or noncompetitive procurement. This causes competitive bidding 
to be disregarded and the contract to be awarded to a particular supplier. The supplier 
typically charges a much higher price than the company could have obtained through 
bidding. Sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications may also be used to 
eliminate competition and steer contracts to a particular vendor.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A requisitioner distorted the requirements of a contract up for bid, claiming the 
specifications called for a sole-source provider. Based on the requisitioner’s information, 
competitive bidding was disregarded and the cont ract was awarded to a particular supplier. 
A review of other bids received at a later date showed that certain materials were available 
for up to $70,000 less than what the company paid in the sole-source arrangement. The 
employee had helped divert the job to the contractor in return for a promise of future 
employment. 
 
Another form of specifications fraud is bid splitting. Entities are often required to solicit 
bids on projects over a certain dollar amount. In order to avoid this requirement, employees 
might break a large project up into several small projects that fall below the mandatory 
bidding level. Once the contract is split, the employee can award some or all of the 
component parts to a contractor with whom he is conspiring.  
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.711 
A less egregious but nevertheless unfair form of bid-rigging occurs when a vendor pays an 
employee of the buyer for the right to see the specifications earlier than his competitors. The 
employee does not alter the specifications to suit the vendor, but instead simply gives him a 
head start on planning his bid and preparing for the job.  
 



:


the presolicit phase
in the presolicit phase of the competit bid processbefor bid ar offici
sought for a projectbriberi scheme can be brok en down into two distinct type the first
is the need recognit scheme where an employe of a purchas compani is paid to
convinc hi compani that a particular project is necessari the second reason to bribe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1708 2011 fraud examin manual
someon in the presolicit phase is to have the specif of the contract tailor to
the strength of a particular supplier
need recognit scheme
the typic fraud in the need recognit phase of the contract negoti is a conspiraci
between the buyer and contractor where an employe of the buyer receiv someth of
valu and in return recogn a need for a particular product or servic the result of
such a scheme is that the victim organ purchas unnecessari good or servic from
a supplier at the direct of the corrupt employe
there ar sever trend that mai indic a need recognit fraud unusu high
requir for stock and inventori level mai reveal a situat in which a corrupt
employe is seek to justifi unnecessari purchas activ from a certain supplier an
employe might also justifi unnecessari purchas of inventori by write off larg number
of surplu item to scrap as these item leav the inventori thei open up space to justifi
addit purchas anoth indic of a need recognit scheme is the defin of a
need that can onli be met by a certain supplier or contractor in addit the failur to
develop a satisfactori list of backup supplier mai reveal an unusu strong attach to a
primari supplier an attach that is explain by the accept of bribe from that
supplier
specif scheme
the other type of presolicit fraud is a specif scheme the specif of a
contract ar a list of the element materi dimens and other relev requir for
complet of the project specif ar prepar to assist vendor in the bid
process tell them what thei ar requir to do and provid a firm basi for make and
accept bid
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1709
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1710 2011 fraud examin manual
on corrupt scheme that occur in thi process is the fraudul tailor of
specif to a particular vendor in these case the vendor pai off an employe of the
buyer who is involv in prepar specif for the contract in return the employe
tailor the specif to accommod that vendor capabl so that the contractor is
effect assur of win the contract
the method us to restrict competit in the bid process mai includ the us of
prequalif procedur that ar known to elimin certain competitor for instanc
the bid mai requir potenti contractor to have a certain percentag of femal or minor
ownership there is noth illeg with such a requir but if it is place in the
specif as a result of a bribe rather than as the result of other factor then the
employe ha sold hi influenc to benefit a dishonest vendor a clear case of corrupt
some employe distort the requir of contract by claim the specif call
for a solesourc provid or noncompetit procur thi caus competit bid
to be disregard and the contract to be award to a particular supplier the supplier
typic charg a much higher price than the compani could have obtain through
bid solesourc or noncompetit procur justif mai also be us to
elimin competit and steer contract to a particular vendor
exampl
a requisition distort the requir of a contract up for bid claim the
specif call for a solesourc provid base on the requisition inform
competit bid wa disregard and the cont ract wa award to a particular supplier
a review of other bid receiv at a later date show that certain materi were avail
for up to 70000 less than what the compani paid in the solesourc arrang the
employe had help divert the job to the contractor in return for a promis of futur
employ
anoth form of specif fraud is bid split entiti ar often requir to solicit
bid on project over a certain dollar amount in order to avoid thi requir employe
might break a larg project up into sever small project that fall below the mandatori
bid level onc the contract is split the employe can award some or all of the
compon part to a contractor with whom he is conspir
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1711
a less egregi but nevertheless unfair form of bidrig occur when a vendor pai an
employe of the buyer for the right to see the specif earlier than hi competitor the
employe doe not alter the specif to suit the vendor but instead simpli give him a
head start on plan hi bid and prepar for the job
