2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/The Solicitation Phase


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


The Solicitation Phase 
In the solicitation phase of the competitive bidding process, fraudsters attempt to influence 
the selection of a contractor by restricting the pool of competitors from whom bids are 
sought. In other words, a corrupt vendor pays an employee of the purchasing company to 
ensure that one or more of the vendor’s competitors do not get to bid on the contract. In 
this manner, the corrupt vendor is able to improve his chances of winning the job.  
 
One type of scheme involves the sales representative who deals on behalf of a number of 
potential bidders. The sales representative bribes a contracting official to rig the solicitation, 
ensuring that only those companies represented by him get to submit bids. It is not 
uncommon in some sectors for buyers to “require” bidders to be represented by certain sales 
or manufacturing representatives. These representatives pay a kickback to the buyer to 
protect their clients’ interests. The result of this transaction is that the purchasing company is 
deprived of the ability to get the best price on its contract. Typically, the group of 
“protected” vendors will not actually compete against each other for the purchaser’s 
contracts, but instead engage in “bid pooling.”   
 
BID POOLING 
Bid pooling is a process by which several bidders conspire to split contracts up and ensure 
that each gets a certain amount of work. Instead of submitting confidential bids, the vendors 
discuss what their bids will be so they can guarantee that each vendor will win a share of the 
purchasing company’s business. For example, if vendors A, B, and C are up for three 
separate jobs, they may agree that A’s bid will be the lowest on the first contract, B’s bid will 
be the lowest on the second contract, and C’s bid will be the lowest on the third contract. 
None of the vendors gets all three jobs, but on the other hand, they are all guaranteed to get 
at least one. Furthermore, since they plan their bids ahead of time, the vendors can conspire 
to raise their prices. Thus the purchasing company suffers as a result of the scheme.  
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.712                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FICTITIOUS SUPPLIERS 
Another way to eliminate competition in the solicitation phase of the selection process is to 
solicit bids from fictitious suppliers. This gives the appearance of a competitive bidding 
situation, when in fact only one real supplier bids on the job. Furthermore, the real 
contractor can raise his prices, since the other bids are fraudulent and sure to be higher than 
his own. In effect, the bids from fictitious suppliers serve to validate the exaggerated quote 
from the real contractor. 
 
OTHER METHODS    
In some cases, competition for a contract can be limited by severely restricting the time for 
submitting bids. Certain suppliers are given advanced notice of contracts before bids are 
solicited. These suppliers are therefore able to begin preparing their bids ahead of time. With 
the short time frame for developing bid proposals, the supplier with advance knowledge of 
the contract will have a decided advantage over his competition.  
 
Bribed purchasing officials can also restrict competition for their coconspirators by soliciting 
bids in obscure publications where other vendors are unlikely to see them. Again, this is 
done to eliminate potential rivals and create an advantage for the corrupt suppliers. Some 
schemes have also involved the publication of bid solicitations during holiday periods when 
those suppliers not “in the know” are unlikely to be looking for potential contracts. In more 
blatant cases, the bids of outsiders are accepted but are “lost” or improperly disqualified by 
the corrupt employee of the purchaser.  
 
Frequently, when a vendor bribes an employee of the purchasing company to assist him in 
any kind of solicitation scheme, the cost of the bribe is included in the corrupt vendor’s bid. 
Therefore, the purchasing company ends up bearing the cost of the illicit payment in the 
form of a higher contract price.  
 



:


the solicit phase
in the solicit phase of the competit bid process fraudster attempt to influenc
the select of a contractor by restrict the pool of competitor from whom bid ar
sought in other word a corrupt vendor pai an employe of the purchas compani to
ensur that on or more of the vendor competitor do not get to bid on the contract in
thi manner the corrupt vendor is abl to improv hi chanc of win the job
on type of scheme involv the sale repres who deal on behalf of a number of
potenti bidder the sale repres bribe a contract offici to rig the solicit
ensur that onli those compani repres by him get to submit bid it is not
uncommon in some sector for buyer to requir bidder to be repres by certain sale
or manufactur repres these repres pai a kickback to the buyer to
protect their client interest the result of thi transact is that the purchas compani is
depriv of the abil to get the best price on it contract typic the group of
protect vendor will not actual compet against each other for the purchas
contract but instead engag in bid pool
bid pool
bid pool is a process by which sever bidder conspir to split contract up and ensur
that each get a certain amount of work instead of submit confidenti bid the vendor
discuss what their bid will be so thei can guarante that each vendor will win a share of the
purchas compani busi for exampl if vendor a b and c ar up for three
separ job thei mai agre that as bid will be the lowest on the first contract bs bid will
be the lowest on the second contract and cs bid will be the lowest on the third contract
none of the vendor get all three job but on the other hand thei ar all guarante to get
at least on furthermor sinc thei plan their bid ahead of time the vendor can conspir
to rais their price thu the purchas compani suffer as a result of the scheme
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1712 2011 fraud examin manual
fictiti supplier
anoth wai to elimin competit in the solicit phase of the select process is to
solicit bid from fictiti supplier thi give the appear of a competit bid
situat when in fact onli on real supplier bid on the job furthermor the real
contractor can rais hi price sinc the other bid ar fraudul and sure to be higher than
hi own in effect the bid from fictiti supplier serv to valid the exagger quot
from the real contractor
other method
in some case competit for a contract can be limit by sever restrict the time for
submit bid certain supplier ar given advanc notic of contract befor bid ar
solicit these supplier ar therefor abl to begin prepar their bid ahead of time with
the short time frame for develop bid propos the supplier with advanc knowledg of
the contract will have a decid advantag over hi competit
bribe purchas offici can also restrict competit for their coconspir by solicit
bid in obscur public where other vendor ar unlik to see them again thi is
done to elimin potenti rival and creat an advantag for the corrupt supplier some
scheme have also involv the public of bid solicit dure holidai period when
those supplier not in the know ar unlik to be look for potenti contract in more
blatant case the bid of outsid ar accept but ar lost or improperli disqualifi by
the corrupt employe of the purchas
frequent when a vendor bribe an employe of the purchas compani to assist him in
ani kind of solicit scheme the cost of the bribe is includ in the corrupt vendor bid
therefor the purchas compani end up bear the cost of the illicit payment in the
form of a higher contract price
