2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/The Solicitation Phase/OTHER METHODS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


OTHER METHODS    
In some cases, competition for a contract can be limited by severely restricting the time for 
submitting bids. Certain suppliers are given advanced notice of contracts before bids are 
solicited. These suppliers are therefore able to begin preparing their bids ahead of time. With 
the short time frame for developing bid proposals, the supplier with advance knowledge of 
the contract will have a decided advantage over his competition.  
 
Bribed purchasing officials can also restrict competition for their coconspirators by soliciting 
bids in obscure publications where other vendors are unlikely to see them. Again, this is 
done to eliminate potential rivals and create an advantage for the corrupt suppliers. Some 
schemes have also involved the publication of bid solicitations during holiday periods when 
those suppliers not “in the know” are unlikely to be looking for potential contracts. In more 
blatant cases, the bids of outsiders are accepted but are “lost” or improperly disqualified by 
the corrupt employee of the purchaser.  
 
Frequently, when a vendor bribes an employee of the purchasing company to assist him in 
any kind of solicitation scheme, the cost of the bribe is included in the corrupt vendor’s bid. 
Therefore, the purchasing company ends up bearing the cost of the illicit payment in the 
form of a higher contract price.  
 



:


other method
in some case competit for a contract can be limit by sever restrict the time for
submit bid certain supplier ar given advanc notic of contract befor bid ar
solicit these supplier ar therefor abl to begin prepar their bid ahead of time with
the short time frame for develop bid propos the supplier with advanc knowledg of
the contract will have a decid advantag over hi competit
bribe purchas offici can also restrict competit for their coconspir by solicit
bid in obscur public where other vendor ar unlik to see them again thi is
done to elimin potenti rival and creat an advantag for the corrupt supplier some
scheme have also involv the public of bid solicit dure holidai period when
those supplier not in the know ar unlik to be look for potenti contract in more
blatant case the bid of outsid ar accept but ar lost or improperli disqualifi by
the corrupt employe of the purchas
frequent when a vendor bribe an employe of the purchas compani to assist him in
ani kind of solicit scheme the cost of the bribe is includ in the corrupt vendor bid
therefor the purchas compani end up bear the cost of the illicit payment in the
form of a higher contract price
