2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Bribery/Illegal Gratuities


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Illegal Gratuities 
Illegal gratuities are similar to bribery schemes except there is not necessarily an intent to 
influence a particular business decision before the fact. In the typical illegal gratuities 
scenario, a decision is made that happens to benefit a certain person or company. The party 
who benefited from the decision then gives a gift to the person who made the decision. The 
gift could be anything of value. An illegal gratuity does not require proof of an intent  
to influence. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.714                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A city commissioner negotiated a land developm ent deal with a group of private investors. 
After the deal was approved, the commissioner and his wife were rewarded with a free 
international vacation, all expenses paid.  
 
At first glance, it may seem that illegal gratuities schemes are harmless as long as the business 
decisions in question are not influenced by the promise of payment. But most company 
ethics policies forbid employees from accepting unreported gifts from vendors. One reason 
is that illegal gratuities schemes can (and do) evolve into bribery schemes. Once an employee 
has been rewarded for an act such as directing business to a particular supplier, an 
understanding might be reached that future decisions beneficial to the supplier will also be 
rewarded. Additionally, even though an outright promise of payment has not been made, 
employees may direct business to certain companies in the hope that they will be rewarded 
with money or gifts. 
 



:


illeg gratuiti
illeg gratuiti ar similar to briberi scheme except there is not necessarili an intent to
influenc a particular busi decis befor the fact in the typic illeg gratuiti
scenario a decis is made that happen to benefit a certain person or compani the parti
who benefit from the decis then give a gift to the person who made the decis the
gift could be anyth of valu an illeg gratuiti doe not requir proof of an intent
to influenc
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1714 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a citi commission negoti a land developm ent deal with a group of privat investor
after the deal wa approv the commission and hi wife were reward with a free
intern vacat all expens paid
at first glanc it mai seem that illeg gratuiti scheme ar harmless as long as the busi
decis in question ar not influenc by the promis of payment but most compani
ethic polici forbid employe from accept unreport gift from vendor on reason
is that illeg gratuiti scheme can and do evolv into briberi scheme onc an employe
ha been reward for an act such as direct busi to a particular supplier an
understand might be reach that futur decis benefici to the supplier will also be
reward addition even though an outright promis of payment ha not been made
employe mai direct busi to certain compani in the hope that thei will be reward
with monei or gift
