2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Detection of Bribery Schemes 
 
Red Flags of Bribery Schemes 
Most bribery schemes are detected thr ough tips from honest and disgruntled coworkers or 
vendors. These allegations can be evaluated through analysis of the “red flags” associated 
with the suspect people or transactions.  
 
The Corrupt Recipient 
A person taking payoffs or embezzling funds often exhibits the following characteristics: 
• The Big Spender — This is the most common way to detect corrupt recipients. Some 
recipients spend their money less conspicuously by paying off debts or paying down 
mortgages.  
• The Gift Taker — An official or executive who regularly accepts inappropriate gifts is often 
one susceptible to larger payments. 
• The “Odd Couple” — Corrupt payers and recipients often  appear to have very friendly 
social relationships. Frequent outside contacts, particularly between parties who do not 
appear to have much in common, might be a sign of deeper and more troublesome ties 
between the parties. 
• The Rule Breaker — This is often the most significant characteristic. A person taking 
payoffs will often take action on his own, or direct a subordinate to bend, break, or 
ignore standard operating procedures or rules to benefit the payer. Particular attention 
should be directed toward those who insert themselves into areas in which they are 
normally not involved or attempt to assert authority or make decisions for which they 
are not responsible. 
• The Complainer — A corrupt recipient often makes excuses for deficiencies in the payer’s 
services, such as poor quality, late deliveries, or high prices. Look for higher prices, 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.717 
“extra” payments, or commissions approved by the suspect, because these might be the 
source of kickback fraud. 
• Genuine Need — Greed, rather than need, seems to be the motivating factor in most cases. 
Occasionally, however, legitimate pressures, such as illness of family members or drug 
addiction, can induce participation in an illegal scheme. 
 
The Corrupt Payer 
Like the recipients of bribery payments, the payer will also demonstrate certain identifiable 
characteristics: 
• The Gift Bearer — The businessperson who routinely offers inappropriate gifts, provides 
lavish business entertainment, or otherwise tries to ingratiate himself is often the one 
offering still more valuable inducements. 
• The Sleaze Factor — The corrupt payer is frequently a person known or suspected in the 
industry to be involved in payoffs or other fraudulent activities. 
• The Too-Successful Bidder — A supplier who is consistently awarded work, without any 
apparent competitive advantage, might be providing under-the-table incentives. 
• Poor Quality, Higher Prices — Particularly after the corrupt relationship has been sealed, the 
quality of product and service provided by the payer might deteriorate and prices 
increase. 
• The One-Person Operation — In certain industries, small, closely held companies that do not 
have the reporting and internal control requirements of their larger, publicly held 
competitors resort to payoffs as a means of marketing advantage. Be alert for 
independent sales representatives, consultants, or other middlemen, because they are 
favored conduits for funneling and concealing illegal payments. 
 
General Purchasing  
The following practices may indicate that single (sole) source vendors are being favored, or 
competitive bidding policies are not being followed:  
• Materials are not being ordered at the optimal reorder point.  
• Orders are consistently made from the same vendor. 
• Established bidding policies are not being followed. 
• The costs of materials are out of line. 
 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.718                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Presolicitation  
Restrictions in an organization’s solicitation documents that tend to restrict competition are 
a red flag. Examples of restrictive conditions include: 
• Specifications and statements of work that are tailored to fit the products or capabilities 
of a single contractor. 
• “Prequalification” procedures that restrict competition. 
• Unnecessary sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications: 
? Containing false statements 
? Signed by unauthorized officials 
? Bypassing necessary review procedures 
 
Other red flags in the presolicitation phase include:   
• A buyer who provides information or advice to a contractor on a preferential basis. 
• New vendors that are added to the “qualified” list for no apparent reason. 
• Statements of work, specifications, or sole-source justifications that are developed by, or 
in consultation with, a contractor who will be permitted to bid. 
• Consultants who assisted in the preparation of the statements of work, specifications, or 
design, and are later permitted to work on the contract as subcontractors or consultants. 
• Projects that are split into smaller contracts to avoid review. 
• Information that is released by firms participating in the design and engineering to 
contractors competing for the prime contract. 
• Requirements that are split up so contractors can each get a “fair share” and can rotate 
bids. 
• Specifications that are not consistent with similar procurements in the past. 
 
Bid Solicitation 
The following are examples of suspicious activity that might signal fraud in the bid 
solicitation phase:   
• The time for submitting bids is limited so that only those with advance information have 
adequate time to prepare bids or proposals. 
• One contractor receives confidential information that is not revealed to his competitors. 
• The conducting of a bidders’ conference, which permits improper communications 
between contractors, who then are in a position to rig bids. 
• The failure to ensure that a sufficient number of potential competitors are aware of the 
solicitation by: 
? Using obscure publications to publish bid solicitations. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.719 
? Publishing bid solicitations during holiday periods. 
• Bid solicitations that are vague as to the time, place, or other requirements for submitting 
acceptable bids. 
• Inadequate internal controls over the number and destination of bid packages sent to 
interested bidders. 
• Improper communication between purchasers and contractors at trade or professional 
meetings. 
• Improper social contact between purchasers and contractor representatives. 
• A purchasing agent who has a financial interest in the business of a contractor. 
• A purchaser who discusses possible employment with a contractor. 
• The purchaser assisting a contractor in the preparation of his bid. 
• A contractor being referred to a specific subcontractor, expert, or source of supply by an 
employee of the purchasing organization. 
• The failure to amend a solicitation to include necessary changes or clarifications in the 
bid, such as telling one contractor of changes that can be made after the bid. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts so that a late bid is accepted. 
• Any indications of collusion between bidders. 
• The falsification of a contractor’s qualifications, work history, facilities, equipment,  
or personnel. 
 
Bid Submission or Contract Acceptance  
Red flags in the submission and post-submission phase of the bidding process include the 
following: 
• Procurement that has been restricted to exclude or hamper any qualified contractor. 
• The improper acceptance of a late bid. 
• A bidder who always bids last on contracts and consistently wins them. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts to get a late bid accepted. 
• Bids that are changed after other bidders’ pri ces are known. This is sometimes done by 
mistakes deliberately “planted” in a bid. 
• A low bidder who withdraws to become a subcontractor of a higher bidder who gets  
the contract. 
• Collusion between bidders. 
• Bidders who reveal their prices to one another. 
• Bids tend to be awarded in a geographic pattern or in a noticeable rotation. 
• Bids for a particular type of work are always awarded to a particular company. 
• False certifications by a contractor. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.720                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The falsification of information concerning contractor qualifications, financial capability, 
facilities, ownership of equipment and supplies, qualifications of personnel, and 
successful performance of previous jobs, etc. 
 
Methods of Proving Corrupt Payments 
There are three basic ways to prove illegal payments: identify and trace them by audit steps, 
turn an inside witness, or secretly infiltrate or record ongoing transactions. An audit might 
focus on the point of suspected payment or receipt, or both. As a very general proposition, 
suspected on-book schemes are best approached from the point of payment, and off-book 
schemes are most easily identified at the suspected point of receipt, or through the use of an 
inside witness, or surveillance. 
 
The Business Profile — Analysis 
The business profile  begins the examination process. It identifies prospective witnesses and 
targets, as well as relevant documents and transactions, and should provide leads as to 
whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being used. 
 
Information of the suspect business should be obtained about the organization, personnel, 
money flow pattern (source of available funds, related expenditures, etc.), location of bank 
accounts, financial condition, and recordkeeping system. This information can be obtained 
through interviews of employees, customers, and competitors; business bank account and 
loan records; financial statements; tax returns; business reporting companies; and business 
public filings. 
 
HOW IS THE BUSINESS ORGANIZED, LEGALLY AND STRUCTURALLY? 
Knowing this information helps determine what records are available (corporate, 
partnership, etc.) and where to go to get them. 
 
WHO ARE THE KEY PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH THE ENTERPRISE? 
This helps to identify potential witnesses and informants, as well as possible subjects. Key 
positions include the owners of the business; the people directly involved in the suspect 
transactions, including secretarial and clerical staff, present and former employees; the 
“number crunchers”; the bookkeeper, outside accountants, and tax preparers; outside 
consultants, sales representatives, and independent contractors (a popular conduit for 
payoffs); and competitors (often eager witnesses who can identify leads to sources of off-
 book funds such as customers and rebate practices). 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.721 
WHAT IS THE MONEY FLOW PATTERN INVOLVED IN THE SUSPECT TRANSACTION? 
Tracing the flow of funds in the suspect transactions is important. Where does the money 
come from and where does it go? Information about the source of funds can provide leads 
as to whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being employed, and the location of  
off-book accounts. Expenditures related to the suspect transactions might cover  
on-book payments. 
 
Determine all sources of funds with the following questions: 
• What goods or services does the business provide? 
• Who are its customers or clients? 
• What mode of payment is used: cash or check? 
• What other sources of funds are available, such as rebates from suppliers and shippers, 
or proceeds of insurance claims, liquidation sales, sale of assets, and loans? 
 
Identify all expenditures associated with the suspect transactions with the following: 
• What disbursements are made to third parties, such as commissioned sales agents, 
consultants, subcontractors, suppliers, and shippers? 
• Did the business have any extraordinary expenses during the suspect time period, such 
as extra commissions, advertising allowances (payments made by a manufacturer to the 
retail customer to assist the customer in meeting its advertising expenses), or inventory 
losses? 
• How are the expenses and disbursements paid: by cash, or by check? From which 
accounts? 
• Does the business maintain an account or fund used to pay miscellaneous expenses? If 
so, where is it located, who keeps the records, and who signs the checks or authorizes 
payments? 
• How are travel and entertainment expenses reimbursed? From which account? 
• What is the company’s policy toward business gifts? What gifts were given to the suspect 
and/or recipients? How were they paid for? Which records are maintained regarding 
them? 
 
WHERE ARE THE COMPANY’S BANK ACCOUNTS? 
Find out where the business deposits its receipts. This is quickly determined from the bank 
stamp on checks deposited from customers. Identify all company accounts by bank, account 
number, and authorized signature. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.722                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHAT IS THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE BUSINESS? 
This data might provide evidence of a motive for the fraud, or the fruits thereof. 
 
WHAT IS THE COMPANY’S RECORD-KEEPING SYSTEM? 
What kind of records does the company keep? For how long, and where are they kept? Who 
maintains them? 
 
Sources of Information for the Business Profile 
PRINCIPALS, EMPLOYEES, AND RECORDS OF SUSPECT BUSINESS 
People suspected of making illegal payments might submit to an interview, particularly if 
they are confident that the payments are well hidden. Interviews should also include other 
key employees (including the financial personnel) involved in the suspect transactions, 
particularly those who have since left the company. Use the Business Profile as a guide to 
questioning.  
 
CUSTOMERS AND COMPETITORS 
In a kickback case, the “customer” (agency) is the employer of the person taking payoffs, 
and is also the victim of the crime. Customers and competitors can provide valuable 
information about the payer’s business operation, particularly concerning the payer’s regular 
bank account, which can be identified through canceled checks. The customer might also 
have invoices and shipping documents that might lead to off-book funds. 
 
BANKS AND LENDING INSTITUTIONS 
The business’s banker might have credit applications, financial statements, loan files, and 
bank account information that might help the examiner. 
 
BUSINESS REPORTING COMPANIES 
Dun & Bradstreet and other commercial reporting companies disseminate basic information 
about the size, structure, sales, and employees of the business. Information about larger 
companies is found in Standard & Poors and other business directories. Other information 
on public record information is located in the “Sources of Information” chapter in the 
Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.723 
Proving On-Book Payments 
There are three basic methods for concealing on-book payments of bribes and/or kickbacks. 
They are fictitious payables, ghost employees, and overbilling. The following are the 
examination steps for identifying and tracing these payments.  
 
Fictitious Disbursement Schemes 
In order to examine on-book payments, obtain the following records from the entity 
suspected of making the illegal payments: 
 
BANK ACCOUNT INFORMATION 
• All records of payments, canceled checks, wire transfer receipts, receipts for the 
purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders, and withdrawal slips 
• Check registers 
• Account statements 
 
SALES BACKUP DOCUMENTATION 
• Purchase orders 
• Invoices 
• Documents showing receipt of goods ordered 
 
ACCOUNTING BOOKS AND RECORDS 
Examine the cash disbursement journals and ledgers. The most important of the above 
information (and often the only information needed) is the bank account information. Begin 
by examining the checks, check register, and/or the cash disbursement journal and paying 
particular attention to the following: 
• Payables and expenses charged to the account (cust omer) on which the illicit payments were made — If 
the examiner suspects that kickbacks were paid on sales to the ABC Corporation, for 
example, look at the payables and expenses charged to that account/customer. 
• Payments for services — Check payments for services such as sales commissions or 
consulting fees, which do not require the delivery of goods and need relatively little 
documentation to obtain payment. 
• Anomalous charges — For the business, an example of anomalous payments can be those 
for design fees paid by a company that is engaged in business that normally would not 
require such services.  
• The endorsement on the check — This might be by signature, or more commonly, by a stamp 
in the name of the business payee. Note the identity of the endorser. (Some corrupt 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.724                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
recipients have been known to endorse such checks in their own name.) 
• The location where the check was negotiated —If not obvious from the endorsement, identify 
the bank where the deposit was made by checking the depository bank’s stamp on the 
back of the check. The geographical location of the depository bank is an important lead 
that can connect the check to the suspected recipient. Determining the depository bank’s 
identity is critical to obtaining the recipient’s bank account information. 
• Checks with a second endorsement — A typical indication of a phony payable check is one paid 
to, and endorsed by, a business, which is then endorsed by an individual, thereby 
permitting it to be cashed or deposited in a personal account. In similar fashion, a check 
payable to a third party can be signed over to the issuer of the check. 
• Cashed (not deposited) checks payable to a business — Generally, a “For Deposit Only” stamp 
appears on the back of deposited checks, although this is not always the case. Most 
banks have a code stamp that indicates whether the check was cashed or not. These 
codes vary, and can be obtained from the bank where the check was negotiated. 
• Checks that fall into an unexplained pattern — An example of a suspicious payable scheme is 
one where checks are drawn once a month in an amount equal to some percentage of 
the sales against which they are charged, and are not otherwise explained. Such a pattern 
might indicate a kickback scheme. If an examination of the checks themselves does not 
yield any clear leads, compare the various records of payment with the backup 
documentation. Note particularly the following circumstances: 
• The absence of documentation — The absence of documentation to support a particular 
payment can include: 
? No invoice appearing in the files for a payment to a supplier or contractor. 
? No receipt to indicate that materials paid for were delivered. 
? No consultant’s work product to substantiate consulting fees paid. 
• Discrepancies — Discrepancies between payment information and backup documentation 
can include: 
? A check payable to a supplier in an amount different than his invoice. 
? A check payable to a person or entity different than that identified on the invoice. 
• Anomalies in support documents — Anomalies in the backup documentation can include 
invoices from several suppliers in different names that: 
? Have the same business address. 
? Are signed by the same person. 
? Returned to a post office box.  
• Unnumbered or sequentially numbered invoices — An example of an invoice scam uses invoices 
numbered 101, 102, and 103, which are dated 30 days apart. Of course, it is highly 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.725 
unlikely that a legitimate business would refrain from issuing invoices in the interim. 
• Alterations — Copies of originals can be made for concealing alterations of original 
documents. Examples can include alterations or photocopies of backup papers.  
• Location and other information on the invoices that tie it to the suspected recipient — If the above 
steps still do not yield any suspect payments, return to the check registers and cash 
disbursement journals to look for discrepancies between the entries and the checks or 
backup documentation, or their absence. The register and journals might also indicate 
the purpose of payments made by wire, cashier’s check, or cash. 
 
TRACING PROCEDURES  
When a suspect payment has been isolated, begin the tracing process. Remember that the 
phony payable might go directly to the recipient (deposited in a shell account), or through an 
intermediary account, person, or entity. It might even be converted to cash by the payer, and 
the cash given to the recipient. 
 
In instances where the identity of the individual recipient is not clear from the face of the 
check (as in checks payable to a business entity), do the following: 
• Examine the back of the check. Note where the check was deposited, and the account 
number, if available. If the check is not endorsed, the bank will still be able to locate the 
account to which it was deposited through its own internal records.  
• Obtain the records of the account where the check was deposited. The signature card 
and the monthly account statement will show the nominal account holder. In the case of 
business accounts, the bank should also have a copy of the corporate resolution or 
partnership agreement authorizing the account. 
• If the identity of the individual recipient is still not clear, check the public filings required 
of business entities to determine ownership. Corporate documents (articles of 
incorporation, annual reports, and some other basic documents) and limited partnerships 
might also be filed in some jurisdictions at the county level. The fictitious name index, 
business license files, telephone billing records, and even utility billing records can also 
lead to the identity of the principals.  
• If the original check is missing or has been destroyed, a microfilm copy can be obtained 
from the bank on which the check was drawn. (The bank where the check was deposited 
will also have a microfilm copy of the check. Unless the exact date of deposit and the 
identity of the depository bank are known, it will be very difficult to locate it.) 
• Payments by wire transfer or cashier’s check  can be traced to the recipient. A wire 
transfer from an account appears on that account statement as a debit memo (often 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.726                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
abbreviated as DM ). The Wire Transfer Request should show the name of the purchaser, 
the payee, and the bank and account number to which the funds were transferred. The 
sender receives a copy of this request, and the bank also maintains a copy, which is 
usually filed by date. 
• The bank’s retained copy of a cashier’s check will identify the payee. The bank also keeps 
the negotiated check when it is returned for payment. It will contain the endorsement 
and show where it was negotiated. Banks usually file cashier’s checks by number, making 
it necessary to know the approximate date they were issued to link them to the 
purchasers. Look for a cashier’s check or wire transfer on the dates of suspect cash 
withdrawals, checks to cash, or checks to the issuing bank. Remember that such 
instruments can be purchased for cash from any bank, not only from the bank where the 
payer’s account is located. 
• If the trail described above leads to an intermediary, the entire process must be repeated.  
 
Ghost Employee Schemes 
Illicit funds can be generated by funneling phony salary payments to fictitious or former 
employees, or by making extra payments to presently salaried employees who then either 
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipient. This is in addition to ghost 
employee schemes used for embezzlement, described previously. To trace such payments, 
payroll and employee lists, personnel files, employment applications, tax withholding forms, 
and payroll checks should be obtained from the suspect payer company. 
 
Attempt to identify the ghost through the following steps: 
• Compare a list of all current and former employees from the personnel office to the 
payroll list. Note discrepancies. Determine whether any employees have failed to execute 
tax withholding forms, or have not elected to receive any health benefits or other 
optional withdrawals, such as enforced savings plans. The absence of such elections is 
often an indication that the employee does not exist. 
• A regular employee’s normal salary might also  be inflated, or, more commonly, travel 
and expense reimbursements might be padded to generate illicit funds. Look for unusual 
disbursements from the accounts in which such checks are deposited. 
 
Once a suspect paycheck has been identified, determine whether the check was cashed or 
deposited. Note the endorsement, the bank, and account where the check was deposited. 
Determine whether there are any second endorsements that might transfer the check to the 
ultimate recipient. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.727 
Overbilling Schemes 
As described above, illicit funds might be added to legitimate payments for goods or services 
provided by actual suppliers, subcontractors, engineers, and agents, with the additional 
amounts being passed on by the supplier or returned to the payer (usually in cash) for 
distribution. 
 
Obtain the same records required for tracing phony payables—bank account information, 
backup documentation, and accounting records—from both the original payer and the 
intermediary. Note the following indicators of suspect payments to the intermediary: 
• Notations on invoices or other billing documents breaking out “extra” or “special” 
charges, particularly those that require no delivery of goods for payment. 
• Discrepancies between the purchase order or invoice amounts and the amount of 
payment. Particularly note invoices that appear to have been altered or copied. 
• Unusually large amounts appearing on particular bills, or bills that break a consistent 
pattern of amounts, schedule, or purpose. 
 
Disbursements from the intermediary might be covered in the same ways as in other on-
 book schemes, such as by means of phony payables, direct cash withdrawals, or 
disbursements charged to miscellaneous accounts, such as travel or entertainment. The 
tracing process is the same as in any on-book scheme. Remember that the overbilling entity 
will usually add its own fee for providing such services. Therefore, the disbursements 
coming from its account might not be in the same amount as the additional payments made 
to it. 
 
Proving Off-Book Payments 
Identifying and tracing off-book payments is usually more difficult than locating on-book 
schemes. Success generally depends upon identifying the source of the funds or accounts 
(from which payments can be traced out), using an inside witness, and focusing on the point 
of receipt. The source of off-book funds might be located by the following: 
 
Indirect Evidence of Unrecorded Sales on the Suspect Company’s Books and Records 
The suspect company’s books and records might reflect unusual costs and expenses not 
associated with the business’s known sales, such as rental payments for an undisclosed 
warehouse, shipping documents reflecting deliveries to an unlisted customer, and 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.728                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
commissions paid to sales agents in a region where sales are not reported. These indicate 
possible unrecorded sales. 
 
Unbalanced Ratios of Costs to Sales 
The cost of producing and selling a particular item usually bears some fixed relationship to 
the revenue it generates. A significant imbalance in such a ratio, such as in a situation where 
twice the supplies are ordered than are needed to produce the reported sales (and the extra is 
not located in inventory), indicates possible unrecorded transactions. This technique is used 
to identify unreported sales by bars and restaurants. 
 
Investigation in the Marketplace 
Customers of the suspect business whose payments might have been diverted to off-book 
accounts might have records, including canceled checks, which would reflect such sales, and 
the bank and account to which the funds were deposited. Customers might also reveal cash 
payments that could be used to create a slush fund. Additionally, competitors might be 
aware of other customers and transactions that could lead to evidence of off-book sales. 
 
Proving Payments in Cash  
The following techniques can be used to prove cash payments circumstantially, or to 
corroborate testimony of such payments by an inside witness: 
• Match evidence of cash withdrawals or disb ursements by the payer with corresponding 
deposits, expenditures, or visits to a safe deposit box by the recipient. 
• Look for the purchase of cashier’s checks, trav eler’s checks, or wire transfers payable to 
the recipient at, or shortly after, cash withdrawals or disbursements. Also look for a 
correlation between cash-generating transactions and money wires or courier services, 
which are sometimes used to send cash. 
• If the scheme is ongoing, consider the use of visual or electronic surveillance (if you’re a 
member of law enforcement), or try to introduce an undercover agent or implement a 
sting operation. 
• Unexplained or unusual cash disbursements or withdrawals, particularly from a business 
that does not normally deal in cash, might itself indicate illicit transactions, or 
corroborate such testimony. To be effective, the examiner must identify and rebut all 
legitimate explanations, which usually requires interviewing the payer. 
• Focus the investigation on the suspected recipient, as discussed below. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.729 
EXAMINATION FROM THE POINT OF RECEIPT 
Often, the only practical approach to identifying and tracing illegal payments is to focus on 
the suspected recipient, particularly if the person making the payments is unknown, one 
person is suspected of taking from many, the payments are in cash or from off-book funds, 
and so on. 
 
THE FINANCIAL/BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The Financial/Behavioral Profile is outlined in the “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. The Financial Profile will identify 
most illicit funds deposited to accounts or expended in significant amounts. It will not reveal 
relatively small currency transactions, particularly if they were for concealed activities, 
consumables, or unusual one-time expenses, such as medical bills. The Financial Profile 
might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless such activities are identified. This is 
done through preparation of the Behavioral Profile. During the interview be alert and review 
documents for signs that the target has: 
• A drug and/or alcohol addiction 
• A gambling habit 
• Loan shark or other private debts 
• A girlfriend (or boyfriend) supported by the target 
• Extraordinary medical expenses 
• Significant, regular cash expenses for entertainment and/or travel 
 
The Behavioral Profile might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such 
as large debts, as well as additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent 
significant amounts of cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from disclosed 
bank accounts or no admitted sources of cash income, there must be other, undisclosed 
sources of income. 
 
THE SUSPECT RECIPIENT 
An interview should almost always be requested with the target. Use the 
Financial/Behavioral Profile as a guide. Pin down the target’s income, assets, and accounts. 
If the witness claims to have legitimate sources of large sums of currency, determine the 
following: 
• What was the source of the cash? 
• What was the amount of cash on hand at the starting point of the investigation, at the 
end of each year thereafter, and on the date of the interview? 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.730                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Where was the cash kept? 
• Why was the cash not deposited in a financial institution or invested? 
• Who knew about the cash? 
• What records of the cash exist? 
• What were the denominations? 
• When and for what was any of the cash spent? 
• Will the subject consent to an inventory of the remaining cash during the interview? If 
not, why not? If so, the cash should be counted at least twice in the presence of another 
examiner. A list of serial and series numbers should also be made.  
 
If the witness testifies that suspect funds were legitimate loan proceeds, ask: 
• Who was the lender? 
• When was the loan made? 
• What was the amount of the loan? 
• What was the purpose of the loan? 
• Was the loan repaid? 
• How was the loan documented? 
 
Also attempt to interview the subject’s spouse separately. Although one spouse generally will 
not be required to testify against the other, spouses can be an important source of lead 
information—if handled carefully. 
 
THIRD-PARTY WITNESSES 
Potential third-party sources include business colleagues, personal associates, bankers, 
brokers, real estate agents, accountants and tax preparers, ex-spouses, and romantic interests 
(particularly former romantic interests). Subjects often boast to their close associates of their 
new wealth, or entertain them with the fruits thereof. Casual remarks by a subject to a 
colleague (and repeated to an examiner) have undone the suspect, even when intensive 
audits have failed. Follow the Financial/Behavioral Profile format to the extent feasible. Of 
course, no single third-party witness is likely to possess all this information, but a complete 
picture can be assembled from bits and pieces provided by a number of such sources. 
 
TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS 
Other techniques for tracing illicit payments can be found in the “Tracing Illicit 
Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.731 



:


detect of briberi scheme
red flag of briberi scheme
most briberi scheme ar detect thr ough tip from honest and disgruntl cowork or
vendor these alleg can be evalu through analysi of the red flag associ
with the suspect peopl or transact
the corrupt recipi
a person take payoff or embezzl fund often exhibit the follow characterist
the big spender thi is the most common wai to detect corrupt recipi some
recipi spend their monei less conspicu by pai off debt or pai down
mortgag
the gift taker an offici or execut who regularli accept inappropri gift is often
on suscept to larger payment
the odd coupl corrupt payer and recipi often appear to have veri friendli
social relationship frequent outsid contact particularli between parti who do not
appear to have much in common might be a sign of deeper and more troublesom ti
between the parti
the rule breaker thi is often the most signific characterist a person take
payoff will often take action on hi own or direct a subordin to bend break or
ignor standard oper procedur or rule to benefit the payer particular attent
should be direct toward those who insert themselv into area in which thei ar
normal not involv or attempt to assert author or make decis for which thei
ar not respons
the complain a corrupt recipi often make excus for defici in the payer
servic such as poor qualiti late deliveri or high price look for higher price
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1717
extra payment or commiss approv by the suspect becaus these might be the
sourc of kickback fraud
genuin need greed rather than need seem to be the motiv factor in most case
occasion howev legitim pressur such as ill of famili member or drug
addict can induc particip in an illeg scheme
the corrupt payer
like the recipi of briberi payment the payer will also demonstr certain identifi
characterist
the gift bearer the businessperson who routin offer inappropri gift provid
lavish busi entertain or otherwis tri to ingrati himself is often the on
offer still more valuabl induc
the sleaz factor the corrupt payer is frequent a person known or suspect in the
industri to be involv in payoff or other fraudul activ
the toosuccess bidder a supplier who is consist award work without ani
appar competit advantag might be provid underthet incent
poor qualiti higher price particularli after the corrupt relationship ha been seal the
qualiti of product and servic provid by the payer might deterior and price
increas
the oneperson oper in certain industri small close held compani that do not
have the report and intern control requir of their larger publicli held
competitor resort to payoff as a mean of market advantag be alert for
independ sale repres consult or other middlemen becaus thei ar
favor conduit for funnel and conceal illeg payment
gener purchas
the follow practic mai indic that singl sole sourc vendor ar be favor or
competit bid polici ar not be follow
materi ar not be order at the optim reorder point
order ar consist made from the same vendor
establish bid polici ar not be follow
the cost of materi ar out of line
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1718 2011 fraud examin manual
presolicit
restrict in an organ solicit document that tend to restrict competit ar
a red flag exampl of restrict condit includ
specif and statement of work that ar tailor to fit the product or capabl
of a singl contractor
prequalif procedur that restrict competit
unnecessari solesourc or noncompetit procur justif
contain fals statement
sign by unauthor offici
bypass necessari review procedur
other red flag in the presolicit phase includ
a buyer who provid inform or advic to a contractor on a preferenti basi
new vendor that ar ad to the qualifi list for no appar reason
statement of work specif or solesourc justif that ar develop by or
in consult with a contractor who will be permit to bid
consult who assist in the prepar of the statement of work specif or
design and ar later permit to work on the contract as subcontractor or consult
project that ar split into smaller contract to avoid review
inform that is releas by firm particip in the design and engin to
contractor compet for the prime contract
requir that ar split up so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat
bid
specif that ar not consist with similar procur in the past
bid solicit
the follow ar exampl of suspici activ that might signal fraud in the bid
solicit phase
the time for submit bid is limit so that onli those with advanc inform have
adequ time to prepar bid or propos
on contractor receiv confidenti inform that is not reveal to hi competitor
the conduct of a bidder confer which permit improp commun
between contractor who then ar in a posit to rig bid
the failur to ensur that a suffici number of potenti competitor ar awar of the
solicit by
us obscur public to publish bid solicit
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1719
publish bid solicit dure holidai period
bid solicit that ar vagu as to the time place or other requir for submit
accept bid
inadequ intern control over the number and destin of bid packag sent to
interest bidder
improp commun between purchas and contractor at trade or profession
meet
improp social contact between purchas and contractor repres
a purchas agent who ha a financi interest in the busi of a contractor
a purchas who discuss possibl employ with a contractor
the purchas assist a contractor in the prepar of hi bid
a contractor be refer to a specif subcontractor expert or sourc of suppli by an
employe of the purchas organ
the failur to amend a solicit to includ necessari chang or clarif in the
bid such as tell on contractor of chang that can be made after the bid
the falsif of document or receipt so that a late bid is accept
ani indic of collus between bidder
the falsif of a contractor qualif work histori facil equip
or personnel
bid submiss or contract accept
red flag in the submiss and postsubmiss phase of the bid process includ the
follow
procur that ha been restrict to exclud or hamper ani qualifi contractor
the improp accept of a late bid
a bidder who alwai bid last on contract and consist win them
the falsif of document or receipt to get a late bid accept
bid that ar chang after other bidder pri ce ar known thi is sometim done by
mistak deliber plant in a bid
a low bidder who withdraw to becom a subcontractor of a higher bidder who get
the contract
collus between bidder
bidder who reveal their price to on anoth
bid tend to be award in a geograph pattern or in a notic rotat
bid for a particular type of work ar alwai award to a particular compani
fals certif by a contractor
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1720 2011 fraud examin manual
the falsif of inform concern contractor qualif financi capabl
facil ownership of equip and suppli qualif of personnel and
success perform of previou job etc
method of prove corrupt payment
there ar three basic wai to prove illeg payment identifi and trace them by audit step
turn an insid wit or secretli infiltr or record ongo transact an audit might
focu on the point of suspect payment or receipt or both as a veri gener proposit
suspect onbook scheme ar best approach from the point of payment and offbook
scheme ar most easili identifi at the suspect point of receipt or through the us of an
insid wit or surveil
the busi profil analysi
the busi profil begin the examin process it identifi prospect wit and
target as well as relev document and transact and should provid lead as to
whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be us
inform of the suspect busi should be obtain about the organ personnel
monei flow pattern sourc of avail fund relat expenditur etc locat of bank
account financi condit and recordkeep system thi inform can be obtain
through interview of employe custom and competitor busi bank account and
loan record financi statement tax return busi report compani and busi
public file
how is the busi organ legal and structur
know thi inform help determin what record ar avail corpor
partnership etc and where to go to get them
who ar the kei personnel associ with the enterpris
thi help to identifi potenti wit and inform as well as possibl subject kei
posit includ the owner of the busi the peopl directli involv in the suspect
transact includ secretari and cleric staff present and former employe the
number cruncher the bookkeep outsid account and tax prepar outsid
consult sale repres and independ contractor a popular conduit for
payoff and competitor often eager wit who can identifi lead to sourc of off
book fund such as custom and rebat practic
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1721
what is the monei flow pattern involv in the suspect transact
trace the flow of fund in the suspect transact is import where doe the monei
come from and where doe it go inform about the sourc of fund can provid lead
as to whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be emploi and the locat of
offbook account expenditur relat to the suspect transact might cover
onbook payment
determin all sourc of fund with the follow question
what good or servic doe the busi provid
who ar it custom or client
what mode of payment is us cash or check
what other sourc of fund ar avail such as rebat from supplier and shipper
or proce of insur claim liquid sale sale of asset and loan
identifi all expenditur associ with the suspect transact with the follow
what disburs ar made to third parti such as commiss sale agent
consult subcontractor supplier and shipper
did the busi have ani extraordinari expens dure the suspect time period such
as extra commiss advertis allow payment made by a manufactur to the
retail custom to assist the custom in meet it advertis expens or inventori
loss
how ar the expens and disburs paid by cash or by check from which
account
doe the busi maintain an account or fund us to pai miscellan expens if
so where is it locat who keep the record and who sign the check or author
payment
how ar travel and entertain expens reimburs from which account
what is the compani polici toward busi gift what gift were given to the suspect
andor recipi how were thei paid for which record ar maintain regard
them
where ar the compani bank account
find out where the busi deposit it receipt thi is quickli determin from the bank
stamp on check deposit from custom identifi all compani account by bank account
number and author signatur
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1722 2011 fraud examin manual
what is the financi condit of the busi
thi data might provid evid of a motiv for the fraud or the fruit thereof
what is the compani recordkeep system
what kind of record doe the compani keep for how long and where ar thei kept who
maintain them
sourc of inform for the busi profil
princip employe and record of suspect busi
peopl suspect of make illeg payment might submit to an interview particularli if
thei ar confid that the payment ar well hidden interview should also includ other
kei employe includ the financi personnel involv in the suspect transact
particularli those who have sinc left the compani us the busi profil as a guid to
question
custom and competitor
in a kickback case the custom agenc is the employ of the person take payoff
and is also the victim of the crime custom and competitor can provid valuabl
inform about the payer busi oper particularli concern the payer regular
bank account which can be identifi through cancel check the custom might also
have invoic and ship document that might lead to offbook fund
bank and lend institut
the businesss banker might have credit applic financi statement loan file and
bank account inform that might help the examin
busi report compani
dun bradstreet and other commerci report compani dissemin basic inform
about the size structur sale and employe of the busi inform about larger
compani is found in standard poor and other busi directori other inform
on public record inform is locat in the sourc of inform chapter in the
investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1723
prove onbook payment
there ar three basic method for conceal onbook payment of bribe andor kickback
thei ar fictiti payabl ghost employe and overbil the follow ar the
examin step for identifi and trace these payment
fictiti disburs scheme
in order to examin onbook payment obtain the follow record from the entiti
suspect of make the illeg payment
bank account inform
all record of payment cancel check wire transfer receipt receipt for the
purchas of cashier check and monei order and withdraw slip
check regist
account statement
sale backup document
purchas order
invoic
document show receipt of good order
account book and record
examin the cash disburs journal and ledger the most import of the abov
inform and often the onli inform need is the bank account inform begin
by examin the check check regist andor the cash disburs journal and pai
particular attent to the follow
payabl and expens charg to the account cust omer on which the illicit payment were made if
the examin suspect that kickback were paid on sale to the abc corpor for
exampl look at the payabl and expens charg to that accountcustom
payment for servic check payment for servic such as sale commiss or
consult fee which do not requir the deliveri of good and need rel littl
document to obtain payment
anomal charg for the busi an exampl of anomal payment can be those
for design fee paid by a compani that is engag in busi that normal would not
requir such servic
the endors on the check thi might be by signatur or more commonli by a stamp
in the name of the busi paye note the ident of the endors some corrupt
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1724 2011 fraud examin manual
recipi have been known to endors such check in their own name
the locat where the check wa negoti if not obviou from the endors identifi
the bank where the deposit wa made by check the depositori bank stamp on the
back of the check the geograph locat of the depositori bank is an import lead
that can connect the check to the suspect recipi determin the depositori bank
ident is critic to obtain the recipi bank account inform
check with a second endors a typic indic of a phoni payabl check is on paid
to and endors by a busi which is then endors by an individu therebi
permit it to be cash or deposit in a person account in similar fashion a check
payabl to a third parti can be sign over to the issuer of the check
cash not deposit check payabl to a busi gener a for deposit onli stamp
appear on the back of deposit check although thi is not alwai the case most
bank have a code stamp that indic whether the check wa cash or not these
code vari and can be obtain from the bank where the check wa negoti
check that fall into an unexplain pattern an exampl of a suspici payabl scheme is
on where check ar drawn onc a month in an amount equal to some percentag of
the sale against which thei ar charg and ar not otherwis explain such a pattern
might indic a kickback scheme if an examin of the check themselv doe not
yield ani clear lead compar the variou record of payment with the backup
document note particularli the follow circumst
the absenc of document the absenc of document to support a particular
payment can includ
no invoic appear in the file for a payment to a supplier or contractor
no receipt to indic that materi paid for were deliv
no consult work product to substanti consult fee paid
discrep discrep between payment inform and backup document
can includ
a check payabl to a supplier in an amount differ than hi invoic
a check payabl to a person or entiti differ than that identifi on the invoic
anomali in support document anomali in the backup document can includ
invoic from sever supplier in differ name that
have the same busi address
ar sign by the same person
return to a post offic box
unnumb or sequenti number invoic an exampl of an invoic scam us invoic
number 101 102 and 103 which ar date 30 dai apart of cours it is highli
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1725
unlik that a legitim busi would refrain from issu invoic in the interim
alter copi of origin can be made for conceal alter of origin
document exampl can includ alter or photocopi of backup paper
locat and other inform on the invoic that tie it to the suspect recipi if the abov
step still do not yield ani suspect payment return to the check regist and cash
disburs journal to look for discrep between the entri and the check or
backup document or their absenc the regist and journal might also indic
the purpos of payment made by wire cashier check or cash
trace procedur
when a suspect payment ha been isol begin the trace process rememb that the
phoni payabl might go directli to the recipi deposit in a shell account or through an
intermediari account person or entiti it might even be convert to cash by the payer and
the cash given to the recipi
in instanc where the ident of the individu recipi is not clear from the face of the
check as in check payabl to a busi entiti do the follow
examin the back of the check note where the check wa deposit and the account
number if avail if the check is not endors the bank will still be abl to locat the
account to which it wa deposit through it own intern record
obtain the record of the account where the check wa deposit the signatur card
and the monthli account statement will show the nomin account holder in the case of
busi account the bank should also have a copi of the corpor resolut or
partnership agreement author the account
if the ident of the individu recipi is still not clear check the public file requir
of busi entiti to determin ownership corpor document articl of
incorpor annual report and some other basic document and limit partnership
might also be file in some jurisdict at the counti level the fictiti name index
busi licens file telephon bill record and even util bill record can also
lead to the ident of the princip
if the origin check is miss or ha been destroi a microfilm copi can be obtain
from the bank on which the check wa drawn the bank where the check wa deposit
will also have a microfilm copi of the check unless the exact date of deposit and the
ident of the depositori bank ar known it will be veri difficult to locat it
payment by wire transfer or cashier check can be trace to the recipi a wire
transfer from an account appear on that account statement as a debit memo often
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1726 2011 fraud examin manual
abbrevi as dm the wire transfer request should show the name of the purchas
the paye and the bank and account number to which the fund were transfer the
sender receiv a copi of thi request and the bank also maintain a copi which is
usual file by date
the bank retain copi of a cashier check will identifi the paye the bank also keep
the negoti check when it is return for payment it will contain the endors
and show where it wa negoti bank usual file cashier check by number make
it necessari to know the approxim date thei were issu to link them to the
purchas look for a cashier check or wire transfer on the date of suspect cash
withdraw check to cash or check to the issu bank rememb that such
instrument can be purchas for cash from ani bank not onli from the bank where the
payer account is locat
if the trail describ abov lead to an intermediari the entir process must be repeat
ghost employe scheme
illicit fund can be gener by funnel phoni salari payment to fictiti or former
employe or by make extra payment to present salari employe who then either
return them to the payer or pass them on to the recipi thi is in addit to ghost
employe scheme us for embezzl describ previous to trace such payment
payrol and employe list personnel file employ applic tax withhold form
and payrol check should be obtain from the suspect payer compani
attempt to identifi the ghost through the follow step
compar a list of all current and former employe from the personnel offic to the
payrol list note discrep determin whether ani employe have fail to execut
tax withhold form or have not elect to receiv ani health benefit or other
option withdraw such as enforc save plan the absenc of such elect is
often an indic that the employe doe not exist
a regular employe normal salari might also be inflat or more commonli travel
and expens reimburs might be pad to gener illicit fund look for unusu
disburs from the account in which such check ar deposit
onc a suspect paycheck ha been identifi determin whether the check wa cash or
deposit note the endors the bank and account where the check wa deposit
determin whether there ar ani second endors that might transfer the check to the
ultim recipi
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1727
overbil scheme
as describ abov illicit fund might be ad to legitim payment for good or servic
provid by actual supplier subcontractor engin and agent with the addit
amount be pass on by the supplier or return to the payer usual in cash for
distribut
obtain the same record requir for trace phoni payablesbank account inform
backup document and account recordsfrom both the origin payer and the
intermediari note the follow indic of suspect payment to the intermediari
notat on invoic or other bill document break out extra or special
charg particularli those that requir no deliveri of good for payment
discrep between the purchas order or invoic amount and the amount of
payment particularli note invoic that appear to have been alter or copi
unusu larg amount appear on particular bill or bill that break a consist
pattern of amount schedul or purpos
disburs from the intermediari might be cover in the same wai as in other on
book scheme such as by mean of phoni payabl direct cash withdraw or
disburs charg to miscellan account such as travel or entertain the
trace process is the same as in ani onbook scheme rememb that the overbil entiti
will usual add it own fee for provid such servic therefor the disburs
come from it account might not be in the same amount as the addit payment made
to it
prove offbook payment
identifi and trace offbook payment is usual more difficult than locat onbook
scheme success gener depend upon identifi the sourc of the fund or account
from which payment can be trace out us an insid wit and focus on the point
of receipt the sourc of offbook fund might be locat by the follow
indirect evid of unrecord sale on the suspect compani book and record
the suspect compani book and record might reflect unusu cost and expens not
associ with the businesss known sale such as rental payment for an undisclos
warehous ship document reflect deliveri to an unlist custom and
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1728 2011 fraud examin manual
commiss paid to sale agent in a region where sale ar not report these indic
possibl unrecord sale
unbalanc ratio of cost to sale
the cost of produc and sell a particular item usual bear some fix relationship to
the revenu it gener a signific imbal in such a ratio such as in a situat where
twice the suppli ar order than ar need to produc the report sale and the extra is
not locat in inventori indic possibl unrecord transact thi techniqu is us
to identifi unreport sale by bar and restaur
investig in the marketplac
custom of the suspect busi whose payment might have been divert to offbook
account might have record includ cancel check which would reflect such sale and
the bank and account to which the fund were deposit custom might also reveal cash
payment that could be us to creat a slush fund addition competitor might be
awar of other custom and transact that could lead to evid of offbook sale
prove payment in cash
the follow techniqu can be us to prove cash payment circumstanti or to
corrobor testimoni of such payment by an insid wit
match evid of cash withdraw or disb ursement by the payer with correspond
deposit expenditur or visit to a safe deposit box by the recipi
look for the purchas of cashier check trav eler check or wire transfer payabl to
the recipi at or shortli after cash withdraw or disburs also look for a
correl between cashgener transact and monei wire or courier servic
which ar sometim us to send cash
if the scheme is ongo consid the us of visual or electron surveil if your a
member of law enforc or try to introduc an undercov agent or implement a
sting oper
unexplain or unusu cash disburs or withdraw particularli from a busi
that doe not normal deal in cash might itself indic illicit transact or
corrobor such testimoni to be effect the examin must identifi and rebut all
legitim explan which usual requir interview the payer
focu the investig on the suspect recipi as discuss below
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1729
examin from the point of receipt
often the onli practic approach to identifi and trace illeg payment is to focu on
the suspect recipi particularli if the person make the payment is unknown on
person is suspect of take from mani the payment ar in cash or from offbook fund
and so on
the financialbehavior profil
the financialbehavior profil is outlin in the trace illicit transact chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual the financi profil will identifi
most illicit fund deposit to account or expend in signific amount it will not reveal
rel small currenc transact particularli if thei were for conceal activ
consum or unusu onetim expens such as medic bill the financi profil
might give inaccur or fals neg read unless such activ ar identifi thi is
done through prepar of the behavior profil dure the interview be alert and review
document for sign that the target ha
a drug andor alcohol addict
a gambl habit
loan shark or other privat debt
a girlfriend or boyfriend support by the target
extraordinari medic expens
signific regular cash expens for entertain andor travel
the behavior profil might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such
as larg debt as well as addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent
signific amount of cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from disclos
bank account or no admit sourc of cash incom there must be other undisclos
sourc of incom
the suspect recipi
an interview should almost alwai be request with the target us the
financialbehavior profil as a guid pin down the target incom asset and account
if the wit claim to have legitim sourc of larg sum of currenc determin the
follow
what wa the sourc of the cash
what wa the amount of cash on hand at the start point of the investig at the
end of each year thereaft and on the date of the interview
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1730 2011 fraud examin manual
where wa the cash kept
why wa the cash not deposit in a financi institut or invest
who knew about the cash
what record of the cash exist
what were the denomin
when and for what wa ani of the cash spent
will the subject consent to an inventori of the remain cash dure the interview if
not why not if so the cash should be count at least twice in the presenc of anoth
examin a list of serial and seri number should also be made
if the wit testifi that suspect fund were legitim loan proce ask
who wa the lender
when wa the loan made
what wa the amount of the loan
what wa the purpos of the loan
wa the loan repaid
how wa the loan document
also attempt to interview the subject spous separ although on spous gener will
not be requir to testifi against the other spous can be an import sourc of lead
informationif handl carefulli
thirdparti wit
potenti thirdparti sourc includ busi colleagu person associ banker
broker real estat agent account and tax prepar exspous and romant interest
particularli former romant interest subject often boast to their close associ of their
new wealth or entertain them with the fruit thereof casual remark by a subject to a
colleagu and repeat to an examin have undon the suspect even when intens
audit have fail follow the financialbehavior profil format to the extent feasibl of
cours no singl thirdparti wit is like to possess all thi inform but a complet
pictur can be assembl from bit and piec provid by a number of such sourc
trace illicit transact
other techniqu for trace illicit payment can be found in the trace illicit
transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1731
