2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Presolicitation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Presolicitation  
Restrictions in an organization’s solicitation documents that tend to restrict competition are 
a red flag. Examples of restrictive conditions include: 
• Specifications and statements of work that are tailored to fit the products or capabilities 
of a single contractor. 
• “Prequalification” procedures that restrict competition. 
• Unnecessary sole-source or noncompetitive procurement justifications: 
? Containing false statements 
? Signed by unauthorized officials 
? Bypassing necessary review procedures 
 
Other red flags in the presolicitation phase include:   
• A buyer who provides information or advice to a contractor on a preferential basis. 
• New vendors that are added to the “qualified” list for no apparent reason. 
• Statements of work, specifications, or sole-source justifications that are developed by, or 
in consultation with, a contractor who will be permitted to bid. 
• Consultants who assisted in the preparation of the statements of work, specifications, or 
design, and are later permitted to work on the contract as subcontractors or consultants. 
• Projects that are split into smaller contracts to avoid review. 
• Information that is released by firms participating in the design and engineering to 
contractors competing for the prime contract. 
• Requirements that are split up so contractors can each get a “fair share” and can rotate 
bids. 
• Specifications that are not consistent with similar procurements in the past. 
 



:


presolicit
restrict in an organ solicit document that tend to restrict competit ar
a red flag exampl of restrict condit includ
specif and statement of work that ar tailor to fit the product or capabl
of a singl contractor
prequalif procedur that restrict competit
unnecessari solesourc or noncompetit procur justif
contain fals statement
sign by unauthor offici
bypass necessari review procedur
other red flag in the presolicit phase includ
a buyer who provid inform or advic to a contractor on a preferenti basi
new vendor that ar ad to the qualifi list for no appar reason
statement of work specif or solesourc justif that ar develop by or
in consult with a contractor who will be permit to bid
consult who assist in the prepar of the statement of work specif or
design and ar later permit to work on the contract as subcontractor or consult
project that ar split into smaller contract to avoid review
inform that is releas by firm particip in the design and engin to
contractor compet for the prime contract
requir that ar split up so contractor can each get a fair share and can rotat
bid
specif that ar not consist with similar procur in the past
