2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Bid Submission or Contract Acceptance


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Bid Submission or Contract Acceptance  
Red flags in the submission and post-submission phase of the bidding process include the 
following: 
• Procurement that has been restricted to exclude or hamper any qualified contractor. 
• The improper acceptance of a late bid. 
• A bidder who always bids last on contracts and consistently wins them. 
• The falsification of documents or receipts to get a late bid accepted. 
• Bids that are changed after other bidders’ pri ces are known. This is sometimes done by 
mistakes deliberately “planted” in a bid. 
• A low bidder who withdraws to become a subcontractor of a higher bidder who gets  
the contract. 
• Collusion between bidders. 
• Bidders who reveal their prices to one another. 
• Bids tend to be awarded in a geographic pattern or in a noticeable rotation. 
• Bids for a particular type of work are always awarded to a particular company. 
• False certifications by a contractor. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.720                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The falsification of information concerning contractor qualifications, financial capability, 
facilities, ownership of equipment and supplies, qualifications of personnel, and 
successful performance of previous jobs, etc. 
 



:


bid submiss or contract accept
red flag in the submiss and postsubmiss phase of the bid process includ the
follow
procur that ha been restrict to exclud or hamper ani qualifi contractor
the improp accept of a late bid
a bidder who alwai bid last on contract and consist win them
the falsif of document or receipt to get a late bid accept
bid that ar chang after other bidder pri ce ar known thi is sometim done by
mistak deliber plant in a bid
a low bidder who withdraw to becom a subcontractor of a higher bidder who get
the contract
collus between bidder
bidder who reveal their price to on anoth
bid tend to be award in a geograph pattern or in a notic rotat
bid for a particular type of work ar alwai award to a particular compani
fals certif by a contractor
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1720 2011 fraud examin manual
the falsif of inform concern contractor qualif financi capabl
facil ownership of equip and suppli qualif of personnel and
success perform of previou job etc
