2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/The Business Profile — Analysis


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


The Business Profile — Analysis 
The business profile  begins the examination process. It identifies prospective witnesses and 
targets, as well as relevant documents and transactions, and should provide leads as to 
whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being used. 
 
Information of the suspect business should be obtained about the organization, personnel, 
money flow pattern (source of available funds, related expenditures, etc.), location of bank 
accounts, financial condition, and recordkeeping system. This information can be obtained 
through interviews of employees, customers, and competitors; business bank account and 
loan records; financial statements; tax returns; business reporting companies; and business 
public filings. 
 
HOW IS THE BUSINESS ORGANIZED, LEGALLY AND STRUCTURALLY? 
Knowing this information helps determine what records are available (corporate, 
partnership, etc.) and where to go to get them. 
 
WHO ARE THE KEY PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH THE ENTERPRISE? 
This helps to identify potential witnesses and informants, as well as possible subjects. Key 
positions include the owners of the business; the people directly involved in the suspect 
transactions, including secretarial and clerical staff, present and former employees; the 
“number crunchers”; the bookkeeper, outside accountants, and tax preparers; outside 
consultants, sales representatives, and independent contractors (a popular conduit for 
payoffs); and competitors (often eager witnesses who can identify leads to sources of off-
 book funds such as customers and rebate practices). 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.721 
WHAT IS THE MONEY FLOW PATTERN INVOLVED IN THE SUSPECT TRANSACTION? 
Tracing the flow of funds in the suspect transactions is important. Where does the money 
come from and where does it go? Information about the source of funds can provide leads 
as to whether an on-book or off-book scheme is being employed, and the location of  
off-book accounts. Expenditures related to the suspect transactions might cover  
on-book payments. 
 
Determine all sources of funds with the following questions: 
• What goods or services does the business provide? 
• Who are its customers or clients? 
• What mode of payment is used: cash or check? 
• What other sources of funds are available, such as rebates from suppliers and shippers, 
or proceeds of insurance claims, liquidation sales, sale of assets, and loans? 
 
Identify all expenditures associated with the suspect transactions with the following: 
• What disbursements are made to third parties, such as commissioned sales agents, 
consultants, subcontractors, suppliers, and shippers? 
• Did the business have any extraordinary expenses during the suspect time period, such 
as extra commissions, advertising allowances (payments made by a manufacturer to the 
retail customer to assist the customer in meeting its advertising expenses), or inventory 
losses? 
• How are the expenses and disbursements paid: by cash, or by check? From which 
accounts? 
• Does the business maintain an account or fund used to pay miscellaneous expenses? If 
so, where is it located, who keeps the records, and who signs the checks or authorizes 
payments? 
• How are travel and entertainment expenses reimbursed? From which account? 
• What is the company’s policy toward business gifts? What gifts were given to the suspect 
and/or recipients? How were they paid for? Which records are maintained regarding 
them? 
 
WHERE ARE THE COMPANY’S BANK ACCOUNTS? 
Find out where the business deposits its receipts. This is quickly determined from the bank 
stamp on checks deposited from customers. Identify all company accounts by bank, account 
number, and authorized signature. 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.722                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHAT IS THE FINANCIAL CONDITION OF THE BUSINESS? 
This data might provide evidence of a motive for the fraud, or the fruits thereof. 
 
WHAT IS THE COMPANY’S RECORD-KEEPING SYSTEM? 
What kind of records does the company keep? For how long, and where are they kept? Who 
maintains them? 
 



:


the busi profil analysi
the busi profil begin the examin process it identifi prospect wit and
target as well as relev document and transact and should provid lead as to
whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be us
inform of the suspect busi should be obtain about the organ personnel
monei flow pattern sourc of avail fund relat expenditur etc locat of bank
account financi condit and recordkeep system thi inform can be obtain
through interview of employe custom and competitor busi bank account and
loan record financi statement tax return busi report compani and busi
public file
how is the busi organ legal and structur
know thi inform help determin what record ar avail corpor
partnership etc and where to go to get them
who ar the kei personnel associ with the enterpris
thi help to identifi potenti wit and inform as well as possibl subject kei
posit includ the owner of the busi the peopl directli involv in the suspect
transact includ secretari and cleric staff present and former employe the
number cruncher the bookkeep outsid account and tax prepar outsid
consult sale repres and independ contractor a popular conduit for
payoff and competitor often eager wit who can identifi lead to sourc of off
book fund such as custom and rebat practic
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1721
what is the monei flow pattern involv in the suspect transact
trace the flow of fund in the suspect transact is import where doe the monei
come from and where doe it go inform about the sourc of fund can provid lead
as to whether an onbook or offbook scheme is be emploi and the locat of
offbook account expenditur relat to the suspect transact might cover
onbook payment
determin all sourc of fund with the follow question
what good or servic doe the busi provid
who ar it custom or client
what mode of payment is us cash or check
what other sourc of fund ar avail such as rebat from supplier and shipper
or proce of insur claim liquid sale sale of asset and loan
identifi all expenditur associ with the suspect transact with the follow
what disburs ar made to third parti such as commiss sale agent
consult subcontractor supplier and shipper
did the busi have ani extraordinari expens dure the suspect time period such
as extra commiss advertis allow payment made by a manufactur to the
retail custom to assist the custom in meet it advertis expens or inventori
loss
how ar the expens and disburs paid by cash or by check from which
account
doe the busi maintain an account or fund us to pai miscellan expens if
so where is it locat who keep the record and who sign the check or author
payment
how ar travel and entertain expens reimburs from which account
what is the compani polici toward busi gift what gift were given to the suspect
andor recipi how were thei paid for which record ar maintain regard
them
where ar the compani bank account
find out where the busi deposit it receipt thi is quickli determin from the bank
stamp on check deposit from custom identifi all compani account by bank account
number and author signatur
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1722 2011 fraud examin manual
what is the financi condit of the busi
thi data might provid evid of a motiv for the fraud or the fruit thereof
what is the compani recordkeep system
what kind of record doe the compani keep for how long and where ar thei kept who
maintain them
