2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Fictitious Disbursement Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Fictitious Disbursement Schemes 
In order to examine on-book payments, obtain the following records from the entity 
suspected of making the illegal payments: 
 
BANK ACCOUNT INFORMATION 
• All records of payments, canceled checks, wire transfer receipts, receipts for the 
purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders, and withdrawal slips 
• Check registers 
• Account statements 
 
SALES BACKUP DOCUMENTATION 
• Purchase orders 
• Invoices 
• Documents showing receipt of goods ordered 
 
ACCOUNTING BOOKS AND RECORDS 
Examine the cash disbursement journals and ledgers. The most important of the above 
information (and often the only information needed) is the bank account information. Begin 
by examining the checks, check register, and/or the cash disbursement journal and paying 
particular attention to the following: 
• Payables and expenses charged to the account (cust omer) on which the illicit payments were made — If 
the examiner suspects that kickbacks were paid on sales to the ABC Corporation, for 
example, look at the payables and expenses charged to that account/customer. 
• Payments for services — Check payments for services such as sales commissions or 
consulting fees, which do not require the delivery of goods and need relatively little 
documentation to obtain payment. 
• Anomalous charges — For the business, an example of anomalous payments can be those 
for design fees paid by a company that is engaged in business that normally would not 
require such services.  
• The endorsement on the check — This might be by signature, or more commonly, by a stamp 
in the name of the business payee. Note the identity of the endorser. (Some corrupt 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.724                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
recipients have been known to endorse such checks in their own name.) 
• The location where the check was negotiated —If not obvious from the endorsement, identify 
the bank where the deposit was made by checking the depository bank’s stamp on the 
back of the check. The geographical location of the depository bank is an important lead 
that can connect the check to the suspected recipient. Determining the depository bank’s 
identity is critical to obtaining the recipient’s bank account information. 
• Checks with a second endorsement — A typical indication of a phony payable check is one paid 
to, and endorsed by, a business, which is then endorsed by an individual, thereby 
permitting it to be cashed or deposited in a personal account. In similar fashion, a check 
payable to a third party can be signed over to the issuer of the check. 
• Cashed (not deposited) checks payable to a business — Generally, a “For Deposit Only” stamp 
appears on the back of deposited checks, although this is not always the case. Most 
banks have a code stamp that indicates whether the check was cashed or not. These 
codes vary, and can be obtained from the bank where the check was negotiated. 
• Checks that fall into an unexplained pattern — An example of a suspicious payable scheme is 
one where checks are drawn once a month in an amount equal to some percentage of 
the sales against which they are charged, and are not otherwise explained. Such a pattern 
might indicate a kickback scheme. If an examination of the checks themselves does not 
yield any clear leads, compare the various records of payment with the backup 
documentation. Note particularly the following circumstances: 
• The absence of documentation — The absence of documentation to support a particular 
payment can include: 
? No invoice appearing in the files for a payment to a supplier or contractor. 
? No receipt to indicate that materials paid for were delivered. 
? No consultant’s work product to substantiate consulting fees paid. 
• Discrepancies — Discrepancies between payment information and backup documentation 
can include: 
? A check payable to a supplier in an amount different than his invoice. 
? A check payable to a person or entity different than that identified on the invoice. 
• Anomalies in support documents — Anomalies in the backup documentation can include 
invoices from several suppliers in different names that: 
? Have the same business address. 
? Are signed by the same person. 
? Returned to a post office box.  
• Unnumbered or sequentially numbered invoices — An example of an invoice scam uses invoices 
numbered 101, 102, and 103, which are dated 30 days apart. Of course, it is highly 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.725 
unlikely that a legitimate business would refrain from issuing invoices in the interim. 
• Alterations — Copies of originals can be made for concealing alterations of original 
documents. Examples can include alterations or photocopies of backup papers.  
• Location and other information on the invoices that tie it to the suspected recipient — If the above 
steps still do not yield any suspect payments, return to the check registers and cash 
disbursement journals to look for discrepancies between the entries and the checks or 
backup documentation, or their absence. The register and journals might also indicate 
the purpose of payments made by wire, cashier’s check, or cash. 
 
TRACING PROCEDURES  
When a suspect payment has been isolated, begin the tracing process. Remember that the 
phony payable might go directly to the recipient (deposited in a shell account), or through an 
intermediary account, person, or entity. It might even be converted to cash by the payer, and 
the cash given to the recipient. 
 
In instances where the identity of the individual recipient is not clear from the face of the 
check (as in checks payable to a business entity), do the following: 
• Examine the back of the check. Note where the check was deposited, and the account 
number, if available. If the check is not endorsed, the bank will still be able to locate the 
account to which it was deposited through its own internal records.  
• Obtain the records of the account where the check was deposited. The signature card 
and the monthly account statement will show the nominal account holder. In the case of 
business accounts, the bank should also have a copy of the corporate resolution or 
partnership agreement authorizing the account. 
• If the identity of the individual recipient is still not clear, check the public filings required 
of business entities to determine ownership. Corporate documents (articles of 
incorporation, annual reports, and some other basic documents) and limited partnerships 
might also be filed in some jurisdictions at the county level. The fictitious name index, 
business license files, telephone billing records, and even utility billing records can also 
lead to the identity of the principals.  
• If the original check is missing or has been destroyed, a microfilm copy can be obtained 
from the bank on which the check was drawn. (The bank where the check was deposited 
will also have a microfilm copy of the check. Unless the exact date of deposit and the 
identity of the depository bank are known, it will be very difficult to locate it.) 
• Payments by wire transfer or cashier’s check  can be traced to the recipient. A wire 
transfer from an account appears on that account statement as a debit memo (often 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.726                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
abbreviated as DM ). The Wire Transfer Request should show the name of the purchaser, 
the payee, and the bank and account number to which the funds were transferred. The 
sender receives a copy of this request, and the bank also maintains a copy, which is 
usually filed by date. 
• The bank’s retained copy of a cashier’s check will identify the payee. The bank also keeps 
the negotiated check when it is returned for payment. It will contain the endorsement 
and show where it was negotiated. Banks usually file cashier’s checks by number, making 
it necessary to know the approximate date they were issued to link them to the 
purchasers. Look for a cashier’s check or wire transfer on the dates of suspect cash 
withdrawals, checks to cash, or checks to the issuing bank. Remember that such 
instruments can be purchased for cash from any bank, not only from the bank where the 
payer’s account is located. 
• If the trail described above leads to an intermediary, the entire process must be repeated.  
 



:


fictiti disburs scheme
in order to examin onbook payment obtain the follow record from the entiti
suspect of make the illeg payment
bank account inform
all record of payment cancel check wire transfer receipt receipt for the
purchas of cashier check and monei order and withdraw slip
check regist
account statement
sale backup document
purchas order
invoic
document show receipt of good order
account book and record
examin the cash disburs journal and ledger the most import of the abov
inform and often the onli inform need is the bank account inform begin
by examin the check check regist andor the cash disburs journal and pai
particular attent to the follow
payabl and expens charg to the account cust omer on which the illicit payment were made if
the examin suspect that kickback were paid on sale to the abc corpor for
exampl look at the payabl and expens charg to that accountcustom
payment for servic check payment for servic such as sale commiss or
consult fee which do not requir the deliveri of good and need rel littl
document to obtain payment
anomal charg for the busi an exampl of anomal payment can be those
for design fee paid by a compani that is engag in busi that normal would not
requir such servic
the endors on the check thi might be by signatur or more commonli by a stamp
in the name of the busi paye note the ident of the endors some corrupt
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1724 2011 fraud examin manual
recipi have been known to endors such check in their own name
the locat where the check wa negoti if not obviou from the endors identifi
the bank where the deposit wa made by check the depositori bank stamp on the
back of the check the geograph locat of the depositori bank is an import lead
that can connect the check to the suspect recipi determin the depositori bank
ident is critic to obtain the recipi bank account inform
check with a second endors a typic indic of a phoni payabl check is on paid
to and endors by a busi which is then endors by an individu therebi
permit it to be cash or deposit in a person account in similar fashion a check
payabl to a third parti can be sign over to the issuer of the check
cash not deposit check payabl to a busi gener a for deposit onli stamp
appear on the back of deposit check although thi is not alwai the case most
bank have a code stamp that indic whether the check wa cash or not these
code vari and can be obtain from the bank where the check wa negoti
check that fall into an unexplain pattern an exampl of a suspici payabl scheme is
on where check ar drawn onc a month in an amount equal to some percentag of
the sale against which thei ar charg and ar not otherwis explain such a pattern
might indic a kickback scheme if an examin of the check themselv doe not
yield ani clear lead compar the variou record of payment with the backup
document note particularli the follow circumst
the absenc of document the absenc of document to support a particular
payment can includ
no invoic appear in the file for a payment to a supplier or contractor
no receipt to indic that materi paid for were deliv
no consult work product to substanti consult fee paid
discrep discrep between payment inform and backup document
can includ
a check payabl to a supplier in an amount differ than hi invoic
a check payabl to a person or entiti differ than that identifi on the invoic
anomali in support document anomali in the backup document can includ
invoic from sever supplier in differ name that
have the same busi address
ar sign by the same person
return to a post offic box
unnumb or sequenti number invoic an exampl of an invoic scam us invoic
number 101 102 and 103 which ar date 30 dai apart of cours it is highli
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1725
unlik that a legitim busi would refrain from issu invoic in the interim
alter copi of origin can be made for conceal alter of origin
document exampl can includ alter or photocopi of backup paper
locat and other inform on the invoic that tie it to the suspect recipi if the abov
step still do not yield ani suspect payment return to the check regist and cash
disburs journal to look for discrep between the entri and the check or
backup document or their absenc the regist and journal might also indic
the purpos of payment made by wire cashier check or cash
trace procedur
when a suspect payment ha been isol begin the trace process rememb that the
phoni payabl might go directli to the recipi deposit in a shell account or through an
intermediari account person or entiti it might even be convert to cash by the payer and
the cash given to the recipi
in instanc where the ident of the individu recipi is not clear from the face of the
check as in check payabl to a busi entiti do the follow
examin the back of the check note where the check wa deposit and the account
number if avail if the check is not endors the bank will still be abl to locat the
account to which it wa deposit through it own intern record
obtain the record of the account where the check wa deposit the signatur card
and the monthli account statement will show the nomin account holder in the case of
busi account the bank should also have a copi of the corpor resolut or
partnership agreement author the account
if the ident of the individu recipi is still not clear check the public file requir
of busi entiti to determin ownership corpor document articl of
incorpor annual report and some other basic document and limit partnership
might also be file in some jurisdict at the counti level the fictiti name index
busi licens file telephon bill record and even util bill record can also
lead to the ident of the princip
if the origin check is miss or ha been destroi a microfilm copi can be obtain
from the bank on which the check wa drawn the bank where the check wa deposit
will also have a microfilm copi of the check unless the exact date of deposit and the
ident of the depositori bank ar known it will be veri difficult to locat it
payment by wire transfer or cashier check can be trace to the recipi a wire
transfer from an account appear on that account statement as a debit memo often
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1726 2011 fraud examin manual
abbrevi as dm the wire transfer request should show the name of the purchas
the paye and the bank and account number to which the fund were transfer the
sender receiv a copi of thi request and the bank also maintain a copi which is
usual file by date
the bank retain copi of a cashier check will identifi the paye the bank also keep
the negoti check when it is return for payment it will contain the endors
and show where it wa negoti bank usual file cashier check by number make
it necessari to know the approxim date thei were issu to link them to the
purchas look for a cashier check or wire transfer on the date of suspect cash
withdraw check to cash or check to the issu bank rememb that such
instrument can be purchas for cash from ani bank not onli from the bank where the
payer account is locat
if the trail describ abov lead to an intermediari the entir process must be repeat
