2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Proving Payments in Cash


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Proving Payments in Cash  
The following techniques can be used to prove cash payments circumstantially, or to 
corroborate testimony of such payments by an inside witness: 
• Match evidence of cash withdrawals or disb ursements by the payer with corresponding 
deposits, expenditures, or visits to a safe deposit box by the recipient. 
• Look for the purchase of cashier’s checks, trav eler’s checks, or wire transfers payable to 
the recipient at, or shortly after, cash withdrawals or disbursements. Also look for a 
correlation between cash-generating transactions and money wires or courier services, 
which are sometimes used to send cash. 
• If the scheme is ongoing, consider the use of visual or electronic surveillance (if you’re a 
member of law enforcement), or try to introduce an undercover agent or implement a 
sting operation. 
• Unexplained or unusual cash disbursements or withdrawals, particularly from a business 
that does not normally deal in cash, might itself indicate illicit transactions, or 
corroborate such testimony. To be effective, the examiner must identify and rebut all 
legitimate explanations, which usually requires interviewing the payer. 
• Focus the investigation on the suspected recipient, as discussed below. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.729 
EXAMINATION FROM THE POINT OF RECEIPT 
Often, the only practical approach to identifying and tracing illegal payments is to focus on 
the suspected recipient, particularly if the person making the payments is unknown, one 
person is suspected of taking from many, the payments are in cash or from off-book funds, 
and so on. 
 
THE FINANCIAL/BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The Financial/Behavioral Profile is outlined in the “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in 
the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. The Financial Profile will identify 
most illicit funds deposited to accounts or expended in significant amounts. It will not reveal 
relatively small currency transactions, particularly if they were for concealed activities, 
consumables, or unusual one-time expenses, such as medical bills. The Financial Profile 
might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless such activities are identified. This is 
done through preparation of the Behavioral Profile. During the interview be alert and review 
documents for signs that the target has: 
• A drug and/or alcohol addiction 
• A gambling habit 
• Loan shark or other private debts 
• A girlfriend (or boyfriend) supported by the target 
• Extraordinary medical expenses 
• Significant, regular cash expenses for entertainment and/or travel 
 
The Behavioral Profile might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such 
as large debts, as well as additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent 
significant amounts of cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from disclosed 
bank accounts or no admitted sources of cash income, there must be other, undisclosed 
sources of income. 
 
THE SUSPECT RECIPIENT 
An interview should almost always be requested with the target. Use the 
Financial/Behavioral Profile as a guide. Pin down the target’s income, assets, and accounts. 
If the witness claims to have legitimate sources of large sums of currency, determine the 
following: 
• What was the source of the cash? 
• What was the amount of cash on hand at the starting point of the investigation, at the 
end of each year thereafter, and on the date of the interview? 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.730                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Where was the cash kept? 
• Why was the cash not deposited in a financial institution or invested? 
• Who knew about the cash? 
• What records of the cash exist? 
• What were the denominations? 
• When and for what was any of the cash spent? 
• Will the subject consent to an inventory of the remaining cash during the interview? If 
not, why not? If so, the cash should be counted at least twice in the presence of another 
examiner. A list of serial and series numbers should also be made.  
 
If the witness testifies that suspect funds were legitimate loan proceeds, ask: 
• Who was the lender? 
• When was the loan made? 
• What was the amount of the loan? 
• What was the purpose of the loan? 
• Was the loan repaid? 
• How was the loan documented? 
 
Also attempt to interview the subject’s spouse separately. Although one spouse generally will 
not be required to testify against the other, spouses can be an important source of lead 
information—if handled carefully. 
 
THIRD-PARTY WITNESSES 
Potential third-party sources include business colleagues, personal associates, bankers, 
brokers, real estate agents, accountants and tax preparers, ex-spouses, and romantic interests 
(particularly former romantic interests). Subjects often boast to their close associates of their 
new wealth, or entertain them with the fruits thereof. Casual remarks by a subject to a 
colleague (and repeated to an examiner) have undone the suspect, even when intensive 
audits have failed. Follow the Financial/Behavioral Profile format to the extent feasible. Of 
course, no single third-party witness is likely to possess all this information, but a complete 
picture can be assembled from bits and pieces provided by a number of such sources. 
 
TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS 
Other techniques for tracing illicit payments can be found in the “Tracing Illicit 
Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.731 



:


prove payment in cash
the follow techniqu can be us to prove cash payment circumstanti or to
corrobor testimoni of such payment by an insid wit
match evid of cash withdraw or disb ursement by the payer with correspond
deposit expenditur or visit to a safe deposit box by the recipi
look for the purchas of cashier check trav eler check or wire transfer payabl to
the recipi at or shortli after cash withdraw or disburs also look for a
correl between cashgener transact and monei wire or courier servic
which ar sometim us to send cash
if the scheme is ongo consid the us of visual or electron surveil if your a
member of law enforc or try to introduc an undercov agent or implement a
sting oper
unexplain or unusu cash disburs or withdraw particularli from a busi
that doe not normal deal in cash might itself indic illicit transact or
corrobor such testimoni to be effect the examin must identifi and rebut all
legitim explan which usual requir interview the payer
focu the investig on the suspect recipi as discuss below
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1729
examin from the point of receipt
often the onli practic approach to identifi and trace illeg payment is to focu on
the suspect recipi particularli if the person make the payment is unknown on
person is suspect of take from mani the payment ar in cash or from offbook fund
and so on
the financialbehavior profil
the financialbehavior profil is outlin in the trace illicit transact chapter in
the investig section of the fraud examin manual the financi profil will identifi
most illicit fund deposit to account or expend in signific amount it will not reveal
rel small currenc transact particularli if thei were for conceal activ
consum or unusu onetim expens such as medic bill the financi profil
might give inaccur or fals neg read unless such activ ar identifi thi is
done through prepar of the behavior profil dure the interview be alert and review
document for sign that the target ha
a drug andor alcohol addict
a gambl habit
loan shark or other privat debt
a girlfriend or boyfriend support by the target
extraordinari medic expens
signific regular cash expens for entertain andor travel
the behavior profil might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such
as larg debt as well as addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent
signific amount of cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from disclos
bank account or no admit sourc of cash incom there must be other undisclos
sourc of incom
the suspect recipi
an interview should almost alwai be request with the target us the
financialbehavior profil as a guid pin down the target incom asset and account
if the wit claim to have legitim sourc of larg sum of currenc determin the
follow
what wa the sourc of the cash
what wa the amount of cash on hand at the start point of the investig at the
end of each year thereaft and on the date of the interview
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1730 2011 fraud examin manual
where wa the cash kept
why wa the cash not deposit in a financi institut or invest
who knew about the cash
what record of the cash exist
what were the denomin
when and for what wa ani of the cash spent
will the subject consent to an inventori of the remain cash dure the interview if
not why not if so the cash should be count at least twice in the presenc of anoth
examin a list of serial and seri number should also be made
if the wit testifi that suspect fund were legitim loan proce ask
who wa the lender
when wa the loan made
what wa the amount of the loan
what wa the purpos of the loan
wa the loan repaid
how wa the loan document
also attempt to interview the subject spous separ although on spous gener will
not be requir to testifi against the other spous can be an import sourc of lead
informationif handl carefulli
thirdparti wit
potenti thirdparti sourc includ busi colleagu person associ banker
broker real estat agent account and tax prepar exspous and romant interest
particularli former romant interest subject often boast to their close associ of their
new wealth or entertain them with the fruit thereof casual remark by a subject to a
colleagu and repeat to an examin have undon the suspect even when intens
audit have fail follow the financialbehavior profil format to the extent feasibl of
cours no singl thirdparti wit is like to possess all thi inform but a complet
pictur can be assembl from bit and piec provid by a number of such sourc
trace illicit transact
other techniqu for trace illicit payment can be found in the trace illicit
transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin manual
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1731
