2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Detection of Bribery Schemes/Proving Payments in Cash/THE SUSPECT RECIPIENT


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


THE SUSPECT RECIPIENT 
An interview should almost always be requested with the target. Use the 
Financial/Behavioral Profile as a guide. Pin down the target’s income, assets, and accounts. 
If the witness claims to have legitimate sources of large sums of currency, determine the 
following: 
• What was the source of the cash? 
• What was the amount of cash on hand at the starting point of the investigation, at the 
end of each year thereafter, and on the date of the interview? 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.730                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Where was the cash kept? 
• Why was the cash not deposited in a financial institution or invested? 
• Who knew about the cash? 
• What records of the cash exist? 
• What were the denominations? 
• When and for what was any of the cash spent? 
• Will the subject consent to an inventory of the remaining cash during the interview? If 
not, why not? If so, the cash should be counted at least twice in the presence of another 
examiner. A list of serial and series numbers should also be made.  
 
If the witness testifies that suspect funds were legitimate loan proceeds, ask: 
• Who was the lender? 
• When was the loan made? 
• What was the amount of the loan? 
• What was the purpose of the loan? 
• Was the loan repaid? 
• How was the loan documented? 
 
Also attempt to interview the subject’s spouse separately. Although one spouse generally will 
not be required to testify against the other, spouses can be an important source of lead 
information—if handled carefully. 
 



:


the suspect recipi
an interview should almost alwai be request with the target us the
financialbehavior profil as a guid pin down the target incom asset and account
if the wit claim to have legitim sourc of larg sum of currenc determin the
follow
what wa the sourc of the cash
what wa the amount of cash on hand at the start point of the investig at the
end of each year thereaft and on the date of the interview
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1730 2011 fraud examin manual
where wa the cash kept
why wa the cash not deposit in a financi institut or invest
who knew about the cash
what record of the cash exist
what were the denomin
when and for what wa ani of the cash spent
will the subject consent to an inventori of the remain cash dure the interview if
not why not if so the cash should be count at least twice in the presenc of anoth
examin a list of serial and seri number should also be made
if the wit testifi that suspect fund were legitim loan proce ask
who wa the lender
when wa the loan made
what wa the amount of the loan
what wa the purpos of the loan
wa the loan repaid
how wa the loan document
also attempt to interview the subject spous separ although on spous gener will
not be requir to testifi against the other spous can be an import sourc of lead
informationif handl carefulli
