2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/BRIBERY AND CORRUPTION/Conflicts of Interest


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Bribery and Corruption


:


Conflicts of Interest 
Conflict of interest schemes generally constitute violations of the legal principle that a 
fiduciary, agent, or employee must act in good faith, with full disclosure, and in the best 
interest of the principal or employer. A conflict of interest occurs when an employee, 
manager, or executive has an undisclosed economic or personal interest in a transaction that 
adversely affects that person’s employer. As with other corruption frauds, conflict schemes 
involve the exertion of an employee’s influence to the detriment of his company. In bribery 
schemes, fraudsters are paid to exercise their influence on behalf of a third party. Conflict of 
interest cases instead involve self-dealing by an employee.  
 
If an employee engages in a transaction that involves a conflict of interest, then the 
employee might also have breached his fiduciary duty  to his employer. An agent (employee) 
owes a fiduciary duty (duty of loyalty) to the principal (employer). The agent must act solely in 
the best interest of the principal and cannot seek to advance personal interest to the 
detriment of the principal. 
 
Breach of fiduciary duty is a civil action that can be used to redress a wide variety of conduct 
that might also constitute fraud, commercial bribery, and conflicts of interest. The elements 
of proof of breach of fiduciary duty are considerably simpler than fraud, and do not require 
proof of wrongful intent. As in conflicts of interest, the wrongdoer must reimburse the 
principal for any losses and pay over profits earned, even if the principal suffered no loss. 
 
The vast majority of conflict of interest cases occur because the fraudster has an undisclosed 
economic interest in a transaction. But the fraudster’s hidden interest is not necessarily 
economic. In some scenarios an employee acts in a manner detrimental to his company in 
order to provide a benefit to a friend or relative, even though the fraudster receives no 
financial benefit from the transaction himself.  
 
In order to be classified as a conflict of interest scheme, the employee’s interest in the 
transaction must be undisclosed. The crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster takes 
advantage of his employer; the victim organization is unaware that its employee has divided 
loyalties. If an employer knows of the employee’s interest in a business deal or negotiation, 
there can be no conflict of interest, no matter how favorable the arrangement is for  
the employee.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.732                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Any bribery scheme we discussed in the previous section could occur as a conflict of 
interest. The only difference is the fraudster’s motive. For instance, if an employee approves 
payment on a fraudulent invoice submitted by a vendor in return for a kickback, this is 
bribery. If, on the other hand, an employee approves payment on invoices submitted by his 
own company (and if his ownership is undisclosed), this is a conflict of interest.  
 
The distinction between the two schemes is obvious. In the bribery case the fraudster 
approves the invoice in return for a kickback, while in a conflict case he approves the invoice 
because of his own hidden interest in the vendor. Aside from the employee’s motive for 
committing the crime, the mechanics of the two transactions are practically identical. The 
same duality can be found in bid-rigging cases, where an employee influences the selection 
of a company in which he has a hidden interest instead of influencing the selection of a 
vendor who has bribed him.  
 
Conflict schemes do not always simply mirror bribery schemes, though. There are a numbers 
of ways in which an employee can use his influence to benefit a company in which he has a 
hidden interest. This section will discuss some of the more common conflict schemes.  
 
Purchase Schemes 
Purchase schemes are very similar to the billing schemes discussed in the Asset 
Misappropriation section, so it will be helpful at  this point to discuss the distinction we have 
drawn between traditional billing schemes and purchasing schemes that are conflicts of 
interest.  
 
While it is true that any time an employee assists in the overbilling of his company there is 
probably some conflict of interest (the employee causes harm to his employer because of a 
hidden financial interest in the transaction), this does not necessarily mean that every false 
billing will be categorized as a conflict scheme. In order for the scheme to be classified as a 
conflict of interest, the employee (or a friend or relative of the employee) must have some 
kind of ownership or employment interest in the vendor that submits the invoice.  
 
This distinction is easy to understand if we look at the nature of the fraud. Why does the 
fraudster overbill his employer? If he engages in  the scheme only for the cash, the scheme is 
a fraudulent disbursement billing scheme. If, on the other hand, he seeks to better the 
financial condition of his business at the expense of his employer, this is a conflict of 
interest. In other words, the fraudster’s interests  lie with a company other than his employer. 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.733 
When an employee falsifies the invoices of a third-party vendor to whom he has no relation, 
this is not a conflict of interest scheme because the employee has no interest in that vendor. 
The sole purpose of the scheme is to generate a fraudulent disbursement.  
 
One might wonder, then, why shell company schemes are classified as fraudulent 
disbursements rather than conflicts of interest. After all, the fraudster in a shell company 
scheme owns the fictitious company and therefore must have an interest in it. Remember, 
though, that shell companies are created for the sole purpose of defrauding the employer. 
The company is not so much an entity in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool. In fact, a 
shell company is usually little more than a post office box and a bank account. The fraudster 
has no interest in the shell company that would cause a division of loyalty; he simply uses the 
shell company to bilk his employer. Shell company schemes are therefore classified as false 
billing schemes. 
 
A short rule of thumb can be used to distinguish between overbilling schemes that are 
classified as asset misappropriations and those that are conflicts of interest: if the bill 
originates from a real company  in which the fraudster has an economic or personal interest, 
and if the fraudster’s interest in the company is  undisclosed to the victim company, then the 
scheme is a conflict of interest.  
 
Now that we know what kinds of billing schemes are classified as conflicts of interest, the 
question is, how do these schemes work? After  our lengthy discussion about distinguishing 
between conflicts and fraudulent disbursements, the answer is somewhat anticlimactic. The 
schemes work the same either way. The mechanics of a billing scheme, whether conflicts or 
fraudulent disbursement, do not change. (See “Conflicts of Interest” flowchart.) 
 
EXAMPLE 
A purchasing superintendent de frauded his employer by purc hasing items from a certain 
vendor at inflated prices. The vendor in this case was owned by the purchasing 
superintendent but established in his wife’s name and run by his brother. The perpetrator’s 
interest in the company was undisclosed. The vendor would buy items on the open market, 
then inflate the prices and resell the items to the victim company. The purchasing 
superintendent used his influence to ensure that his employer continued doing business with 
the vendor and paying the exorbitant prices.  
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.734                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fraudsters also engage in bid-rigging on behalf of their own companies. The methods used 
to rig bids are discussed in detail in the Bribery section and will not be dealt with in depth 
here. Briefly stated, an employee of the purchasing company is in a perfect position to rig 
bids if he has access to the bids of his competitors. Since he can find out what prices other 
vendors have bid, the fraudster can easily tailor his own company’s bid to win the contract. 
Fraudsters also sometimes use bid waivers to avoid competitive bidding outright.  
 
EXAMPLE   
A manager processed several unsubstantiated bid waivers in order to direct purchases to a 
vendor in which one of his employees had an interest. The conflict was undisclosed and the 
scheme cost the victim company over $150,000.  
 
In other cases a fraudster might ignore his employer’s purchasing rotation and direct an 
inordinate number of purchases or contracts to his own company. Any way in which a 
fraudster exerts his influence to divert business to a company in which he has a hidden 
interest is a conflict of interest.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.735 
Unique Assets 
Not all conflict schemes occur in the traditional vendor-buyer relationship. Sometimes 
schemes involve employees negotiating for the purchase of some unique, typically large asset 
such as land or a building in which the employee had an undisclosed interest. It is in the 
process of these negotiations that the fraudster violates his duty of loyalty to his employer. 
Because he stands to profit from the sale of the asset, the employee does not negotiate in 
good faith to his employer; he does not attempt to get the best price possible. The fraudster 
will reap a greater financial benefit if the purchase price is high.  
 
For example, an employee in charge of negotiating mineral leases on land that he secretly 
owns is obviously in a position of compromise. There will be no financial motive for this 
employee to negotiate a favorable lease on behalf of his employer.  
 
Turnaround Sales  
A special kind of purchasing scheme sometimes used by fraudsters is called the turnaround 
sale or the flip. In this type of scheme an employee knows his employer is seeking to purchase 
a certain asset and takes advantage of the situation by purchasing the asset himself (usually in 
the name of an accomplice or shell company). The fraudster then turns around and resells 
the item to his employer at an inflated price.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A chief executive officer, conspiring with a former employee, sold an office building to the 
CEO’s company. What made the transaction suspicious was that the building had been 
purchased by the former employee on the same day that it was resold to the victim company, 
and for $1.2 million less than the price charged to the CEO’s company.  
 
Sales Schemes 
There are two principal types of conflict schemes associated with sales of goods or services 
by the victim company. The first and most harmful is the underselling of goods or services. 
Just as a corrupt employee can cause his employer to overpay  for goods or services sold by a 
company in which he has a hidden interest, so too can he cause the employer to undersell to a 
company in which he maintains a hidden interest. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.736                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Underbillings 
Many employees who have hidden interests in outside companies sell goods or services to 
these companies at below-market prices. This results in a diminished profit margin or even a 
loss for the victim organization, depending upon the size of the discount.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee disposed of his employer’s real esta te by selling it below fair market value to a 
company in which he had a hidden interest, causing a loss of approximately $500,000.  
 
Writing Off Sales 
The other type of sales scheme involves tampering with the books of the victim company to 
decrease or write off the amount owed by the company in which the employee has a hidden 
interest. For instance, after an employee’s company purchases goods or services from the 
victim organization, credit memos may be issued against the sale, causing it to be written off 
to contra accounts such as Discounts and Allowances. A large number of reversing entries to 
sales may be a sign that fraud is occurring in an organization.  
 
EXAMPLE  
A plant manager assisted favored clients by delaying billing on their purchases for up to 60 
days. When the receivable on these clients’ accounts became delinquent, the perpetrator 
issued credit memos against the sales to delete them. The plant manager issued new invoices 
on the sales after the “old” receivables were taken off the books. In this way, the receivables 
could be carried indefinitely on the books without ever becoming past due.  
  
Other Schemes  
In other cases, the perpetrator might not write off the scheme, but simply delay billing. This 
is sometimes done as a “favor” to a friendly client and is not an outright avoidance of the bill 
but rather a dilatory tactic. The victim organization eventually gets paid, but loses time value 
on the payment, which arrives later than it should.  
 
Business Diversions 
A number of employees end up starting their own businesses, which compete directly with 
their employers. While still employed by the victim organization, these employees might 
begin siphoning off clients for their own business. This activity clearly violates the 
employee’s duty of loyalty to the employer, and frequently violates the company’s internal 
policies. There is nothing unscrupulous about free competition, but while a person acts as a 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.737 
representative of his employer, it is certainly improper to try to undercut the employer and 
take his clients. Normal standards of business ethics require employees to act in the best 
interests of their employers.  
 
Resource Diversions 
Some employees divert the funds and other resources of their employers to the development 
of their own business. This kind of scheme involves elements of both conflicts of interest 
and fraudulent disbursements. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A vice president of a company authorized large expenditures to develop a unique type of 
new equipment used by a certain contractor. Another firm subsequently took over the 
contractor, as well as the new equipment. Shortly after that, the vice president retired and 
went to work for the firm that had bought out the contractor. The fraudster had managed 
to use his employer’s money to fund a company in which he eventually developed an interest.  
 
While these schemes are clearly corruption schemes, the funds are diverted through the use 
of a fraudulent disbursement. The money could be drained from the victim organization 
through a check tampering scheme, a billing scheme, a payroll scheme, or an expense 
reimbursement scheme. For a discussion of the methods used to generate fraudulent 
disbursements, please refer to the Asset Misappropriation section.  
 
Financial Interest in Companies Under Perpetrator's Supervision 
Sometimes an employee will have a direct or indirect financial interest in a company under 
his supervision. For example, accountants sometimes hold stock in a company they audit. 
These problems often occur in government. 
 
Financial Disclosure 
Management has an obligation to disclose to the shareholders significant fraud committed by 
officers, executives, and others in positions of trust. Management does not have the 
responsibility of disclosing uncharged criminal conduct of its officers and executives. 
However, if and when officers, executives, or other persons in trusted positions become 
subjects of a criminal indictment, disclosure is required. 
 
Bribery and Corruption  Financial Transactions   
1.738                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The inadequate disclosure of conflicts of interest is among the most serious of frauds. 
Inadequate disclosure of related-party transactions is not limited to any specific industry; it 
transcends all business types and relationships. 
 
Appearance of Conflict of Interest 
A final type of conflict of interest is the appearance of such. Examples include ownership in a 
blind trust, in which the employee has no authority to make investment decisions, or an 
external auditor owning a minority interest in a company that is audited by the auditor’s firm. 
Such matters are rarely prosecuted as criminal offenses. 
 
Detection of Conflicts of Interest 
Conflicts of interest are probably one of the most difficult schemes to uncover. Therefore, 
no fast and easy detection methods exist for this type of fraud. Some of the more common 
methods that can be used are tips and complaints, comparisons of vendor addresses with 
employee addresses, review of vendor ownership files, review of exit interviews, 
comparisons of vendor addresses to addresses of subsequent employers, policies requiring 
certain employees to provide the names and employers of immediate family members, and 
interviews with purchasing personnel for favorable treatment of one or more vendors. 
 
Tips and Complaints 
If a particular vendor is being favored, then competing vendors may file complaints. 
Additionally, employee complaints about the service of a favored vendor may lead to the 
discovery of a conflict of interest. 
 
Comparison of Vendor Addresses with Employee Addresses 
If nominee or related parties are used as owners of vendors, then the business address of the 
vendor may match that of the employee. Also, look for post office box addresses for 
vendors. This detection method is similar to that used for locating phony vendors. 
 
Review of Vendor Ownership Files 
When a vendor is selected, a complete file of the ownership of that vendor should be kept. 
This is particularly important for closely held businesses. If the vendor is required to update 
the file annually then changes in ownership will also be disclosed. A computer comparison 
of the vendor ownership and the employee file may reveal conflicts of interest. 
 
Financial Transactions  Bribery and Corruption 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.739 
Review of Exit Interviews and Comparisons of Vendor Addresses to Addresses of Subsequent Employers 
If a review of an employee’s exit interview yields the name and address of the subsequent 
employer, then a simple comparison of that name and address with the vendor file may 
reveal conflicts of interest wherein the employee has obtained employment from  
a contractor. 
 
Interviews of Purchasing Personnel for Favorable Treatment of One or More Vendors 
Employees are generally the first to observe that a vendor is receiving favorable treatment. 
Therefore, by asking employees if any vendor is receiving favorable treatment, the examiner 
may discover conflicts of interest that would otherwise have gone unnoticed. Another 
question that may be asked of employees is whether any vendor’s service (or product) has 
recently become substandard.  
 
Policies Requiring Certain Employees to Provide the Names and Employers of Immediate Family Members 
Where acceptable by law, a productive audit test may be to require members of management, 
as well as members of the procurement department, to provide detailed information 
regarding the names and employers of all immediate family members and household 
members. Comparing the names and employers of family members to the current position 
of the employee may lead to information that would require further investigation to 
determine whether a conflict of interest exists. 
 
Prevention of Conflicts of Interest 
Organizations should establish policies clearly de fining what constitutes a conflict of interest, 
and prohibiting any such entanglements by officers, directors, employees, or other agents of 
the organization. A policy requiring employees to complete an annual disclosure statement is 
an excellent proactive approach to dealing with potential conflicts. Comparing the disclosed 
names and addresses with vendor and customer lists may reveal real conflicts of interest or 
the appearance of such. Furthermore, these statements will reinforce in employees the idea 
that engaging in conflicts of interests is unacceptable and will result in severe consequences.  
 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.801 



:


conflict of interest
conflict of interest scheme gener constitut violat of the legal principl that a
fiduciari agent or employe must act in good faith with full disclosur and in the best
interest of the princip or employ a conflict of interest occur when an employe
manag or execut ha an undisclos econom or person interest in a transact that
advers affect that person employ as with other corrupt fraud conflict scheme
involv the exert of an employe influenc to the detriment of hi compani in briberi
scheme fraudster ar paid to exercis their influenc on behalf of a third parti conflict of
interest case instead involv selfdeal by an employe
if an employe engag in a transact that involv a conflict of interest then the
employe might also have breach hi fiduciari duti to hi employ an agent employe
ow a fiduciari duti duti of loyalti to the princip employ the agent must act sole in
the best interest of the princip and cannot seek to advanc person interest to the
detriment of the princip
breach of fiduciari duti is a civil action that can be us to redress a wide varieti of conduct
that might also constitut fraud commerci briberi and conflict of interest the element
of proof of breach of fiduciari duti ar consider simpler than fraud and do not requir
proof of wrong intent as in conflict of interest the wrongdoer must reimburs the
princip for ani loss and pai over profit earn even if the princip suffer no loss
the vast major of conflict of interest case occur becaus the fraudster ha an undisclos
econom interest in a transact but the fraudster hidden interest is not necessarili
econom in some scenario an employe act in a manner detriment to hi compani in
order to provid a benefit to a friend or rel even though the fraudster receiv no
financi benefit from the transact himself
in order to be classifi as a conflict of interest scheme the employe interest in the
transact must be undisclos the crux of a conflict case is that the fraudster take
advantag of hi employ the victim organ is unawar that it employe ha divid
loyalti if an employ know of the employe interest in a busi deal or negoti
there can be no conflict of interest no matter how favor the arrang is for
the employe
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1732 2011 fraud examin manual
ani briberi scheme we discuss in the previou section could occur as a conflict of
interest the onli differ is the fraudster motiv for instanc if an employe approv
payment on a fraudul invoic submit by a vendor in return for a kickback thi is
briberi if on the other hand an employe approv payment on invoic submit by hi
own compani and if hi ownership is undisclos thi is a conflict of interest
the distinct between the two scheme is obviou in the briberi case the fraudster
approv the invoic in return for a kickback while in a conflict case he approv the invoic
becaus of hi own hidden interest in the vendor asid from the employe motiv for
commit the crime the mechan of the two transact ar practic ident the
same dualiti can be found in bidrig case where an employe influenc the select
of a compani in which he ha a hidden interest instead of influenc the select of a
vendor who ha bribe him
conflict scheme do not alwai simpli mirror briberi scheme though there ar a number
of wai in which an employe can us hi influenc to benefit a compani in which he ha a
hidden interest thi section will discuss some of the more common conflict scheme
purchas scheme
purchas scheme ar veri similar to the bill scheme discuss in the asset
misappropri section so it will be help at thi point to discuss the distinct we have
drawn between tradit bill scheme and purchas scheme that ar conflict of
interest
while it is true that ani time an employe assist in the overbil of hi compani there is
probabl some conflict of interest the employe caus harm to hi employ becaus of a
hidden financi interest in the transact thi doe not necessarili mean that everi fals
bill will be categor as a conflict scheme in order for the scheme to be classifi as a
conflict of interest the employe or a friend or rel of the employe must have some
kind of ownership or employ interest in the vendor that submit the invoic
thi distinct is easi to understand if we look at the natur of the fraud why doe the
fraudster overbil hi employ if he engag in the scheme onli for the cash the scheme is
a fraudul disburs bill scheme if on the other hand he seek to better the
financi condit of hi busi at the expens of hi employ thi is a conflict of
interest in other word the fraudster interest lie with a compani other than hi employ
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1733
when an employe falsifi the invoic of a thirdparti vendor to whom he ha no relat
thi is not a conflict of interest scheme becaus the employe ha no interest in that vendor
the sole purpos of the scheme is to gener a fraudul disburs
on might wonder then why shell compani scheme ar classifi as fraudul
disburs rather than conflict of interest after all the fraudster in a shell compani
scheme own the fictiti compani and therefor must have an interest in it rememb
though that shell compani ar creat for the sole purpos of defraud the employ
the compani is not so much an entiti in the mind of the fraudster as it is a tool in fact a
shell compani is usual littl more than a post offic box and a bank account the fraudster
ha no interest in the shell compani that would caus a divis of loyalti he simpli us the
shell compani to bilk hi employ shell compani scheme ar therefor classifi as fals
bill scheme
a short rule of thumb can be us to distinguish between overbil scheme that ar
classifi as asset misappropri and those that ar conflict of interest if the bill
origin from a real compani in which the fraudster ha an econom or person interest
and if the fraudster interest in the compani is undisclos to the victim compani then the
scheme is a conflict of interest
now that we know what kind of bill scheme ar classifi as conflict of interest the
question is how do these scheme work after our lengthi discuss about distinguish
between conflict and fraudul disburs the answer is somewhat anticlimact the
scheme work the same either wai the mechan of a bill scheme whether conflict or
fraudul disburs do not chang see conflict of interest flowchart
exampl
a purchas superintend de fraud hi employ by purc hase item from a certain
vendor at inflat price the vendor in thi case wa own by the purchas
superintend but establish in hi wife name and run by hi brother the perpetr
interest in the compani wa undisclos the vendor would bui item on the open market
then inflat the price and resel the item to the victim compani the purchas
superintend us hi influenc to ensur that hi employ continu do busi with
the vendor and pai the exorbit price
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1734 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster also engag in bidrig on behalf of their own compani the method us
to rig bid ar discuss in detail in the briberi section and will not be dealt with in depth
here briefli state an employe of the purchas compani is in a perfect posit to rig
bid if he ha access to the bid of hi competitor sinc he can find out what price other
vendor have bid the fraudster can easili tailor hi own compani bid to win the contract
fraudster also sometim us bid waiver to avoid competit bid outright
exampl
a manag process sever unsubstanti bid waiver in order to direct purchas to a
vendor in which on of hi employe had an interest the conflict wa undisclos and the
scheme cost the victim compani over 150000
in other case a fraudster might ignor hi employ purchas rotat and direct an
inordin number of purchas or contract to hi own compani ani wai in which a
fraudster exert hi influenc to divert busi to a compani in which he ha a hidden
interest is a conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1735
uniqu asset
not all conflict scheme occur in the tradit vendorbuy relationship sometim
scheme involv employe negoti for the purchas of some uniqu typic larg asset
such as land or a build in which the employe had an undisclos interest it is in the
process of these negoti that the fraudster violat hi duti of loyalti to hi employ
becaus he stand to profit from the sale of the asset the employe doe not negoti in
good faith to hi employ he doe not attempt to get the best price possibl the fraudster
will reap a greater financi benefit if the purchas price is high
for exampl an employe in charg of negoti miner leas on land that he secretli
own is obvious in a posit of compromis there will be no financi motiv for thi
employe to negoti a favor leas on behalf of hi employ
turnaround sale
a special kind of purchas scheme sometim us by fraudster is call the turnaround
sale or the flip in thi type of scheme an employe know hi employ is seek to purchas
a certain asset and take advantag of the situat by purchas the asset himself usual in
the name of an accomplic or shell compani the fraudster then turn around and resel
the item to hi employ at an inflat price
exampl
a chief execut offic conspir with a former employe sold an offic build to the
ceo compani what made the transact suspici wa that the build had been
purchas by the former employe on the same dai that it wa resold to the victim compani
and for 12 million less than the price charg to the ceo compani
sale scheme
there ar two princip type of conflict scheme associ with sale of good or servic
by the victim compani the first and most harm is the undersel of good or servic
just as a corrupt employe can caus hi employ to overpai for good or servic sold by a
compani in which he ha a hidden interest so too can he caus the employ to undersel to a
compani in which he maintain a hidden interest
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1736 2011 fraud examin manual
underbil
mani employe who have hidden interest in outsid compani sell good or servic to
these compani at belowmarket price thi result in a diminish profit margin or even a
loss for the victim organ depend upon the size of the discount
exampl
an employe dispos of hi employ real esta te by sell it below fair market valu to a
compani in which he had a hidden interest caus a loss of approxim 500000
write off sale
the other type of sale scheme involv tamper with the book of the victim compani to
decreas or write off the amount ow by the compani in which the employe ha a hidden
interest for instanc after an employe compani purchas good or servic from the
victim organ credit memo mai be issu against the sale caus it to be written off
to contra account such as discount and allow a larg number of revers entri to
sale mai be a sign that fraud is occur in an organ
exampl
a plant manag assist favor client by delai bill on their purchas for up to 60
dai when the receiv on these client account becam delinqu the perpetr
issu credit memo against the sale to delet them the plant manag issu new invoic
on the sale after the old receiv were taken off the book in thi wai the receiv
could be carri indefinit on the book without ever becom past due
other scheme
in other case the perpetr might not write off the scheme but simpli delai bill thi
is sometim done as a favor to a friendli client and is not an outright avoid of the bill
but rather a dilatori tactic the victim organ eventu get paid but lose time valu
on the payment which arriv later than it should
busi divers
a number of employe end up start their own busi which compet directli with
their employ while still emploi by the victim organ these employe might
begin siphon off client for their own busi thi activ clearli violat the
employe duti of loyalti to the employ and frequent violat the compani intern
polici there is noth unscrupul about free competit but while a person act as a
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1737
repres of hi employ it is certainli improp to try to undercut the employ and
take hi client normal standard of busi ethic requir employe to act in the best
interest of their employ
resourc divers
some employe divert the fund and other resourc of their employ to the develop
of their own busi thi kind of scheme involv element of both conflict of interest
and fraudul disburs
exampl
a vice presid of a compani author larg expenditur to develop a uniqu type of
new equip us by a certain contractor anoth firm subsequ took over the
contractor as well as the new equip shortli after that the vice presid retir and
went to work for the firm that had bought out the contractor the fraudster had manag
to us hi employ monei to fund a compani in which he eventu develop an interest
while these scheme ar clearli corrupt scheme the fund ar divert through the us
of a fraudul disburs the monei could be drain from the victim organ
through a check tamper scheme a bill scheme a payrol scheme or an expens
reimburs scheme for a discuss of the method us to gener fraudul
disburs pleas refer to the asset misappropri section
financi interest in compani under perpetr supervis
sometim an employe will have a direct or indirect financi interest in a compani under
hi supervis for exampl account sometim hold stock in a compani thei audit
these problem often occur in govern
financi disclosur
manag ha an oblig to disclos to the sharehold signific fraud commit by
offic execut and other in posit of trust manag doe not have the
respons of disclos uncharg crimin conduct of it offic and execut
howev if and when offic execut or other person in trust posit becom
subject of a crimin indict disclosur is requir
briberi and corrupt financi transact
1738 2011 fraud examin manual
the inadequ disclosur of conflict of interest is among the most seriou of fraud
inadequ disclosur of relatedparti transact is not limit to ani specif industri it
transcend all busi type and relationship
appear of conflict of interest
a final type of conflict of interest is the appear of such exampl includ ownership in a
blind trust in which the employe ha no author to make invest decis or an
extern auditor own a minor interest in a compani that is audit by the auditor firm
such matter ar rare prosecut as crimin offens
detect of conflict of interest
conflict of interest ar probabl on of the most difficult scheme to uncov therefor
no fast and easi detect method exist for thi type of fraud some of the more common
method that can be us ar tip and complaint comparison of vendor address with
employe address review of vendor ownership file review of exit interview
comparison of vendor address to address of subsequ employ polici requir
certain employe to provid the name and employ of immedi famili member and
interview with purchas personnel for favor treatment of on or more vendor
tip and complaint
if a particular vendor is be favor then compet vendor mai file complaint
addition employe complaint about the servic of a favor vendor mai lead to the
discoveri of a conflict of interest
comparison of vendor address with employe address
if nomine or relat parti ar us as owner of vendor then the busi address of the
vendor mai match that of the employe also look for post offic box address for
vendor thi detect method is similar to that us for locat phoni vendor
review of vendor ownership file
when a vendor is select a complet file of the ownership of that vendor should be kept
thi is particularli import for close held busi if the vendor is requir to updat
the file annual then chang in ownership will also be disclos a comput comparison
of the vendor ownership and the employe file mai reveal conflict of interest
financi transact briberi and corrupt
2011 fraud examin manual 1739
review of exit interview and comparison of vendor address to address of subsequ employ
if a review of an employe exit interview yield the name and address of the subsequ
employ then a simpl comparison of that name and address with the vendor file mai
reveal conflict of interest wherein the employe ha obtain employ from
a contractor
interview of purchas personnel for favor treatment of on or more vendor
employe ar gener the first to observ that a vendor is receiv favor treatment
therefor by ask employe if ani vendor is receiv favor treatment the examin
mai discov conflict of interest that would otherwis have gone unnot anoth
question that mai be ask of employe is whether ani vendor servic or product ha
recent becom substandard
polici requir certain employe to provid the name and employ of immedi famili member
where accept by law a product audit test mai be to requir member of manag
as well as member of the procur depart to provid detail inform
regard the name and employ of all immedi famili member and household
member compar the name and employ of famili member to the current posit
of the employe mai lead to inform that would requir further investig to
determin whether a conflict of interest exist
prevent of conflict of interest
organ should establish polici clearli de fine what constitut a conflict of interest
and prohibit ani such entangl by offic director employe or other agent of
the organ a polici requir employe to complet an annual disclosur statement is
an excel proactiv approach to deal with potenti conflict compar the disclos
name and address with vendor and custom list mai reveal real conflict of interest or
the appear of such furthermor these statement will reinforc in employe the idea
that engag in conflict of interest is unaccept and will result in sever consequ
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1801
