2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/The Money Laundering Process/ATMs


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


ATMs 
Law enforcement officials are also reporting an  increasing use of automatic teller machines 
(ATMs) to launder money. ATMs can be purchased for as little as $3,000. Money launderers 
purchase the machines and place them either in establishments they control or in legitimate 
businesses. The machines work the same as any other ATM machines, and all transactions 
are legitimate. The money launderer simply fills the machine with cash from illegal activities. 
The customer uses the machine and never realizes the source of the cash. 
 
The ATM banking system debits the cardholders account and credits the ATM owner’s bank 
account. At the end of the month, the launderer receives a bank statement showing funds 
being deposited from a legitimate financial institution. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1609 
This option is attractive for money launderers because there are currently no regulations 
governing the use and operation of privately-owned ATMs. There is no requirement to 
check the backgrounds of purchasers of the machines, and there are no mandatory reporting 
procedures and no rules for maintaining ATM sales records. 
 



:


atm
law enforc offici ar also report an increas us of automat teller machin
atm to launder monei atm can be purchas for as littl as 3000 monei launder
purchas the machin and place them either in establish thei control or in legitim
busi the machin work the same as ani other atm machin and all transact
ar legitim the monei launder simpli fill the machin with cash from illeg activ
the custom us the machin and never realiz the sourc of the cash
the atm bank system debit the cardhold account and credit the atm owner bank
account at the end of the month the launder receiv a bank statement show fund
be deposit from a legitim financi institut
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11609
thi option is attract for monei launder becaus there ar current no regul
govern the us and oper of privatelyown atm there is no requir to
check the background of purchas of the machin and there ar no mandatori report
procedur and no rule for maintain atm sale record
