2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Hawala Exchanges/How It Works


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


How It Works 
Hawala networks operate with the non-physical transfer of money. Typically, one who wants 
to send money abroad will call on a hawala dealer, known as a hawaladar. Hawala 
transactions are often disguised by legitimate businesses (e.g., travel agencies, cell phone 
companies, movie stores, convenience stores, and car washes). The hawaladar will contact 
another hawaladar in the country where the money is to be distributed, and with whom he 
has a familial relation or is a trustworthy connection. The hawaladars will discuss the 
transaction and arrange for delivery of the money to the recipient. Sometimes the hawaladar 
will give the giver a receipt, but with very little information. Information typically contained 
therein includes a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipient. Once hawaladars have 
exchanged the basic information of the transaction, the hawaladar for the recipient will 
locate and deliver the money to the recipient. The recipient will then use the code to verify 
his identification with the hawaladar who is distributing the money. The only records kept of 
the transaction are the amounts owed one hawaladar to another. Because most hawala 
transactions are disguised by legitimate businesses, records of such transactions are generally 
disguised as well. 
 
EXAMPLE 
1.  Ana in New York contacts and gives $5,000 in cash to Hawaladar A in New 
York to get $4,800 to Andy in Dubai. 
2.  Hawaladar A contacts Hawaladar B in Dubai and arranges the transfer; a code is 
exchanged. 
3.  Hawaladar A gives Ana a code to be communicated to Andy. 
4.  Ana communicates the code to Andy. 
5.  Hawaladar B and Andy make contact in Dubai. 
6.  Andy relates code to Hawaladar B and is then given the money. 
7.  Hawaladar A owes Hawaladar B $4,800 worth of “The Big Apple” t-shirts. 
Hawaladar A sends the merchandise from New York to Hawaladar B in Dubai. 
8.  Transaction is complete.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1614                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Often, hawaladars are business partners who do legitimate business with each other on a 
regular basis. Because it can be difficult to transfer large amounts of money between 
countries, a debt might be paid with merchandise or a favor (e.g., Hawaladar B owes 
Hawaladar A money from a past transaction, and in a new transaction pays the recipient, 
thereby relinquishing his debt to Hawaladar A from the former transaction).  
 
The hawala exchange is a tempting opportunity for many because it: 
• Doesn’t require formal identification;  
• Takes hours rather than days to transfer the money overseas;  
• Is cheaper than paying bank and shipping fees because hawaladars generally take a very 
small commission;  
• No currency conversion is necessary; and  
• Lacks a coherent paper trail. 
 



:


how it work
hawala network oper with the nonphys transfer of monei typic on who want
to send monei abroad will call on a hawala dealer known as a hawaladar hawala
transact ar often disguis by legitim busi eg travel agenc cell phone
compani movi store conveni store and car wash the hawaladar will contact
anoth hawaladar in the countri where the monei is to be distribut and with whom he
ha a famili relat or is a trustworthi connect the hawaladar will discuss the
transact and arrang for deliveri of the monei to the recipi sometim the hawaladar
will give the giver a receipt but with veri littl inform inform typic contain
therein includ a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipi onc hawaladar have
exchang the basic inform of the transact the hawaladar for the recipi will
locat and deliv the monei to the recipi the recipi will then us the code to verifi
hi identif with the hawaladar who is distribut the monei the onli record kept of
the transact ar the amount ow on hawaladar to anoth becaus most hawala
transact ar disguis by legitim busi record of such transact ar gener
disguis as well
exampl
1 ana in new york contact and give 5000 in cash to hawaladar a in new
york to get 4800 to andi in dubai
2 hawaladar a contact hawaladar b in dubai and arrang the transfer a code is
exchang
3 hawaladar a give ana a code to be commun to andi
4 ana commun the code to andi
5 hawaladar b and andi make contact in dubai
6 andi relat code to hawaladar b and is then given the monei
7 hawaladar a ow hawaladar b 4800 worth of the big appl tshirt
hawaladar a send the merchandis from new york to hawaladar b in dubai
8 transact is complet
monei launder financi transact
11614 2011 fraud examin manual
often hawaladar ar busi partner who do legitim busi with each other on a
regular basi becaus it can be difficult to transfer larg amount of monei between
countri a debt might be paid with merchandis or a favor eg hawaladar b ow
hawaladar a monei from a past transact and in a new transact pai the recipi
therebi relinquish hi debt to hawaladar a from the former transact
the hawala exchang is a tempt opportun for mani becaus it
doesnt requir formal identif
take hour rather than dai to transfer the monei oversea
is cheaper than pai bank and ship fee becaus hawaladar gener take a veri
small commiss
no currenc convers is necessari and
lack a coher paper trail
