2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Hawala Exchanges/The Hawala Exchange and Money Laundering


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


The Hawala Exchange and Money Laundering 
The very essence of hawala exchange bypasses regulation, such that money can be 
transferred independent of government and financial institution oversight. While many 
hawala exchanges are remittances free of mal-intent and therefore “legitimate” in some 
countries, (known as “white hawalas”), the system  lends itself to abuse. The use of a hawala 
exchange for illegal purposes such as money laundering, drug trafficking, or terrorism is 
referred to as a “black hawala.”   
 
Money laundering, specifically, is the disguising  of the existence, nature, source, ownership, 
location, and disposition of property derived from criminal activity. For hawaladars who 
operate storefront retail or service businesses in addition to their side hawala exchanges, 
bank deposits will rarely trigger investigation by a financial institution unless deposits are 
exceedingly high for the particular business. As always, such money can go undetected by 
using it towards personal and business expenses. (It is important to note that in the U.S. all 
cash transactions over $10,000 must be reported  to the federal government.) Hawala money 
can easily be layered because paper trails are meager at most. Furthermore, because most 
hawala exchanges are hidden behind business veils, money received from such transactions 
can unnoticeably be recouped into business accounts and thus integrated into bank accounts.  
 
Unfortunately, due to the “hidden” nature of the hawala business, much of this money is 
used to fund dangerous activities such as the importation of heroin and the purchase of 
unauthorized weapons. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1615 



:


the hawala exchang and monei launder
the veri essenc of hawala exchang bypass regul such that monei can be
transfer independ of govern and financi institut oversight while mani
hawala exchang ar remitt free of malint and therefor legitim in some
countri known as white hawala the system lend itself to abus the us of a hawala
exchang for illeg purpos such as monei launder drug traffick or terror is
refer to as a black hawala
monei launder specif is the disguis of the exist natur sourc ownership
locat and disposit of properti deriv from crimin activ for hawaladar who
oper storefront retail or servic busi in addit to their side hawala exchang
bank deposit will rare trigger investig by a financi institut unless deposit ar
exceedingli high for the particular busi as alwai such monei can go undetect by
us it toward person and busi expens it is import to note that in the us all
cash transact over 10000 must be report to the feder govern hawala monei
can easili be layer becaus paper trail ar meager at most furthermor becaus most
hawala exchang ar hidden behind busi veil monei receiv from such transact
can unnotic be recoup into busi account and thu integr into bank account
unfortun due to the hidden natur of the hawala busi much of thi monei is
us to fund danger activ such as the import of heroin and the purchas of
unauthor weapon
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11615
