2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/Title I — Recordkeeping


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Title I — Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. Recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. All institutions are required to keep a record of any financial transaction of more 
than $10,000. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1622                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep for five years an original, microfilm, 
or other copy of certain documents relating to demand deposits and checking and savings 
accounts. The records that must be retained include: 
• Signature cards. 
• Statements, ledger cards, or other records disclosing all transactions; that is, deposits and 
withdrawals. 
• Copies of both sides of customers’ checks, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks of more than $100 drawn on the bank, or issued and payable by it. 
• Identity of each purchaser of a certificate of deposit. 
• Each deposit slip or credit ticket reflecting a transaction in excess of $100. 
 
In addition to these requirements, financial institutions are required to capture, verify, and 
retain information on the identity of purchasers of monetary instruments (such as cashier’s 
checks) in amounts of $3,000 or more, or any transmittal or transfer of funds involving 
$3,000 or more. These records are also required to be kept for five years. 
 
Banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a customer’s 
checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit tickets. They 
must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check deposited to a 
customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply only to checks written or deposits made in 
excess of $100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all such items rather than sorting out 
those less than $100. The Bank Secrecy Act also  requires financial institutions to retain a 
record of any extension of credit more than $1 0,000 as well as each transfer of $10,000 or 
more outside the United States. 
 
The penalties for failure to comply with these recordkeeping requirements are severe. Any 
insured depository institution and any director, officer, or employee who willfully or through 
gross negligence violates any regulation can be subject to a $10,000 civil penalty. The statute 
further provides that a separate violation occurs for each day  the violation continues and at 
each office, branch, or place of business at which the violation occurs. If a violation is 
committed in furtherance of a felony crime, criminal penalties can be imposed of up to five 
years in prison and/or a fine of not more than $10,000. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1623 



:


titl i recordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani financi transact of more
than 10000
monei launder financi transact
11622 2011 fraud examin manual
these regul provid in part that bank must keep for five year an origin microfilm
or other copi of certain document relat to demand deposit and check and save
account the record that must be retain includ
signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw
copi of both side of custom check bank draft monei order and cashier
check of more than 100 drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
ident of each purchas of a certif of deposit
each deposit slip or credit ticket reflect a transact in excess of 100
in addit to these requir financi institut ar requir to captur verifi and
retain inform on the ident of purchas of monetari instrument such as cashier
check in amount of 3000 or more or ani transmitt or transfer of fund involv
3000 or more these record ar also requir to be kept for five year
bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a custom
check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit ticket thei
must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check deposit to a
custom check account
although some of these requir appli onli to check written or deposit made in
excess of 100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all such item rather than sort out
those less than 100 the bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a
record of ani extens of credit more than 1 0000 as well as each transfer of 10000 or
more outsid the unit state
the penalti for failur to compli with these recordkeep requir ar sever ani
insur depositori institut and ani director offic or employe who willfulli or through
gross neglig violat ani regul can be subject to a 10000 civil penalti the statut
further provid that a separ violat occur for each dai the violat continu and at
each offic branch or place of busi at which the violat occur if a violat is
commit in further of a feloni crime crimin penalti can be impos of up to five
year in prison andor a fine of not more than 10000
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11623
