2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Laws Relating to Health Care Fraud/State Statutes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


State Statutes 
Although fraud is illegal in every state, not all states have specific legislation against insurance 
fraud. Laws such as “grand theft,” “scheme to  defraud,” or “fraud by deception” must be 
used to charge offenders. Nineteen states have passed legislation that specifically prohibits 
insurance fraud although the effectiveness varies according to the provisions in each statute. 
For example, in some states, health insurance fraud is illegal, but there is no immunity to the 
insurance company for reporting fraud. 
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted the Insurance 
Fraud Prevention Model Act. The key provisions include:  
• Mandatory reporting of fraud. 
• Immunity from prosecution for reporting fraud. 
• Making insurance fraud a felony under state law.  
• Requiring a fraud warning on claim forms. 
• Requiring anti-fraud initiatives including mandatory special investigation units. 
• Restitution to the victim. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1210                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


state statut
although fraud is illeg in everi state not all state have specif legisl against insur
fraud law such as grand theft scheme to defraud or fraud by decept must be
us to charg offend nineteen state have pass legisl that specif prohibit
insur fraud although the effect vari accord to the provis in each statut
for exampl in some state health insur fraud is illeg but there is no immun to the
insur compani for report fraud
the nation associ of insur commission naic adopt the insur
fraud prevent model act the kei provis includ
mandatori report of fraud
immun from prosecut for report fraud
make insur fraud a feloni under state law
requir a fraud warn on claim form
requir antifraud initi includ mandatori special investig unit
restitut to the victim
health care fraud financi transact
11210 2011 fraud examin manual
