2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


COVERT EXAMINATIONS 
 
A covert operation  is designed to obtain evidence by use of agents whose true role is 
undisclosed to the target. There are two major forms of covert operations: undercover operations  
and surveillance operations.  
 
Several distinctions define these types of covert operations. Undercover operations seek to 
develop evidence directly from people involved in the offense through the use of disguise 
and deceit. Rather than waiting for the information to come by other routes, there is a 
conscious decision to seek it out. In contrast, surveillance operations use the skills of 
observation to determine activity of individuals. The surveillance operation is designed to 
gather information.  
 
Covert operations require the highest degree of skill and planning. Used in a timely manner 
with great care, a covert operation can produce results that cannot be achieved in any other 
way. Used incorrectly or handled badly, covert operations can lead to embarrassment, 
serious financial liability, injury, and even death.  
 
Disguise and deceit in undercover operations are well recognized by the courts as a 
legitimate function of public and private law enforcement, provided the undercover 
operation is based on sufficient probable cause. Covert operations cannot be conducted as 
“fishing expeditions.” Justification for conducting the operation must be legally sound and 
defensible and must not violate a person’s reasonable expectation of privacy.  
 
Prior to an undercover operation, it is essential that the basis for the operation be committed 
to writing, preferably in a memo (see “Re port Writing”). The memorandum should clearly 
state: 
• The information upon which the covert operation will be based 
• The information that is expected to be gained from the operation 
• The identities of suspects, if known 
• Operatives under your care, custody, or control 
  
A fraud examiner is undercover when he officially abandons his identity as an examiner and 
adopts one designed to obtain information from people who do not realize his true identity. 
The assumed identity might involve only the adoption of another name or it might require 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an elaborate cover. The aim should be to avoid being compromised, to minimize danger to 
the fraud examiner, and to ensure ultimate success of the operation. 
 
Information sought might include the location of outlets for stolen goods, the subject’s 
methods of operation, detailed personal data on all subjects, and any other relevant 
information. Information should be developed with care to avoid alerting the targets or their 
associates. Only those people who need to know should be informed of the undercover 
investigation.  
 
 



:


covert examin
a covert oper is design to obtain evid by us of agent whose true role is
undisclos to the target there ar two major form of covert oper undercov oper
and surveil oper
sever distinct defin these type of covert oper undercov oper seek to
develop evid directli from peopl involv in the offens through the us of disguis
and deceit rather than wait for the inform to come by other rout there is a
consciou decis to seek it out in contrast surveil oper us the skill of
observ to determin activ of individu the surveil oper is design to
gather inform
covert oper requir the highest degre of skill and plan us in a time manner
with great care a covert oper can produc result that cannot be achiev in ani other
wai us incorrectli or handl badli covert oper can lead to embarrass
seriou financi liabil injuri and even death
disguis and deceit in undercov oper ar well recogn by the court as a
legitim function of public and privat law enforc provid the undercov
oper is base on suffici probabl caus covert oper cannot be conduct as
fish expedit justif for conduct the oper must be legal sound and
defens and must not violat a person reason expect of privaci
prior to an undercov oper it is essenti that the basi for the oper be commit
to write prefer in a memo see re port write the memorandum should clearli
state
the inform upon which the covert oper will be base
the inform that is expect to be gain from the oper
the ident of suspect if known
oper under your care custodi or control
a fraud examin is undercov when he offici abandon hi ident as an examin and
adopt on design to obtain inform from peopl who do not realiz hi true ident
the assum ident might involv onli the adopt of anoth name or it might requir
covert examin investig
3302 2011 fraud examin manual
an elabor cover the aim should be to avoid be compromis to minim danger to
the fraud examin and to ensur ultim success of the oper
inform sought might includ the locat of outlet for stolen good the subject
method of oper detail person data on all subject and ani other relev
inform inform should be develop with care to avoid alert the target or their
associ onli those peopl who need to know should be inform of the undercov
investig
