2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Establishing an Identity


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Establishing an Identity 
A cover story must be fabricated to conceal the true identity of the fraud examiner. The 
story should help the examiner gain the subject’s confidence but it should rarely, if ever, be 
wholly fictitious. The examiner should be from a city with which he is familiar, but not from 
the home city of the subject. Arrangements should be made to have key people in the 
fictitious history corroborate the undercover examiner’s claims. 
 
Particular attention should be paid to items carried by the undercover examiner, such as 
pocketbooks, watches, rings, tokens, suitcases, ticket stubs, miscellaneous papers, matches, 
letters, and sums of money. Documents and identity cards should show the appropriate 
amount of wear and tear. The fraud examiner should be able to explain how each item came 
into his possession. 
 
There should be a natural contact between the undercover examiner and the subject. The 
background story should contain elements that will bring the suspect and the examiner 
together without any contrived effort. A mutual interest in hobbies, sports, and other leisure 
activities can provide an opportunity for getting acquainted. The examiner should not pose 
as an authority on a subject unless totally qualified. Many times an examiner’s admitted lack 
of knowledge—but an interest in—a given subj ect will help make the subject feel important 
and not threatened. 
 
According to Timothy J. Walsh, a security expert, the following situations are those in which 
covert operations have traditionally worked well. 
• There is reliable information about criminal activity or asset losses, but insufficient detail 
for prevention or apprehension.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.303 
• Losses are known to be occurring in an area, but there is no information as to how they 
are occurring or who is responsible. 
• It is desirable to gather information concerning personal relationships or to identify the 
contacts made with or by certain people.  
• It is desirable to compare actual practices with supposed or required practices.  
• It is important to obtain information in an indirect manner from people believed to 
possess it.  
 
Covert operations should be used when there is no other practical way to obtain  
necessary information.  
 
 



:


establish an ident
a cover stori must be fabric to conceal the true ident of the fraud examin the
stori should help the examin gain the subject confid but it should rare if ever be
wholli fictiti the examin should be from a citi with which he is familiar but not from
the home citi of the subject arrang should be made to have kei peopl in the
fictiti histori corrobor the undercov examin claim
particular attent should be paid to item carri by the undercov examin such as
pocketbook watch ring token suitcas ticket stub miscellan paper match
letter and sum of monei document and ident card should show the appropri
amount of wear and tear the fraud examin should be abl to explain how each item came
into hi possess
there should be a natur contact between the undercov examin and the subject the
background stori should contain element that will bring the suspect and the examin
togeth without ani contriv effort a mutual interest in hobbi sport and other leisur
activ can provid an opportun for get acquaint the examin should not pose
as an author on a subject unless total qualifi mani time an examin admit lack
of knowledgebut an interest ina given subj ect will help make the subject feel import
and not threaten
accord to timothi j walsh a secur expert the follow situat ar those in which
covert oper have tradition work well
there is reliabl inform about crimin activ or asset loss but insuffici detail
for prevent or apprehens
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3303
loss ar known to be occur in an area but there is no inform as to how thei
ar occur or who is respons
it is desir to gather inform concern person relationship or to identifi the
contact made with or by certain peopl
it is desir to compar actual practic with suppos or requir practic
it is import to obtain inform in an indirect manner from peopl believ to
possess it
covert oper should be us when there is no other practic wai to obtain
necessari inform
