2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Surveillance/General


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


General 
Vehicle surveillance demands additional preparations. A dependable vehicle similar to types 
commonly found in the area where the surveillance is to take place must be used. This can 
be a panel truck, automobile, or a large truck or trailer. The license should be of the state and 
county where the surveillance will take place. If more than one vehicle is to be used, two-way 
radio or cellular telephone conversation is usually necessary. Consideration should be given 
to gasoline, water, first-aid equipment, and road-map requirements. 
 
Whenever possible, combining foot and vehicular surveillance is an advantage. The 
observers will likely remain more alert. When a subject parks his vehicle and remains in it, an 
observer on foot can better monitor the subject’s actions and those of passersby.  
 
As in foot surveillance, vehicular surveillance requires inconspicuous actions. Observers 
should generally stay in the same lane as the target to avoid having to make turns from the 
wrong lane. If the situation allows, observers should change direction, perhaps going around 
a block in order to break continuity before the suspect becomes suspicious. It is difficult at 
night for the observers to be sure they are following the right vehicle. The target’s car can be 
kept in sight better if it is distinctive. If the opportunity arises, reflective tape can be attached 
to the rear of the subject’s car. The dome light  of the observer’s car should be disconnected 
so that the light will not show when a door is opened. Headlights and license-plate lights can 
be wired to allow them to be turned on or off. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


gener
vehicl surveil demand addit prepar a depend vehicl similar to type
commonli found in the area where the surveil is to take place must be us thi can
be a panel truck automobil or a larg truck or trailer the licens should be of the state and
counti where the surveil will take place if more than on vehicl is to be us twowai
radio or cellular telephon convers is usual necessari consider should be given
to gasolin water firstaid equip and roadmap requir
whenev possibl combin foot and vehicular surveil is an advantag the
observ will like remain more alert when a subject park hi vehicl and remain in it an
observ on foot can better monitor the subject action and those of passersbi
as in foot surveil vehicular surveil requir inconspicu action observ
should gener stai in the same lane as the target to avoid have to make turn from the
wrong lane if the situat allow observ should chang direct perhap go around
a block in order to break continu befor the suspect becom suspici it is difficult at
night for the observ to be sure thei ar follow the right vehicl the target car can be
kept in sight better if it is distinct if the opportun aris reflect tape can be attach
to the rear of the subject car the dome light of the observ car should be disconnect
so that the light will not show when a door is open headlight and licensepl light can
be wire to allow them to be turn on or off
covert examin investig
3310 2011 fraud examin manual
