2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Sources and Informants 
Sources and informants both serve the same purpose—to provide information to help 
develop a case. However, there are notable differences between confidential sources and 
confidential informants. The terms should not be used interchangeably.  
 
A confidential source  furnishes information as a result of occupation or profession and has no 
culpability in the alleged offense. For example, confidential sources might include barbers, 
attorneys, accountants, and law enforcement personnel. A confidential informant  has a direct or 
indirect involvement in the matter under investigation, and might be culpable. The 
distinction between the two is their involvement in the offense. Informants can pose 
treacherous legal issues for the examiner.  
 
Tom Melsheimer, a former federal prosecutor, suggests from his experience that no piece of 
evidence is quite as convincing to a jury as a secretly photographed or recorded conversation 
that an informant can obtain firsthand. This information is generally accepted as a “slam 
dunk” for a criminal prosecutor, because there is  little that a white-collar criminal can dispute 
when caught in the act of a fraud. For this reason, the use of informants is likely to increase 
in future fraud investigations. 
 



:


sourc and inform
sourc and inform both serv the same purposeto provid inform to help
develop a case howev there ar notabl differ between confidenti sourc and
confidenti inform the term should not be us interchang
a confidenti sourc furnish inform as a result of occup or profess and ha no
culpabl in the alleg offens for exampl confidenti sourc might includ barber
attornei account and law enforc personnel a confidenti inform ha a direct or
indirect involv in the matter under investig and might be culpabl the
distinct between the two is their involv in the offens inform can pose
treacher legal issu for the examin
tom melsheim a former feder prosecutor suggest from hi experi that no piec of
evid is quit as convinc to a juri as a secretli photograph or record convers
that an inform can obtain firsthand thi inform is gener accept as a slam
dunk for a crimin prosecutor becaus there is littl that a whitecollar crimin can disput
when caught in the act of a fraud for thi reason the us of inform is like to increas
in futur fraud investig
