2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants/Informants


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Informants 
Sources 
In some instances (but not many), the source might want money or other consideration for 
furnishing information. The examiner should not offer any compensation. It is better to 
have the source request it. This is to avoid any allegation of misconduct on the part of the 
examiner for paying for information. Sources have their reasons for informing. It might be 
the sense of importance that comes from being involved or a chance to play “detective.” In 
other cases, the source might have a grudge against the target. Other reasons include a 
feeling of moral responsibility to report information. Perhaps more than any other reason, a 
source will furnish information because he likes and trusts the examiner and wants to help. 
 
Informants 
Informants, especially incidental ones, commonly want something in return for their 
information. They take the attitude that their involvement has personal risk, and they want 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to be paid for their “trouble.” The informant is likely to be predisposed to sell information 
to the highest bidder.  
 
Many informants—perhaps the majority—are unstable. As often as not, an informant’s 
motivation is to “get” the target, not because  of any sense of morality, but because the 
informant and the target are closely involved. In the case of drug dealing, for example, an 
informant might furnish information because the target is the competition. In other cases, 
the informant is motivated by a sense of self-importance. He is a “big man”; people take  
him seriously. 
 
Probably the most common reason informants supply information is because they are 
involved in the offense, and by furnishing information on the target (which is commonly 
false), they can diffuse suspicion from their own activities. In many instances, the examiner 
initially does not know the truth about the informant.  
 
The fraud examiner must also be aware of the overzealous informant. Melsheimer cautions 
that most of the recently catalogued cases concerning the abuse of informants were the 
result of “involved informants who are private citizens, self-motivated to satisfy their law 
enforcement sponsors at virtually any cost.” In an attempt to ingratiate themselves to 
investigators, the informant will often engage in unscrupulous activities to provide the 
information they think the investigators are looking for. The fraud examiner must lay out the 
ground rules for the informant before beginning this type of investigation or risk the 
embarrassment (and punishment) that a less-than-truthful informant can provide.  
 



:


inform
sourc
in some instanc but not mani the sourc might want monei or other consider for
furnish inform the examin should not offer ani compens it is better to
have the sourc request it thi is to avoid ani alleg of misconduct on the part of the
examin for pai for inform sourc have their reason for inform it might be
the sens of import that come from be involv or a chanc to plai detect in
other case the sourc might have a grudg against the target other reason includ a
feel of moral respons to report inform perhap more than ani other reason a
sourc will furnish inform becaus he like and trust the examin and want to help
inform
inform especi incident on commonli want someth in return for their
inform thei take the attitud that their involv ha person risk and thei want
covert examin investig
3316 2011 fraud examin manual
to be paid for their troubl the inform is like to be predispos to sell inform
to the highest bidder
mani informantsperhap the majorityar unstabl as often as not an inform
motiv is to get the target not becaus of ani sens of moral but becaus the
inform and the target ar close involv in the case of drug deal for exampl an
inform might furnish inform becaus the target is the competit in other case
the inform is motiv by a sens of selfimport he is a big man peopl take
him serious
probabl the most common reason inform suppli inform is becaus thei ar
involv in the offens and by furnish inform on the target which is commonli
fals thei can diffus suspicion from their own activ in mani instanc the examin
initi doe not know the truth about the inform
the fraud examin must also be awar of the overzeal inform melsheim caution
that most of the recent catalogu case concern the abus of inform were the
result of involv inform who ar privat citizen selfmotiv to satisfi their law
enforc sponsor at virtual ani cost in an attempt to ingrati themselv to
investig the inform will often engag in unscrupul activ to provid the
inform thei think the investig ar look for the fraud examin must lai out the
ground rule for the inform befor begin thi type of investig or risk the
embarrass and punish that a lessthantruth inform can provid
