2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Sources and Informants/Legal Considerations


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Legal Considerations 
As noted, dealing with sources and informants is fraught with legal pitfalls. The examiner 
should be circumspect in all interactions with sources and informants. The examiner might 
be able to trust a source, but rarely an informant. Always document contacts with sources 
and informants in case of problems.  
 
Many jurisdictions guarantee the accused the right to confront his accuser. That is an 
absolute right of the accused; it is not possible to cross-examine someone who lurks behind 
a cloak of secrecy. The examiner will usually not be able to testify to what a source or 
informant said because of the “hearsay” rule. The witness can testify only to what he knows, 
not what someone else has said.  
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.317 
If a decision is made to pay an informant or source, the payment should be made in cash and 
a receipt should be secured. If the source will not sign a receipt, do not pay. There have been 
numerous instances where a receipt was not obtained and the informant subsequently denied 
receiving funds or challenged the amount. The examiner then has to defend himself without 
proof; indeed, some investigators have been accused of having embezzled the payments. 
Payments should only be on a COD basis. The information should be furnished and verified 
before turning over any money. If not, the examiner might become the victim of a scam.  
 
Entrapment is sometimes raised as a criminal defense. This is especially true when the 
informant is doing things at the behest of law enforcement. The defense is that the target is 
innocent, but was unlawfully lured into a crime that he otherwise would not have 
committed. This can best be overcome by ensuring that the source or informant only gathers 
information and plays a limited role in the case.  
 



:


legal consider
as note deal with sourc and inform is fraught with legal pitfal the examin
should be circumspect in all interact with sourc and inform the examin might
be abl to trust a sourc but rare an inform alwai document contact with sourc
and inform in case of problem
mani jurisdict guarante the accus the right to confront hi accus that is an
absolut right of the accus it is not possibl to crossexamin someon who lurk behind
a cloak of secreci the examin will usual not be abl to testifi to what a sourc or
inform said becaus of the hearsai rule the wit can testifi onli to what he know
not what someon els ha said
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3317
if a decis is made to pai an inform or sourc the payment should be made in cash and
a receipt should be secur if the sourc will not sign a receipt do not pai there have been
numer instanc where a receipt wa not obtain and the inform subsequ deni
receiv fund or challeng the amount the examin then ha to defend himself without
proof inde some investig have been accus of have embezzl the payment
payment should onli be on a cod basi the inform should be furnish and verifi
befor turn over ani monei if not the examin might becom the victim of a scam
entrap is sometim rais as a crimin defens thi is especi true when the
inform is do thing at the behest of law enforc the defens is that the target is
innoc but wa unlawfulli lure into a crime that he otherwis would not have
commit thi can best be overcom by ensur that the sourc or inform onli gather
inform and plai a limit role in the case
