2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/COVERT EXAMINATIONS/Use of Operatives


:


Investigation


:


Covert Examinations


:


Use of Operatives 
Operatives are subject to greater control than informants. In a typical scenario, a source or 
informant advises that information exists or that a crime is currently being committed. The 
informant’s motives might or might not be altruistic. For example, a warehouse worker 
approaches the fraud examiner and says that Collins is stealing inventory. The informant 
wants money for her assistance in apprehending Collins. The examiner does not know 
whether the informant is telling the truth or whether she is trying to divert attention from 
herself.  
 
The informant suggested that she secretly record a conversation with Collins, getting Collins 
to admit to the theft. If an informant conducts the investigation under the examiner’s 
direction, he then becomes an operative. To demonstrate a worst-case scenario, consider the 
following example. Without the examiner’s k nowledge or consent, the informant plants a 
tape recorder in the break room at the warehouse, and records conversations to which he is 
not a party. This is a violation of the law regarding interception of communication. Although 
the recording was made without the examiner’s knowledge or consent, the case is 
nonetheless compromised. The informant might insist that he recorded the conversations at 
the examiner’s request, thereby placing the examiner in the unenviable position of having to 
defend himself. 
 
Most operatives lack the training to conduct an investigation, and they cannot, in many 
instances, be trusted. It is vital that operatives be properly monitored and supervised. Obtain 
background information on the operative to ensure his degree of culpability in the offense, if 
any. Make certain that the operative clearly understands the objectives of the covert 
operation, and ensure that he is regularly debriefed before and after critical meetings with the 
target. Be careful that the operative does not take any action without proper authorization.  
  
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.320   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


us of oper
oper ar subject to greater control than inform in a typic scenario a sourc or
inform advis that inform exist or that a crime is current be commit the
inform motiv might or might not be altruist for exampl a warehous worker
approach the fraud examin and sai that collin is steal inventori the inform
want monei for her assist in apprehend collin the examin doe not know
whether the inform is tell the truth or whether she is try to divert attent from
herself
the inform suggest that she secretli record a convers with collin get collin
to admit to the theft if an inform conduct the investig under the examin
direct he then becom an oper to demonstr a worstcas scenario consid the
follow exampl without the examin k nowledg or consent the inform plant a
tape record in the break room at the warehous and record convers to which he is
not a parti thi is a violat of the law regard intercept of commun although
the record wa made without the examin knowledg or consent the case is
nonetheless compromis the inform might insist that he record the convers at
the examin request therebi place the examin in the unenvi posit of have to
defend himself
most oper lack the train to conduct an investig and thei cannot in mani
instanc be trust it is vital that oper be properli monitor and supervis obtain
background inform on the oper to ensur hi degre of culpabl in the offens if
ani make certain that the oper clearli understand the object of the covert
oper and ensur that he is regularli debrief befor and after critic meet with the
target be care that the oper doe not take ani action without proper author
covert examin investig
3320 2011 fraud examin manual
