2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Hacking/Altering the Way a System Generates Passwords


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Altering the Way a System Generates Passwords 
Not all passwords are supplied by users. Some are generated by a computer system’s 
“randomizer” function. For example, many Internet Service Providers (ISPs) give first-time 
users a randomly generated password (and sometimes a random user name as well), which 
gets the person online. Then the user changes the log-in information to their  
own preference.  
 
By learning how a certain system’s randomizer works, the hacker can imitate the generation 
of valid passwords, or alter how the system operates. For example, with some tinkering, the 
randomizer can be set to give every new user the same, seemingly random, password: 
EVBDCL8. But that won’t work for long. It’s better to have the machine make a password 
built off some information about the user that is publicly available. Using a relatively simple 
set of algorithms, a hacker can convert a user name, such as “halbfish” into an obscure 
looking string like “rueavzhr” (letters are read as numbers by computers speaking ASCII 
code, so the algorithms are using sine values to convert the ASCII values into a new set  
of numbers).  
 
Here’s a good example of how manipulating a randomizer works. Dennis Ritchie, who 
helped develop UNIX technology, reported how a hacker attacked one company’s system. 
Computer officials at the company had their system generate passwords, each eight 
characters long, mixing letters and digits. In a brute force attack, it should have taken 112 
years to crack the nearly 3 trillion possibilities. However, the randomizer on the company 
system could only take 32,768 seeds for passwords. The hacker used his own machine to 
generate and test each of those combinations, using, according to Ritchie, “a total of only 
about one minute of machine time.” In less time than the average commercial break runs on 
television, the hacker breached a seemingly impenetrable system. 
 



:


alter the wai a system gener password
not all password ar suppli by user some ar gener by a comput system
random function for exampl mani internet servic provid isp give firsttim
user a randomli gener password and sometim a random user name as well which
get the person onlin then the user chang the login inform to their
own prefer
by learn how a certain system random work the hacker can imit the gener
of valid password or alter how the system oper for exampl with some tinker the
random can be set to give everi new user the same seemingli random password
evbdcl8 but that wont work for long it better to have the machin make a password
built off some inform about the user that is publicli avail us a rel simpl
set of algorithm a hacker can convert a user name such as halbfish into an obscur
look string like rueavzhr letter ar read as number by comput speak ascii
code so the algorithm ar us sine valu to convert the ascii valu into a new set
of number
here a good exampl of how manipul a random work denni ritchi who
help develop unix technolog report how a hacker attack on compani system
comput offici at the compani had their system gener password each eight
charact long mix letter and digit in a brute forc attack it should have taken 112
year to crack the nearli 3 trillion possibl howev the random on the compani
system could onli take 32768 seed for password the hacker us hi own machin to
gener and test each of those combin us accord to ritchi a total of onli
about on minut of machin time in less time than the averag commerci break run on
televis the hacker breach a seemingli impenetr system
