2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Electronic Mail


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Electronic Mail  
E-mail has revolutionized the ability of businesses to interact swiftly and, indeed, global 
business has embraced the e-mail system wholeheartedly. Few organizations do not provide 
some form of internal electronic communications. Due to the speed at which businesses can 
now interact and conduct business, as well as the relative cost advantage e-mail enjoys over 
other means of communication, the number of new e-mail users will no doubt continue  
to boom.  
 
E-mail does, however, also give organizations a degree of vulnerability. Aside from 
employees using it for personal correspondence, e-mail can be used to sabotage and crash 
organizations’ networks. Forwarding viruses or even simple virus hoaxes are often enough to 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1814                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
overload a system. Using e-mail through such systems as the Internet endows senders with 
identity protection—the original sender of the message can be disguised or obscured. 
Therefore, because a sender’s identity can be concealed, sensitive business information can 
be safely forwarded to an unauthorized address. 
 
Consider: 
• Company employees now possess the ability to quickly disclose sensitive company 
materials to outside parties, increasing the opportunity for corporate espionage. 
• Companies that employ a company-wide e-mail system can now be held responsible for 
any unethical or illegal activities conducted by employees on the e-mail system. 
• Companies must now be concerned with the repercussions of the actions of any 
disgruntled or rash employees. The speed with which an e-mail can be “fired off” creates 
the opportunity for ill-advised communications. 
• Once an e-mail message has left a company’s system, it may travel through any number 
of “foreign” e-mail systems before reaching its destination. An e-mail transmission can 
quite easily be intercepted or compromised without the use of encryption software.  
• Without a security-enhanced e-mail system, the receiver of an e-mail message has little 
assurance that the e-mail is authentic. E-mail addresses can be easily “spoofed” or cloned 
by a knowledgeable user. 
 
E-mail can be delivered almost instantaneously anywhere the networks, computers, and 
software exist to handle its transmission and reception. In fact, one of the emerging security 
problems concerning e-mail is the huge volume of space required to archive old messages. In 
some organizations, people are regularly asked to cull through their old e-mail messages and 
delete those no longer needed. In addition, some organizations will delete any old e-mail 
messages left on the mail server machines after a certain amount of time (e.g., one or two 
months). 
 



:


electron mail
email ha revolution the abil of busi to interact swiftli and inde global
busi ha embrac the email system wholeheartedli few organ do not provid
some form of intern electron commun due to the speed at which busi can
now interact and conduct busi as well as the rel cost advantag email enjoi over
other mean of commun the number of new email user will no doubt continu
to boom
email doe howev also give organ a degre of vulner asid from
employe us it for person correspond email can be us to sabotag and crash
organ network forward virus or even simpl viru hoax ar often enough to
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11814 2011 fraud examin manual
overload a system us email through such system as the internet endow sender with
ident protectionth origin sender of the messag can be disguis or obscur
therefor becaus a sender ident can be conceal sensit busi inform can
be safe forward to an unauthor address
consid
compani employe now possess the abil to quickli disclos sensit compani
materi to outsid parti increas the opportun for corpor espionag
compani that emploi a companywid email system can now be held respons for
ani uneth or illeg activ conduct by employe on the email system
compani must now be concern with the repercuss of the action of ani
disgruntl or rash employe the speed with which an email can be fire off creat
the opportun for illadvis commun
onc an email messag ha left a compani system it mai travel through ani number
of foreign email system befor reach it destin an email transmiss can
quit easili be intercept or compromis without the us of encrypt softwar
without a securityenhanc email system the receiv of an email messag ha littl
assur that the email is authent email address can be easili spoof or clone
by a knowledg user
email can be deliv almost instantan anywher the network comput and
softwar exist to handl it transmiss and recept in fact on of the emerg secur
problem concern email is the huge volum of space requir to archiv old messag in
some organ peopl ar regularli ask to cull through their old email messag and
delet those no longer need in addit some organ will delet ani old email
messag left on the mail server machin after a certain amount of time eg on or two
month
