2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses/Polymorphic Viruses


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Polymorphic Viruses 
Polymorphic viruses create varied (though fully functional) copies of themselves as a way to 
avoid detection by antivirus software. Some polymorphic viruses use different encryption 
Computer and Internet Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1820                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
schemes and require different decryption routines. Thus, the same virus may look 
completely different on different systems or even within different files. Other polymorphic 
viruses vary instruction sequences and use false commands in the attempt to thwart antivirus 
software. One of the most advanced polymorphic viruses uses a mutation engine and 
random-number generators to change the virus code and its decryption routine. 
Spanska.4250  is a type of polymorphic virus. This virus infects program files (files with .exe 
and .com extensions). When one of the programs is infected, the virus hides in the 
computer’s memory. Spanska.4250 remains in memory on the lookout to infect programs 
executed by users. Once Spanska.4250 carries out its infection the size of the infected 
programs will increase by 4250 bytes (the virus size). Moreover, the following message will 
be displayed: “(c) Spanska 97.” This virus uses an anti-tracing technique to make it more 
difficult to detect. In addition, it uses the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possible to 
find up to 366 different variants of this virus. 
 



:


polymorph virus
polymorph virus creat vari though fulli function copi of themselv as a wai to
avoid detect by antiviru softwar some polymorph virus us differ encrypt
comput and internet fraud financi transact
11820 2011 fraud examin manual
scheme and requir differ decrypt routin thu the same viru mai look
complet differ on differ system or even within differ file other polymorph
virus vari instruct sequenc and us fals command in the attempt to thwart antiviru
softwar on of the most advanc polymorph virus us a mutat engin and
randomnumb gener to chang the viru code and it decrypt routin
spanska4250 is a type of polymorph viru thi viru infect program file file with ex
and com extens when on of the program is infect the viru hide in the
comput memori spanska4250 remain in memori on the lookout to infect program
execut by user onc spanska4250 carri out it infect the size of the infect
program will increas by 4250 byte the viru size moreov the follow messag will
be displai c spanska 97 thi viru us an antitrac techniqu to make it more
difficult to detect in addit it us the system date to encrypt itself so it will be possibl to
find up to 366 differ variant of thi viru
