2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/COMPUTER AND INTERNET FRAUD/Computer Viruses/Virus Protection


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Computer and Internet Fraud


:


Virus Protection 
Computer users should take measures to protect their computers against viruses. Some of 
the steps that can be taken are: 
• Do not use a disk to boot your system. 
Financial Transactions  Computer and Internet Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1823 
• If you must boot your system from a disk, make sure it is properly labeled and 
continuously protected. 
• Don’t install shareware or other untested programs on your system, but if you do, don’t 
put them in the root directory. 
• In a network environment, don’t place untested programs on the server. 
• If you are sharing information on disks, ensure they only contain information and no 
executable files. 
• Use current antivirus software to detect potential viruses. 
• Back up all programs and files. 
• Write virus-free warranties and indemnities into your purchase orders and contracts. 
• Always write-protect your systems and program disks. 
• Teach computer users about computer viruses so that they can recognize them. 
• Always use caution when opening e-mail attachments. 
 



:


viru protect
comput user should take measur to protect their comput against virus some of
the step that can be taken ar
do not us a disk to boot your system
financi transact comput and internet fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11823
if you must boot your system from a disk make sure it is properli label and
continu protect
dont instal sharewar or other untest program on your system but if you do dont
put them in the root directori
in a network environ dont place untest program on the server
if you ar share inform on disk ensur thei onli contain inform and no
execut file
us current antiviru softwar to detect potenti virus
back up all program and file
write virusfre warranti and indemn into your purchas order and contract
alwai writeprotect your system and program disk
teach comput user about comput virus so that thei can recogn them
alwai us caution when open email attach
