2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/DIGITAL FORENSICS/Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics/Seizing Digital Evidence/EXAMINE AND DOCUMENT THE MACHINE’S SURROUNDINGS


:


Investigation


:


Digital Forensics


:


EXAMINE AND DOCUMENT THE MACHINE’S SURROUNDINGS 
The first step in the evidence collection process is to examine and document the machine’s 
surroundings. This includes collecting all printouts, disks, notes, and other physical evidence 
for further analysis. Document the scene with photographs or a diagram, depending on the 
complexity of the setup, remembering that it may be a year or longer before testimony about 
what the office looked like on the day of the seizure will be asked for in a legal proceeding.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.717 
When documenting the condition of the evidence, the examiner should consider: 
• Documenting what is on the screen, if the system is on. 
• Documenting any processes that are currently running. 
• Taking photographs of the various views of the equipment and media to document any 
damage or defects. 
• Taking photographs of the equipment’s physical connections. 
• Making a drawing of the location to document the layout and relative locations from 
which evidence was seized. 
 
Additionally, because many people have a habit of writing down or recording their 
passwords near their computers, examiners should look around for notes that may appear to 
be passwords. This may aid in discovering passwords needed to access encrypted data if the 
subject of the investigation is being uncooperative. 
 
Take good notes on the machine’s state at the ti me of the seizure. Record the time and date 
that the system was seized and the personnel involved in the seizure. The status of the 
system should also be noted. Was it on, off, or on standby? Was there anything unusual 
attached to the system? Was there any obvious damage? Did any files have to be saved? 
Also, if the computer was active, record any open applications. Make sure to start a chain of 
custody document and note each person and storage location through which each piece of 
evidence passes. 
 
In addition to documenting the machine’s state at the time of seizure, the examiners should 
document any serial numbers and other potential identifying markings (e.g., manufacturer, 
model number, asset tracking number, etc.), and he should photograph and diagram the 
system’s entire configuration. 
 



:


examin and document the machin surround
the first step in the evid collect process is to examin and document the machin
surround thi includ collect all printout disk note and other physic evid
for further analysi document the scene with photograph or a diagram depend on the
complex of the setup rememb that it mai be a year or longer befor testimoni about
what the offic look like on the dai of the seizur will be ask for in a legal proceed
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3717
when document the condit of the evid the examin should consid
document what is on the screen if the system is on
document ani process that ar current run
take photograph of the variou view of the equip and media to document ani
damag or defect
take photograph of the equip physic connect
make a draw of the locat to document the layout and rel locat from
which evid wa seiz
addition becaus mani peopl have a habit of write down or record their
password near their comput examin should look around for note that mai appear to
be password thi mai aid in discov password need to access encrypt data if the
subject of the investig is be uncoop
take good note on the machin state at the ti me of the seizur record the time and date
that the system wa seiz and the personnel involv in the seizur the statu of the
system should also be note wa it on off or on standbi wa there anyth unusu
attach to the system wa there ani obviou damag did ani file have to be save
also if the comput wa activ record ani open applic make sure to start a chain of
custodi document and note each person and storag locat through which each piec of
evid pass
in addit to document the machin state at the time of seizur the examin should
document ani serial number and other potenti identifi mark eg manufactur
model number asset track number etc and he should photograph and diagram the
system entir configur
