2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Introduction


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Introduction 
Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, and auditors often are called upon to provide 
testimony in criminal and civil prosecutions where their services can be used to support 
investigations of matters such as financial frauds, embezzlements, misapplication of funds, 
arson for profit, bankruptcy fraud, improper accounting practices, and tax evasion. Fraud 
examiners may also be used as defense witnesses or to support the defendant’s counsel on 
matters that involve accounting or audit issues. 
 
Experts can serve one of two roles in the trial process: testifying expert or consulting expert. 
Testifying expert witnesses give opinion testimony when specialized knowledge is needed to help 
the jury understand evidence or determine a fact in issue. Conversely, consulting experts typically 
do not testify at trial. Instead, they are hired to provide technical assistance to the attorney in 
preparing the case. Generally, both testifying and consulting experts play an ongoing part with 
the litigation process.  
 
Although experts serve one of two roles, they can perform various functions throughout the 
litigation process. Lawyers often count on testifying experts to help crystallize the judge or 
jury’s understanding of the case. In his book, Effective Expert Witnessing, author Jack V. Matson 
lists the four main functions of all expert testimony and offers advice on fulfilling each 
assigned duty: 
• Establish the facts. You must first develop a strategy to collect and examine the 
documentation in the case. The discovery process, which is a mechanism for full 
disclosure of all knowledge pertinent to the case, usually yields a vast amount of paper, 
which the expert then must sift through to make a preliminary classification of relevance. 
• Interpret the facts. Tie together cause and effect relationships with the data and the facts for 
the technical basis of your case. Do not be fooled by correlation that seemingly links cause 
and effect but holds no theoretical justification. 
• Comment on the opposing expert’s facts and opinions. Develop a good understanding of the 
opposing experts by reviewing their educational background and experience. Read their 
publications. Probe for weaknesses that your side might exploit. Oftentimes trials become 
a battle of the experts. Prepare for the battle with as much intelligence as you can muster. 
Take apart the opposition’s expert report, which represents the other side’s best case, 
piece by piece. Your attorney needs to know the most intimate details about the facts and 
opinions contained in that report. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.802  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Define the professional standards in the particular area of your opponent’s expertise. One of the most 
critically important ways an expert is used in trial is to define the “standard of care” 
exercised by fellow professionals in the field. Standard of care has been traditionally 
defined on the basis of judgment normally exercised by professionals in good standing. 
Additionally, the professional must be informed or aware of current practices and 
promulgation. Obsolete practices are now considered by the court to be negligent 
practices. Thus, professionals must exercise reasonable, informed judgment in carrying out 
their duties. You, as the expert, will be called upon to define the professional standard and 
to measure that against the standard of care exercised by the professional(s) on the other 
side. 
 
If called by the prosecution, examiners might testify to their findings, and if called by the 
defense, they might testify regarding opinions expressed by the prosecution’s expert — to 
create doubt in the jury’s mind about the credibility or weight to be given to that expert. 
 
Alternatively, an examiner might be called upon to give an opinion different from that reached 
by an equally credible expert on the other side. This might be due to different interpretations 
of the facts of the case. In some instances, given equally plausible alternatives, the case might 
be decided on whichever side has the most credible expert witness. 
 
Additionally, effective expert witnesses frequently share certain characteristics. Credibility is 
one such feature. To become a “credible” expert witness, one must be a member in good 
standing of the profession and usually be recognized as an authority in that profession or 
some specialized aspect of practice within it. 
 
Similarly, an expert witness in the area of accounting must have a thorough knowledge not 
only of generally accepted accounting principles, but also of current promulgations. The 
expert’s expertise often might involve special knowledge of a specific industry. In this case, 
the expert should be aware of recent developments and any important issues within that area. 
 
The expert also must be analytical and be able to work with incomplete data. The expert, 
however, might not always be able to recognize when data is incomplete. As a result, the 
expert might make assumptions that will then be open for interpretation or attack. If all data 
have not been made available, then the opposing counsel might be able to offer alternate 
scenarios that are more plausible under the circumstances, thus discrediting the expert. 
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.803 



:


introduct
certifi fraud examin account and auditor often ar call upon to provid
testimoni in crimin and civil prosecut where their servic can be us to support
investig of matter such as financi fraud embezzl misappl of fund
arson for profit bankruptci fraud improp account practic and tax evas fraud
examin mai also be us as defens wit or to support the defend counsel on
matter that involv account or audit issu
expert can serv on of two role in the trial process testifi expert or consult expert
testifi expert wit give opinion testimoni when special knowledg is need to help
the juri understand evid or determin a fact in issu convers consult expert typic
do not testifi at trial instead thei ar hire to provid technic assist to the attornei in
prepar the case gener both testifi and consult expert plai an ongo part with
the litig process
although expert serv on of two role thei can perform variou function throughout the
litig process lawyer often count on testifi expert to help crystal the judg or
juri understand of the case in hi book effect expert wit author jack v matson
list the four main function of all expert testimoni and offer advic on fulfil each
assign duti
establish the fact you must first develop a strategi to collect and examin the
document in the case the discoveri process which is a mechan for full
disclosur of all knowledg pertin to the case usual yield a vast amount of paper
which the expert then must sift through to make a preliminari classif of relev
interpret the fact tie togeth caus and effect relationship with the data and the fact for
the technic basi of your case do not be fool by correl that seemingli link caus
and effect but hold no theoret justif
comment on the oppos expert fact and opinion develop a good understand of the
oppos expert by review their educ background and experi read their
public probe for weak that your side might exploit oftentim trial becom
a battl of the expert prepar for the battl with as much intellig as you can muster
take apart the opposit expert report which repres the other side best case
piec by piec your attornei need to know the most intim detail about the fact and
opinion contain in that report
testifi as an expert wit law
2802 2011 fraud examin manual
defin the profession standard in the particular area of your oppon expertis on of the most
critic import wai an expert is us in trial is to defin the standard of care
exercis by fellow profession in the field standard of care ha been tradition
defin on the basi of judgment normal exercis by profession in good stand
addition the profession must be inform or awar of current practic and
promulg obsolet practic ar now consid by the court to be neglig
practic thu profession must exercis reason inform judgment in carri out
their duti you as the expert will be call upon to defin the profession standard and
to measur that against the standard of care exercis by the profession on the other
side
if call by the prosecut examin might testifi to their find and if call by the
defens thei might testifi regard opinion express by the prosecut expert to
creat doubt in the juri mind about the credibl or weight to be given to that expert
altern an examin might be call upon to give an opinion differ from that reach
by an equal credibl expert on the other side thi might be due to differ interpret
of the fact of the case in some instanc given equal plausibl altern the case might
be decid on whichev side ha the most credibl expert wit
addition effect expert wit frequent share certain characterist credibl is
on such featur to becom a credibl expert wit on must be a member in good
stand of the profess and usual be recogn as an author in that profess or
some special aspect of practic within it
similarli an expert wit in the area of account must have a thorough knowledg not
onli of gener accept account principl but also of current promulg the
expert expertis often might involv special knowledg of a specif industri in thi case
the expert should be awar of recent develop and ani import issu within that area
the expert also must be analyt and be abl to work with incomplet data the expert
howev might not alwai be abl to recogn when data is incomplet as a result the
expert might make assumpt that will then be open for interpret or attack if all data
have not been made avail then the oppos counsel might be abl to offer altern
scenario that ar more plausibl under the circumst thu discredit the expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2803
