2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Preparing a Report/Proposed Changes to Expert Witness Rules Related to Expert Witness Discovery


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Proposed Changes to Expert Witness Rules Related to Expert Witness Discovery 
Recently, the Judicial Conference of the United States’ Advisory Committee on Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedures proposed significant amendments to Rule 26. If adopted, the amendments 
would significantly change the discoverability of the data or information considered by a 
testifying expert. This section examines the proposals.  
 
Although almost everything a testifying expert says or writes is subject to discovery by 
opposing counsel under current law, the revisions would prohibit the discovery of draft expert 
reports and limit discovery of attorney-expert communications. More specifically, the 
amendments would, among other things, make the following three changes: 
• Communications between counsel and retained testifying experts would generally be 
protected from disclosure or discovery. This amendment would offer work product 
protections similar to those already available to consulting experts.  
• Draft reports and disclosures required by Rule 26(a)(2) of any testifying expert would no 
longer be discoverable.  
• Rule 26 reports produced by a testifying expert would only need to include the “facts or 
data considered” by the expert. Currently, Rule 26(a)(2) reads “data or other information 
considered,” which courts have interpreted to include everything communicated by 
counsel to the expert. Thus, the amendment emphasizes that experts should only include 
factual information in their reports.  
 
These amendments are expected to be adopted and become effective on Dec. 1, 2010, as 
amended. 
 
 



:


propos chang to expert wit rule relat to expert wit discoveri
recent the judici confer of the unit state advisori committe on feder rule
of civil procedur propos signific amend to rule 26 if adopt the amend
would significantli chang the discover of the data or inform consid by a
testifi expert thi section examin the propos
although almost everyth a testifi expert sai or write is subject to discoveri by
oppos counsel under current law the revis would prohibit the discoveri of draft expert
report and limit discoveri of attorneyexpert commun more specif the
amend would among other thing make the follow three chang
commun between counsel and retain testifi expert would gener be
protect from disclosur or discoveri thi amend would offer work product
protect similar to those alreadi avail to consult expert
draft report and disclosur requir by rule 26a2 of ani testifi expert would no
longer be discover
rule 26 report produc by a testifi expert would onli need to includ the fact or
data consid by the expert current rule 26a2 read data or other inform
consid which court have interpret to includ everyth commun by
counsel to the expert thu the amend emphas that expert should onli includ
factual inform in their report
these amend ar expect to be adopt and becom effect on dec 1 2010 as
amend
