2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS/Direct Examination/Direct Testimony Considerations


:


Law


:


Testifying as an Expert Witness


:


Direct Testimony Considerations 
The purpose of direct examination is to enable counsel for the side you represent to draw out 
the evidence to prove the case. Most likely, this will only be a reiteration of what previously 
has been discussed with your counsel outside the courtroom. It is still very important, 
however, to refresh your memory beforehand by reference to anything you may have read, 
written, or given in evidence on the case. 
 
Direct examination is the most organized aspect of the trial; it is the stage in which the 
expert’s credibility must be established with the judge or jury. According to the concept of the 
primary memory, people remember best what they hear first and last. This often is a useful 
idea to employ in giving or structuring evidence. Another noteworthy point is that the jurors 
often have limited attention spans in a long trial; thus, it is often useful to use a 
“grab/give/conclude” method of presenting evidence. 
 
To a witness, the interpretation of questions and the ability to listen are crucial skills. Even 
though the witness might already have gone through a mock direct examination, it is critical 
that each question be carefully evaluated again — the witness should reflect upon the questions 
asked and not anticipate them (they might have been changed, anyway, since the time of 
rehearsal). 
 
The answers to all questions should be clear and concise, and, where complex terms are used, 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.820  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
they should be clarified. Similarly, explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms and avoid 
professional jargon because the fact finders might not be familiar with esoteric or technical 
terminology. 
 
Use of notes should be limited as much as possible to maintain eye contact. 
 
Schedules, if any, should be described accurately and succinctly in easily understood terms. 
Schedules are, by their nature, concise documents and should be described in that manner.  
 
If opinions are given, they should be stated with conviction. 
 
Certain standards for Certified Fraud Examiners are found in the Code of Professional Ethics 
(please see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual). 
Specifically, Certified Fraud Examiners are prohibited from expressing opinions as to the guilt 
or innocence of any person or party. This is not to say that the expert witness cannot testify to 
the badges, hallmarks, or characteristics of fraud found in the case. It also does not mean that 
the Certified Fraud Examiner cannot testify that, based on the evidence, he believes the 
accused might have committed the offense. However, the ultimate guilt or innocence of any 
person or party is the sole responsibility of the judge and jury. The Certified Fraud Examiner 
typically will not be permitted to testify to the ultimate fact questions. 
 
 



:


direct testimoni consider
the purpos of direct examin is to enabl counsel for the side you repres to draw out
the evid to prove the case most like thi will onli be a reiter of what previous
ha been discuss with your counsel outsid the courtroom it is still veri import
howev to refresh your memori beforehand by refer to anyth you mai have read
written or given in evid on the case
direct examin is the most organ aspect of the trial it is the stage in which the
expert credibl must be establish with the judg or juri accord to the concept of the
primari memori peopl rememb best what thei hear first and last thi often is a us
idea to emploi in give or structur evid anoth noteworthi point is that the juror
often have limit attent span in a long trial thu it is often us to us a
grabgiveconclud method of present evid
to a wit the interpret of question and the abil to listen ar crucial skill even
though the wit might alreadi have gone through a mock direct examin it is critic
that each question be carefulli evalu again the wit should reflect upon the question
ask and not anticip them thei might have been chang anywai sinc the time of
rehears
the answer to all question should be clear and concis and where complex term ar us
testifi as an expert wit law
2820 2011 fraud examin manual
thei should be clarifi similarli explain complex concept in a layperson term and avoid
profession jargon becaus the fact finder might not be familiar with esoter or technic
terminolog
us of note should be limit as much as possibl to maintain ey contact
schedul if ani should be describ accur and succinctli in easili understood term
schedul ar by their natur concis document and should be describ in that manner
if opinion ar given thei should be state with convict
certain standard for certifi fraud examin ar found in the code of profession ethic
pleas see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
specif certifi fraud examin ar prohibit from express opinion as to the guilt
or innoc of ani person or parti thi is not to sai that the expert wit cannot testifi to
the badg hallmark or characterist of fraud found in the case it also doe not mean that
the certifi fraud examin cannot testifi that base on the evid he believ the
accus might have commit the offens howev the ultim guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti is the sole respons of the judg and juri the certifi fraud examin
typic will not be permit to testifi to the ultim fact question
