2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/Basic Concepts of the Law/Substantive and Procedural Law


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Substantive and Procedural Law 
Additionally, in the United States, there are two main categories of law: substantive law and 
procedural law. Substantive law is comprised of the basic laws of rights and duties (contract 
law, tort law, criminal law, etc.) as opposed to procedural law, which involves rules governing 
pleadings, evidence, jurisdiction, and so on. If someone says an act is “against the law,” he 
means substantive law, which includes statutes and ordinances at every level; common law, or 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.102  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
case law, from all the various courts; and state and federal constitutions.  
 
Procedural law sets out the rules of the legal system, including the procedures to be followed in 
hearing a grievance. This means deadlines, filing requirements, steps to follow in bringing a 
claim, rules of evidence, and so on. Substantive law sets the terms of any dispute; procedural 
law dictates how a legal dispute is handled. 
 
In federal courts, procedures are governed by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.  
 
There are special procedural laws governing appeals courts and evidence. The Federal Rules of 
Appellate Procedure are collected in the U.S. Code (following Title 28); individual courts of 
appeal may supplement the general rules with their own publications. These are listed under 
the name of the court (e.g., Appeals to the Fifth Circuit Manual). 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence cover what counts as evidence, the conditions of its admissibility 
in court, and the methods which authorities must use in acquiring and processing evidence.  
 
Each state (and some counties) publishes its own procedural rules. Most states follow the 
general outline of the federal rules, but procedural rules can be vastly different. If you have a 
specific question about a procedural or evidentiary rule at the state or county level, consult a 
copy of the rules for the particular jurisdiction or your attorney. 
 



:


substant and procedur law
addition in the unit state there ar two main categori of law substant law and
procedur law substant law is compris of the basic law of right and duti contract
law tort law crimin law etc as oppos to procedur law which involv rule govern
plead evid jurisdict and so on if someon sai an act is against the law he
mean substant law which includ statut and ordin at everi level common law or
overview of the unit state legal system law
2102 2011 fraud examin manual
case law from all the variou court and state and feder constitut
procedur law set out the rule of the legal system includ the procedur to be follow in
hear a grievanc thi mean deadlin file requir step to follow in bring a
claim rule of evid and so on substant law set the term of ani disput procedur
law dictat how a legal disput is handl
in feder court procedur ar govern by the feder rule of civil procedur and the
feder rule of crimin procedur
there ar special procedur law govern appeal court and evid the feder rule of
appel procedur ar collect in the us code follow titl 28 individu court of
appeal mai supplement the gener rule with their own public these ar list under
the name of the court eg appeal to the fifth circuit manual
the feder rule of evid cover what count as evid the condit of it admiss
in court and the method which author must us in acquir and process evid
each state and some counti publish it own procedur rule most state follow the
gener outlin of the feder rule but procedur rule can be vastli differ if you have a
specif question about a procedur or evidentiari rule at the state or counti level consult a
copi of the rule for the particular jurisdict or your attornei
