2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/Civil and Criminal Actions for Fraud/Criminal Versus Civil Actions for Fraud


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Criminal Versus Civil Actions for Fraud 
Fraud may be prosecuted criminally, civilly, or both, in sequence or simultaneously, but there 
are a number of differences between criminal and civil actions with which the Certified Fraud 
Examiner should be familiar. The following is a brief description of some of the differences 
between civil and criminal actions. More information about each action is contained in the 
chapters on Criminal Prosecutions and the Civil Justice System. 
 
One key difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns who files the suit. 
Criminal actions for fraud are brought by the government acting through the prosecutor’s 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.111 
office. The prosecutor has almost unbridled discretion in such matters as whether to bring a 
criminal case, what charges to file, who to charge, and whether to try the case or negotiate a 
plea bargain. Conversely, civil actions may be brought by private individuals or organizations, 
usually without the involvement or permission of the government or court. However, 
corporate civil liability may be enforced by both private individuals as well as government 
agencies (e.g., the SEC). Moreover, a civil action usually involves a dispute over something 
(such as the terms of a contract) or a claim that one part has violated a legal duty owed to it 
by the other party, which can be generally referred to as tort actions. 
 
Another key distinction concerns who investigates the cases. Criminal cases are investigated 
by law enforcement agencies, at times with the assistance of the prosecutor’s office and the 
grand jury. The grand jury  is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas —
 legal orders to produce documents, witnesses, or other things — for testimony and documents 
to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. Law enforcement agencies and the 
prosecution can therefore subpoena evidence before charges are filed to determine whether 
an offense has occurred. In civil actions brought by private parties, however, there generally is 
no opportunity to compel the production of testimony or other evidence until a complaint is 
filed. 
 
Moreover, criminal investigations and prosecutions for fraud are subject to constitutional 
limitations, such as those in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments, and other procedural 
rules to protect the rights of the defendant, including the requirement to give Miranda 
warnings. In general, these requirements have limited applicability to civil actions. Violations 
of constitutional rights in a criminal case can result in the “suppression,” or exclusion, of any 
evidence or statement obtained by such means, or in some instances, in dismissal of the 
indictment. 
 
Also, the burden of proof differs. The burden of proof in a criminal case is always beyond a 
reasonable doubt. In civil cases, however, the burden of proof is lower, usually a preponderance of 
the evidence.  
 
Another difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns the outcomes of 
each type of case. Criminal cases are punished by outcomes such as imprisonment, fine, order 
of restitution, probation, and community service.  
 
Civil cases, if successful, result in an award of civil remedies. In general, remedy is a term used 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.112  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to refer to any process, procedure, or consequence of a legal wrong by which a victim of 
misconduct can be redressed for his loss.  
 
Civil remedies generally are of three principal types: monetary (damages), declaratory, and 
equitable. Monetary (damages) remedies are remedies for the victim’s recovery of money 
damages for the injury. Declaratory remedies  are remedies in which the court states or declares 
the rights of the parties. For example, when a court interprets a will or a contract or when a 
court decides who owns personal property, its decisions are declaratory in nature. Equitable 
remedies are remedies used when the legal remedy by itself would be inadequate compensation 
for the wronged suffered. One of the primary equitable remedies is the injunction, which is a 
court order by which a party is required to perform, or is restrained from performing, a 
specific act. 
 



:


crimin versu civil action for fraud
fraud mai be prosecut crimin civilli or both in sequenc or simultan but there
ar a number of differ between crimin and civil action with which the certifi fraud
examin should be familiar the follow is a brief descript of some of the differ
between civil and crimin action more inform about each action is contain in the
chapter on crimin prosecut and the civil justic system
on kei differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern who file the suit
crimin action for fraud ar brought by the govern act through the prosecutor
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2111
offic the prosecutor ha almost unbridl discret in such matter as whether to bring a
crimin case what charg to file who to charg and whether to try the case or negoti a
plea bargain convers civil action mai be brought by privat individu or organ
usual without the involv or permiss of the govern or court howev
corpor civil liabil mai be enforc by both privat individu as well as govern
agenc eg the sec moreov a civil action usual involv a disput over someth
such as the term of a contract or a claim that on part ha violat a legal duti ow to it
by the other parti which can be gener refer to as tort action
anoth kei distinct concern who investig the case crimin case ar investig
by law enforc agenc at time with the assist of the prosecutor offic and the
grand juri the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena
legal order to produc document wit or other thing for testimoni and document
to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur law enforc agenc and the
prosecut can therefor subpoena evid befor charg ar file to determin whether
an offens ha occur in civil action brought by privat parti howev there gener is
no opportun to compel the product of testimoni or other evid until a complaint is
file
moreov crimin investig and prosecut for fraud ar subject to constitut
limit such as those in the fourth fifth and sixth amend and other procedur
rule to protect the right of the defend includ the requir to give miranda
warn in gener these requir have limit applic to civil action violat
of constitut right in a crimin case can result in the suppress or exclus of ani
evid or statement obtain by such mean or in some instanc in dismiss of the
indict
also the burden of proof differ the burden of proof in a crimin case is alwai beyond a
reason doubt in civil case howev the burden of proof is lower usual a preponder of
the evid
anoth differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern the outcom of
each type of case crimin case ar punish by outcom such as imprison fine order
of restitut probat and commun servic
civil case if success result in an award of civil remedi in gener remedi is a term us
overview of the unit state legal system law
2112 2011 fraud examin manual
to refer to ani process procedur or consequ of a legal wrong by which a victim of
misconduct can be redress for hi loss
civil remedi gener ar of three princip type monetari damag declaratori and
equit monetari damag remedi ar remedi for the victim recoveri of monei
damag for the injuri declaratori remedi ar remedi in which the court state or declar
the right of the parti for exampl when a court interpret a will or a contract or when a
court decid who own person properti it decis ar declaratori in natur equit
remedi ar remedi us when the legal remedi by itself would be inadequ compens
for the wrong suffer on of the primari equit remedi is the injunct which is a
court order by which a parti is requir to perform or is restrain from perform a
specif act
