2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Signed Statements/Key Points in Signed Statements


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Key Points in Signed Statements 
There is no legal requirement that a statement must be in the handwriting or wording of the 
declarant. Because the examiner usually knows how to draft a valid statement, to let a 
confessor draft the statement is generally not a good idea. A statement’s wording should be 
precise. 
 
Declarants should read and sign the statement without undue delay. Do not ask the 
confessor to sign the statement; instead, say “Please sign here.” Although there is no legal 
requirement, it is a good idea to have two people witness the signing of a statement. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.922   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There should not be more than one written statement for each offense. If facts are inadvertently 
omitted, they can later be added to the original statement as an addendum. For legal 
purposes, prepare separate statements for unrelated offenses. This rule applies because the 
target might be tried more than once—once for each offense. Preserve all notes taken during 
an interview, especially those concerning a confession. Having access to pertinent notes can 
aid in a cross-examination regarding the validity of a signed statement. Stenographic notes, if 
any, also should be preserved. Once a conf ession is obtained, substantiate it through 
additional investigation, if necessary. 
 
 



:


kei point in sign statement
there is no legal requir that a statement must be in the handwrit or word of the
declar becaus the examin usual know how to draft a valid statement to let a
confessor draft the statement is gener not a good idea a statement word should be
precis
declar should read and sign the statement without undu delai do not ask the
confessor to sign the statement instead sai pleas sign here although there is no legal
requir it is a good idea to have two peopl wit the sign of a statement
report standard investig
3922 2011 fraud examin manual
there should not be more than on written statement for each offens if fact ar inadvert
omit thei can later be ad to the origin statement as an addendum for legal
purpos prepar separ statement for unrel offens thi rule appli becaus the
target might be tri more than onceonc for each offens preserv all note taken dure
an interview especi those concern a confess have access to pertin note can
aid in a crossexamin regard the valid of a sign statement stenograph note if
ani also should be preserv onc a conf ession is obtain substanti it through
addit investig if necessari
