2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Engagement Contracts


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Engagement Contracts 
Certified Fraud Examiners are sometimes hired for specific engagements. The examiner 
should always prepare an engagement letter so that he and the client have a clear 
understanding of the objectives of the assignment. If the terms of the engagement are 
defined in a contract, any later dispute becomes easier to resolve. 
 
According to the Code of Professional Ethics, a Certified Fraud Examiner: 
• Will only accept assignments for which there is a reasonable expectation that the work 
will be completed with professional competence. 
• Will obtain evidence or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any 
opinion rendered. 
• Will disclose all material matters discovered during the course of an examination that, if 
omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
The engagement letter should be written with these standards in mind. The first question 
one must answer in preparing a contract is: Who is one’s client? Has one been engaged by 
the plaintiff, the defendant, or their counsel?  Often the engagement letter will be addressed 
to attorneys. This can be either corporate or outside counsel.  
 
There are two primary forms of engagement letters: the long form and the short form. The 
long form spells out the details of what examination techniques you intend to follow, while 
the short form does not. See the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section for examples 
of each type of engagement contracts. 
 



:


engag contract
certifi fraud examin ar sometim hire for specif engag the examin
should alwai prepar an engag letter so that he and the client have a clear
understand of the object of the assign if the term of the engag ar
defin in a contract ani later disput becom easier to resolv
accord to the code of profession ethic a certifi fraud examin
will onli accept assign for which there is a reason expect that the work
will be complet with profession compet
will obtain evid or other document to establish a reason basi for ani
opinion render
will disclos all materi matter discov dure the cours of an examin that if
omit could caus a distort of the fact
the engag letter should be written with these standard in mind the first question
on must answer in prepar a contract is who is on client ha on been engag by
the plaintiff the defend or their counsel often the engag letter will be address
to attornei thi can be either corpor or outsid counsel
there ar two primari form of engag letter the long form and the short form the
long form spell out the detail of what examin techniqu you intend to follow while
the short form doe not see the sampl report in the appendix to thi section for exampl
of each type of engag contract
