2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


MONEY LAUNDERING 
 
Introduction 
Money laundering is the disguising of the existence, nature, source, ownership, location, and 
disposition of property derived from criminal activity. Although it is not currently possible 
to quantify the total volume of money laundered globally or in the U.S., it is clearly an 
enormous problem existing within every financial system. Nevertheless, the continuing 
demand to know how much money is laundered annually has led many organizations to 
calculate and offer their own estimations. For example, the International Monetary Fund 
estimated that money laundering caused a total monetary loss of $590 billion to $1.5 trillion 
globally in 1996, the United Nations estimated a loss of $500 billion to $1 trillion globally in 
2005, and a 2007 KPMG survey found that money-laundering flows exceed $1 trillion per 
year. 
 
The “washing” of money includes all forms of illegal activities. In most instances the goal is 
to conduct transactions in cash (currency) in such a way as to conceal the true nature of 
transactions. Problems occur regarding large volumes of cash, transporting it, converting 
small denomination bills to larger denomination bills, and converting cash into assets that 
can be invested or spent. Money laundering is generally accomplished in three stages: (1) 
placement; (2) layering; and (3) integration. 
 
 
The Money Laundering Process 
 
Placement 
Placement of funds into a financial institution is the initial step in the process. It is at this 
step that legislation has been developed to prevent launderers from depositing or converting 
large amounts of cash at financial institutions or taking cash out of the country. Money 
laundering schemes are most often detected at this stage.  
 
Placement can take any number of forms. If the money launderer has a large amount of 
cash, he can move the money out of the country in a suitcase and deposit it in an off-shore 
bank. Another choice is to break up the money into smaller amounts and deposit it into 
bank accounts or purchase cashier’s checks, traveler’s checks, or money orders. The process 
of breaking transactions up into smaller amounts to evade the reporting requirements is 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1602                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
known as smurfing. A sophisticated smurfing operation might involve hundreds of bank 
accounts in dozens of cities. 
 
Layering 
If the placement of the initial funds goes undetected, financial transactions can be designed 
in complex patterns in order to prevent detection. This stage of the process is referred to as 
layering  and represents the most difficult area of detection. Once the funds have been 
deposited into a financial institution, a launderer can move the funds around by using layers 
of financial transactions designed to confuse the audit trail. The money can even be 
transported out of the country through wire transfers. 
 
Integration 
The final stage in the laundering process is the integration  of the money back into the 
economy in such a way as to make it appear to be a legitimate business transaction. This 
stage of the process is also difficult to detect; however, if the integration process creates a 
paper trail — such as deeds for real estate, invoices, loan documents, Currency Transaction 
Reports (CTRs), or checks—and if there is cooperation from informants or foreign entities, 
then the chances of detection are improved. 
 
A money laundering scheme cannot be successful until the paper trail is eliminated or made 
so complex that the flow of illegal income cannot be easily traced. The number of steps used 
to launder funds depends on how much distance the money launderer wishes to put between 
the illegally earned cash and the laundered asset into which it is converted. A greater number 
of steps increases the complexity of tracing the funds, but it also increases the length of the 
paper trail and the chance that the transaction will be reported. 
 
The object of money laundering is not only to disguise the source of illegal funds, but also to 
convert large stores of currency into other assets. In some cases, illegal funds are spent on 
personal assets, such as homes, cars, jewelry, and furniture. But the typical money launderer 
will not dispose of all his illegal currency in this manner; he will want to have a certain 
amount of liquid reserves for spending. Keeping large bundles of cash is inefficient because 
they are difficult to hide and transport. Therefore, money launderers will often convert 
substantial portions of their currency into negotiable instruments such as cashier’s checks 
and money orders, which are routinely issued by financial institutions. Criminals prefer these 
negotiable instruments for two reasons. First, cashier’s checks and money orders are bearer 
instruments, and the holder can use them or deposit them without having to prove the 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1603 
source of the funds. Second, they are “liquid” assets because the holder can use  
them immediately. 
 
The following is an example of how a money laundering scheme operates.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Alberto Barrera, dubbed Papa Smurf by the federal agents investigating him, ran a rather 
sophisticated smurfing operation out of Miami involving bank accounts in cities all over the 
country. Barrera and his accomplices would fly to Phoenix, Denver, Omaha, Portland, and 
other cities. When they arrived they would immediately travel to various banks. The scheme 
would begin with the purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders in amounts less than 
$10,000 (to avoid federal report ing requirements). This would be repeated several times at 
different banks. The “smurfs” would then travel to another city where some of the 
previously purchased check and money orders would be deposited in accounts controlled by 
Barrera. Then more purchases of cashier’s checks and money orders would be made before 
the group traveled on to the next city. Once the money was converted or deposited, much of 
it was transferred to off-shore banks.  
 
Using a Legitimate Business to Launder Funds 
One of the most comm on methods of laundering funds is to filter the money through a 
legitimate business, otherwise known as a “front” business. A front business can be a very 
effective way to launder money because it provides a safe place for organizing and managing 
criminal activity, where the comings and goings of large numbers of people will not arouse 
undue suspicion. In addition, a front that does legitimate business provides cover for 
delivery and transportation related to illegal activity. The expenses from illegal activity can be 
attributed to the legitimate enterprise, and illegal revenues can be easily placed into the 
enterprise. 
 
The three methods most commonly used to hide assets or launder money through a front 
business are: overstatement of reported revenues, overstatement of reported expenses, and 
balance sheet laundering. 
 
Overstatement of Reported Revenues 
Overstating revenues, also known as income statement laundering, occurs when the money 
launderer records more income on the books of a business than is actually generated by that 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1604                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. The fictitious revenue accounts for the illegal funds that are secretly inserted into 
the company.  
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars encourages customers to pay with cash. If the customer pays in cash, 
he receives a discount that might be as high as 25 percent. The invoice, however, makes 
no mention of this cash discount. The company reports the full sales amount as income. 
Depending on the number of cars sold, the company can launder thousands of dollars 
in illegal income. 
 
Overstatement of Reported Expenses 
The disadvantage of overstating revenues is that taxes will be due on the reported income. 
Therefore, if a company overstates its revenue, it will also want to overstate its expenses to 
offset its tax liability. The fictitious expenses also enable the perpetrator to siphon money 
out of the business in order to make payoffs, buy illegal goods, or invest in other  
criminal ventures. 
 
Overstating expenses can be accomplished very easily by reporting payments for supplies 
never received, professional services never rendered, or wages for fictitious employees. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars reports wages for three mechanics and an assistant manager who do 
not exist. The company also reports payments of over $200,000 a year to several 
lawyers, accountants, and other “consultants” who do little, if any, actual work. 
 
Income statement laundering, which includes both overstated revenues and expenses, can be 
difficult to detect. When artificial price inflation is applied in moderate percentages to goods 
and services whose market value is difficult to establish (e.g., artwork, used cars, consulting 
fees, advertising expenses), detection is exceedingly difficult without inside information. 
Complete fabrication of transactions, on the other hand, or creation of “ghost” employees is 
somewhat easier to spot. 
 
Depositing Cash and Writing Checks in Excess of Reported Revenues and Expenses (Balance Sheet Laundering) 
Rather than attempting to disguise money as normal business revenue, excess funds can 
simply be deposited into the bank account of the business. This technique is known as 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1605 
balance sheet laundering because it is independent of the money that flows in and out of  
the business. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars deposits an additional $30,000 per month in its account although 
there are no recorded sales for this amount. At the end of the year, the company has an 
extra $360,000 in cash in its account. 
 
This type of scheme can be detected by examining the revenue records of the business. 
Every legitimate asset in a company’s possession had to have come from somewhere — if not 
from revenues then from a limited number of other credible alternatives. The basic 
alternative sources are loans, sale of property or equipment, and capital investments from 
shareholders. All of these transactions require significant documentary evidence, which the 
examiner should seek out to explain any suspicious infusion of cash into a suspect business. 
 
Favorite Businesses for Hiding or Laundering Money 
In general terms, the businesses chosen for money laundering possess one or more of the 
following characteristics:  
• Revenue — A revenue base that is difficult to measure because most revenue comes from 
cash transactions with a highly variable amount per customer. This allows extra money 
to be brought into the business and disguised as revenue. 
• Expense — Expenses that are variable and difficult to measure can enable the launderer 
to extract money from the front business without giving rise to undue suspicion.  
• History — Historical ties either with the ethnic base of a particular criminal group or with 
industries that have traditionally served as a base for criminal activity.  
 
Bars, Restaurants, and Night Clubs 
Businesses that are commonly used to front money laundering operations include bars, 
restaurants, and nightclubs. These businesses charge relatively high prices, and customers 
vary widely in their purchases. Sales are generally in cash, and it is notoriously difficult to 
match the cost of providing food, liquor, and entertainment with the revenues they produce. 
Fast food restaurants are also frequently used to front for money laundering operations. 
Although they tend to charge lower prices than other types of restaurants, most of their sales 
are made in cash, and expenses can be easily inflated.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1606                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Vending Machines 
Vending machine operations also possess many characteristics favorable to a money 
laundering operation. They have a highly variable and difficult to measure volume of cash 
receipts, and in large operations there is a fair amount of flexibility with various 
transportation, installation, and promotion expenses, providing cover for the withdrawal of 
laundered funds.  
 
Wholesale Distribution 
Wholesale distribution businesses have historically been a prominent part of money 
laundering. The revenues in a wholesaling business are not typically as flexible as in food 
service and vending machine operations, but with a diverse product line and falsified 
invoices, it is still possible to inject a good deal of illegal cash into the business. More 
importantly, the industry is ideal for money laundering from the standpoint of expenses. The 
activities required to run this kind of business are so diverse and difficult to measure that 
expenses are easy to inflate. Furthermore, a wholesale business’s buildings, warehouses, 
transportation fleet, and its contact with retail establishments are all attractive factors. Many 
of the classic criminal activities (such as drugs, fencing, and contraband) are themselves 
nothing more than distribution operations and can hide behind this type of business cover.  
 
The Real Estate Industry 
Money launderers often use the real estate industry to launder illicitly obtained money. 
Generally, the real estate industry is attractive to money launderers for various reasons. For 
example, the vast array of financial transactions linked to real estate provides money 
launderers an exceptional range of options for abusing these procedures to launder and use 
illegally obtained funds. In addition, real estate transactions often involve multiple parties 
(such as brokers, agents, and appraisers), which can obscure the source of investment funds 
and the identity of the true owner. Finally, money launderers may earn additional profits 
from introducing illicit funds into the real estate industry, especially in vibrant real  
estate markets.   
 
Although there is a vast number of methods to launder money in the real estate industry, 
there are a few common schemes that warrant identification and discussion, including: 
• Loan-back schemes 
• Back-to-back loan schemes 
• Shell companies 
• Appraisal fraud 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1607 
• Monetary instruments 
• Mortgage schemes 
• Indirect investments in the real estate industry 
 
LOAN-BACK SCHEMES 
Money launderers often use loan-back schemes to finance the purchase of properties directly 
or indirectly through purchasing shares in property investment funds. In a typical loan-back 
scheme, money launderers will deposit illicit funds in an overseas entity that they own and 
then the entity loans the funds back to the launderers. The purpose of the loan is to make 
the money source appear legitimate and to conceal the parties’ identities or the nature of the 
financial transactions associated with the loans.  
 
BACK-TO-BACK LOAN SCHEMES 
As with loan-back schemes, money launderers often use back-to-back loan schemes to 
purchase property. In a back-to-back loan scheme, a money launderer obtains a loan by 
presenting collateral, which originated from illicit funds, to a financial institution. Like the 
loan-back scheme, this technique gives the loaned money the appearance of a genuine loan.  
 
SHELL COMPANIES 
Money launderers often use shell companies, which are discussed in more detail below, to 
purchase real estate. Generally defined, shell companies are business entities, including 
limited liability companies, trusts, business trusts, and corporations, without active business 
or significant assets. Because there is a lack of transparency in the formation of shell 
companies, money launderers often use them to hide the identity of the true owner, the 
source of the money, or the destination of the money. 
 
APPRAISAL FRAUD 
Appraisal fraud is often associated with money laundering schemes. Money launderers may 
purchase properties to launder money or may use illicit funds to service the interest on the 
debts. Such schemes can conceal the true identity of the property owners and the true origin 
of the funds used in the transaction.  
 
Appraisal fraud occurs where appraisers fail to accurately evaluate the property, or when the 
appraiser deliberately becomes party to a scheme to defraud the lender, the borrower, or 
both. A common technique is the over- or under-valuation of property, which consists of 
buying/selling property at a price above/below its market value. In addition to manipulating 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1608                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
appraisals, money launderers also over-value property through a series of subsequent sales, 
each time at a higher price, which tend to conceal the true purposes of the transactions. 
 
MONETARY INSTRUMENTS 
In many instances, money launderers purchase, build, or renovate property with cash, wire 
transfers, or other payable-through accounts. This allows the integration of large sums of 
illicit money into legal financial systems. Later, if sold, it is difficult to relate the transaction 
to any criminal activity and therefore, successfully conceals the true origin of the illicit funds 
and their ownership.   
 
MORTGAGE SCHEMES 
Often, money launderers will use illicit funds to pay the interest or repay the principal on 
mortgage loans, and in so doing, the illicit income is converted into seemingly legitimate 
profits when the property is sold. Mortgage schemes also involve under- and over-valuation 
of property. For example, in a common under-valuation scheme, a money launderer will 
under-value the purchase price of property, obtain a mortgage loan for the under-valued 
amount, use the loan to pay for the under-valued price, and pay the excess amount under the 
table with illicit funds.  
 
INDIRECT INVESTMENTS IN THE REAL ESTATE INDUSTRY 
Indirect investments, which are those in which the investor has no direct control over the 
assets or investment vehicle, in the real estate industry offer opportunities to conceal an 
investor’s identification and monetary sources primarily because multiple parties are involved 
with the process.    
 
ATMs 
Law enforcement officials are also reporting an  increasing use of automatic teller machines 
(ATMs) to launder money. ATMs can be purchased for as little as $3,000. Money launderers 
purchase the machines and place them either in establishments they control or in legitimate 
businesses. The machines work the same as any other ATM machines, and all transactions 
are legitimate. The money launderer simply fills the machine with cash from illegal activities. 
The customer uses the machine and never realizes the source of the cash. 
 
The ATM banking system debits the cardholders account and credits the ATM owner’s bank 
account. At the end of the month, the launderer receives a bank statement showing funds 
being deposited from a legitimate financial institution. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1609 
This option is attractive for money launderers because there are currently no regulations 
governing the use and operation of privately-owned ATMs. There is no requirement to 
check the backgrounds of purchasers of the machines, and there are no mandatory reporting 
procedures and no rules for maintaining ATM sales records. 
 
Gift Cards 
Although gift cards are a convenient way to show someone you care, the ease with which 
they can be purchased and used makes them attractive for money laundering. It is estimated 
that American consumers purchase more than $100 billion each year in stored-value cards. 
Closed-system cards are those that can be used at only one retailer or group of retailers. 
Open-system cards (such as those issued by VISA, MasterCard, and American Express) can 
be used at any merchant who accepts those credit cards.  
 
Although closed-cards can only be used at certain locations, there is no oversight as to their 
purchase. As long as the purchase does not involve a cash transaction greater than $10,000, 
there is no obligation on the part of the retailer to perform any type of due diligence or even 
obtain the identity of the purchaser. 
 
Even for open-system cards purchased at financial institutions, there is no requirement that 
purchaser have an account at the bank or provide identification if the transaction is under 
$10,000. Banks are not required to perform due diligence on individual purchasers. 
 
Money launderers can anonymously purchase stored-value cards at a number of different 
locations and then easily transport them out of the country. A small box containing just 200 
cards could store almost $2,000,000 without the necessity of currency reporting. 
 
Banks and Other Depository Financial Institutions 
Banks and other depository institutions are susceptible to individuals attempting to launder 
illicit funds because they are the primary gateway to the U.S. financial system. Once placed in 
a depository institution, illegal proceeds can be transferred instantly by wire or disguised by 
commingling with legitimate funds. A challenge currently faced by depository institutions 
includes money launderers concealing their identities and sources of income to open 
accounts and launder illegal proceeds. Additionally, the increasing use of the Internet to 
open or access accounts make it difficult for depository institutions to verify customers’ 
identification.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1610                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Money Services Businesses 
Money services businesses (MSBs) refer to non-depository financial service providers 
operating in one or more of the following capacities:  
• Currency exchangers;  
• Check cashers;  
• Issuers, sellers, or redeemers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value;  
• The United States Postal Service; and  
• Money transmitters. 
 
MSBs offer an alternative to depository institutions for both financial services and money 
laundering. For this reason, an individual unable to transfer illegal funds into the U.S. 
banking system may turn to MSBs. In a ddition, most MSBs operate without federal 
regulatory supervision.  
 
Insurance Companies 
Due to the recent growth in the financial products offered by insurance agents and brokers 
(including savings products, investment products, and tax planning services), the insurance 
industry has become increasingly attractive to money launderers. According to the 2007 
National Money Laundering Strategy, this de velopment is occurring primarily because 
insurance “agents and brokers now offer a range of investment services featuring financial 
products that can be purchased and subsequently transferred, redeemed or sold, creating 
new opportunities for money laundering.” Generally, the independent brokers and agents 
who often sell insurance products do not work directly for the insurance companies. As a 
result, these intermediaries may lack the knowledge or incentive to screen clients or to 
question payment methods, and it is this factor that money launderers often exploit.  
 
Casinos 
Casinos operate in a high-volume cash-intensive industry and provide a broad range of 
financial services (such as deposit and credit accounts, funds transfers, check cashing, and 
currency exchange services) outside the traditional financial services system. As a result, 
casinos are susceptible to money laundering.  
 
According to the 2005 U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment, criminals typically 
launder money through casinos by exchanging illicit cash for casino chips and then either: 
• Holding the chips for a period of time and later cashing them in for a casino check or 
having the casino wire the money elsewhere; 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1611 
• Using the chips as currency to purchase narcotics, with the drug dealer later cashing in 
the chips; or, 
• Using the chips to gamble in hopes of generating certifiable winnings. 
 
Shell Companies 
Shell companies refer to non-publicly traded corporations, limited liability companies 
(LLCs), and trusts, which generally do not have any physical presence, other than a mailing 
address, and generate little to no independent economic value. In most situations, individuals 
and businesses form shell companies for legitimate reasons, such as holding the stock or 
intellectual property rights of another business entity, facilitating domestic and cross-border 
currency and asset transfers, or fostering domestic and cross-border currency corporate 
mergers. However, shell companies have become common tools for money laundering 
primarily because they have the ability to hide ownership and mask financial details and 
because money launderers can create them with minimal public disclosure of personal 
information regarding controlling interests and ownership. This lack of transparency 
prevents the discovery of suspicious transactions and impedes investigations and 
prosecutions.   
 
Other Common Methods of Money Laundering 
In the 2005 U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment, the U.S. government identified 
other common methods that criminals use to integrate illicit money into the financial system: 
(1) online payment systems; (2) bulk cash smuggling; and (3) trade-based money laundering. 
 
Online Payment Systems 
In response to market demand, online payment services, which accept funds in a variety of 
ways to transfer payment either to an individual or a merchant, are emerging. In addition, the 
increasing demand for new payment methods has led a growing number of online markets 
to embrace online payment systems, which set their own clearing and settlement terms and 
offer no consumer protection or financial regulation. Since most transactions through these 
service providers are considered final and provide no recourse to individuals who believe 
they have been defrauded, federal law enforcement agencies suggest that they have become a 
popular payment system for individuals perpetrating online fraud. 
 
Online payment systems are often vulnerable to money laundering because many of them 
function as international person-to-person payment systems, which cross jurisdictional 
boundaries, creating difficulties for authorities pursuing enforcement or legal actions. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1612                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, many service providers do not have effective customer identification or 
recordkeeping practices while others promote anonymous payments. 
 
Bulk Cash Smuggling 
Bulk cash smuggling, which is the smuggling cash out of the U.S. for deposit in foreign 
jurisdictions with lax financial institutions or to fund criminal enterprises, is also on the rise. 
The rise is bulk cash smuggling is due to the increasingly effective anti-money laundering 
policies and procedures at U.S. financial institutions. In typical bulk cash smuggling 
operations, smugglers hide cash in vehicles, luggage, express packages, commercial 
shipments, private aircrafts, or private boats. 
 
Trade-Based Money Laundering 
Trade-based money laundering is generally the most complex of the money laundering 
methods. This method encompasses a variety of schemes, which utilize international trade to 
disguise the transfers of illicit funds. The most common method of trade-based money 
laundering is the Black Market Peso Exchange (BMPE), a scheme where brokers purchase 
narcotics proceeds in the U.S. from the cartels and exchange them for clean pesos in 
Columbia. Other common trade-based money laundering methods include manipulating 
trade documents to over- and under-pay for imports and exports and using criminal 
proceeds to buy gems or precious metals.  
 
Calling in a Specialist 
Converting ill-gotten gains into cashier’s checks or money orders is not particularly difficult 
for even the most unsophisticated criminal. However because many launderers fear 
detection, they turn to more sophisticated specialists. Couriers  arrange for the transportation 
of money to a site where it is converted into another form of currency. For instance, drug 
traffickers will physically transport money to a foreign jurisdiction where it is deposited into 
a bank account or converted directly to checks or money orders. Since the courier has no 
apparent connection with the true owner of the funds, the money launderer retains  
his anonymity.  
 
White-collar professionals, such as attorneys, accountants, and brokers, might also serve to 
launder illegal funds. Through investments, trust accounts, fund transfers, and tax avoidance 
schemes these professionals can manipulate the financial, commercial, and legal systems to 
conceal the origin and ownership of assets. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1613 
Hawala Exchanges 
Although the theoretical workings of hawala have been around for at least a century, only 
recently has the United States publicly recognized it as a threat to homeland security. 
Hawala, often referred to as hundi, is an informal remittance system primarily exploited in 
Asia and the Middle East. Because the system is unregulated and leaves virtually no paper 
trail, it is ripe for money laundering.  
 
How It Works 
Hawala networks operate with the non-physical transfer of money. Typically, one who wants 
to send money abroad will call on a hawala dealer, known as a hawaladar. Hawala 
transactions are often disguised by legitimate businesses (e.g., travel agencies, cell phone 
companies, movie stores, convenience stores, and car washes). The hawaladar will contact 
another hawaladar in the country where the money is to be distributed, and with whom he 
has a familial relation or is a trustworthy connection. The hawaladars will discuss the 
transaction and arrange for delivery of the money to the recipient. Sometimes the hawaladar 
will give the giver a receipt, but with very little information. Information typically contained 
therein includes a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipient. Once hawaladars have 
exchanged the basic information of the transaction, the hawaladar for the recipient will 
locate and deliver the money to the recipient. The recipient will then use the code to verify 
his identification with the hawaladar who is distributing the money. The only records kept of 
the transaction are the amounts owed one hawaladar to another. Because most hawala 
transactions are disguised by legitimate businesses, records of such transactions are generally 
disguised as well. 
 
EXAMPLE 
1.  Ana in New York contacts and gives $5,000 in cash to Hawaladar A in New 
York to get $4,800 to Andy in Dubai. 
2.  Hawaladar A contacts Hawaladar B in Dubai and arranges the transfer; a code is 
exchanged. 
3.  Hawaladar A gives Ana a code to be communicated to Andy. 
4.  Ana communicates the code to Andy. 
5.  Hawaladar B and Andy make contact in Dubai. 
6.  Andy relates code to Hawaladar B and is then given the money. 
7.  Hawaladar A owes Hawaladar B $4,800 worth of “The Big Apple” t-shirts. 
Hawaladar A sends the merchandise from New York to Hawaladar B in Dubai. 
8.  Transaction is complete.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1614                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Often, hawaladars are business partners who do legitimate business with each other on a 
regular basis. Because it can be difficult to transfer large amounts of money between 
countries, a debt might be paid with merchandise or a favor (e.g., Hawaladar B owes 
Hawaladar A money from a past transaction, and in a new transaction pays the recipient, 
thereby relinquishing his debt to Hawaladar A from the former transaction).  
 
The hawala exchange is a tempting opportunity for many because it: 
• Doesn’t require formal identification;  
• Takes hours rather than days to transfer the money overseas;  
• Is cheaper than paying bank and shipping fees because hawaladars generally take a very 
small commission;  
• No currency conversion is necessary; and  
• Lacks a coherent paper trail. 
 
The Hawala Exchange and Money Laundering 
The very essence of hawala exchange bypasses regulation, such that money can be 
transferred independent of government and financial institution oversight. While many 
hawala exchanges are remittances free of mal-intent and therefore “legitimate” in some 
countries, (known as “white hawalas”), the system  lends itself to abuse. The use of a hawala 
exchange for illegal purposes such as money laundering, drug trafficking, or terrorism is 
referred to as a “black hawala.”   
 
Money laundering, specifically, is the disguising  of the existence, nature, source, ownership, 
location, and disposition of property derived from criminal activity. For hawaladars who 
operate storefront retail or service businesses in addition to their side hawala exchanges, 
bank deposits will rarely trigger investigation by a financial institution unless deposits are 
exceedingly high for the particular business. As always, such money can go undetected by 
using it towards personal and business expenses. (It is important to note that in the U.S. all 
cash transactions over $10,000 must be reported  to the federal government.) Hawala money 
can easily be layered because paper trails are meager at most. Furthermore, because most 
hawala exchanges are hidden behind business veils, money received from such transactions 
can unnoticeably be recouped into business accounts and thus integrated into bank accounts.  
 
Unfortunately, due to the “hidden” nature of the hawala business, much of this money is 
used to fund dangerous activities such as the importation of heroin and the purchase of 
unauthorized weapons. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1615 
Signs of a Hawala Exchange 
Red flags of money laundering could also indicate a hawala exchange. The following 
transactions could indicate money laundering via a hawala exchange. The list should be used 
to identify those transactions and customers, which might require further investigation: 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction, which is typically handled by checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Several check deposits from various ethnic communities. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy, account, or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Services provided internationally but paid for locally. 
 
 
Federal and State Law 
 
PATRIOT Act of 2001 
On October 26, 2001, Pre sident George W. Bush signed into law the Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act  (the 
PATRIOT Act). The PATRIOT Act was a response to the tragedies of September 11, 2001, 
and reflected Congressional concern with the money laundering activities of the terrorists 
who committed those attacks.  
 
Title III of the Act is entitled the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-
 Terrorist Financing Act of 2001. Title III creates significant requirements for financial 
institutions aimed at curtailing money laundering. The most significant anti-money 
laundering provisions of the law include the following:  
• Financial institutions are required to establish anti-money laundering programs.  
• Financial institutions are required to establish programs for identifying customers.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1616                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• U.S. banks are prohibited from maintaining correspondent accounts with foreign shell 
banks. 
• Securities broker-dealers are required to file suspicious activity reports.  
• Financial institutions are required to adopt special due diligence procedures for foreign 
correspondent accounts and private banking accounts. 
• Non-financial businesses are required to file currency transaction reports 
• Financial institutions have increased authority to share customer information relating to 
money laundering.  
• The government has greater power to obtain information from financial institutions. 
 
Anti-Money Laundering Programs  
Section 352 of the PATRIOT Act requires all financial institutions to establish anti-money 
laundering programs, which must include, at a minimum: 
• The development of internal policies, procedures, and controls to prevent money 
laundering. 
• The designation of a money laundering compliance officer. 
• An ongoing training program for awareness of money laundering. 
• An independent audit function to test the programs. 
 
The Act defines the term “financial institution” broadly to include not only insured and 
commercial banks, but also securities brokers and dealers, investment companies, currency 
exchanges, issuers of cashier’s checks and money orders, credit card companies, insurance 
companies, travel agencies, and a host of other businesses. The complete list can be found at 
31, U.S.C., § 312 (a)(2).  
 
Identification and Verification of Accountholders 
Section 326 of the Act expands the Bank Secrecy Act (discussed below) by requiring 
financial institutions to implement Customer Identification Programs (CIPs). These CIPs are 
to be incorporated into financial institutions’ money laundering programs, and at a 
minimum, they must include reasonable procedures for: 
• Verifying the identity of any person seeking to open an account to the extent reasonable 
and practicable;  
• Maintaining records of the information used to verify a person’s identity, including 
name, address, and other identifying information; and  
• Consulting lists of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations to determine 
if the person seeking to open the account appears on any such list. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1617 
Prohibition Against Foreign Shell Bank Accounts  
Pursuant to sections 313 and 319 of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a 
far-reaching final regulation that applies to over 9,000 foreign financial institutions that have 
correspondent accounts in the United States. The rule prohibits foreign shell banks (those 
without a physical presence in any country) from maintaining correspondent accounts at any 
U.S. financial institution. It also requires U.S. financial intuitions to maintain the name and 
contact information of the owners of the foreign banks for whom they maintain 
correspondent accounts. The rule strongly encourages U.S. intuitions to obtain 
“certifications” from their foreign bank customer s. The certification can be used by the U.S. 
institution to help ensure that the customer is not a shell bank. (Although not required, 
obtaining the certifications and verifying the information can create a safe harbor from civil 
liability.)   
 
U.S. institutions are also required to take “reasonable steps” to ensure that correspondent 
accounts provided to foreign banks are not used to provide services indirectly to foreign 
shell banks. Foreign banks that have accounts in the U.S. are required to appoint someone in 
the U.S. to accept service of legal process. The rule also gives the Secretary of the Treasury 
and the Attorney General the authority to issue a summons or subpoena to any foreign bank 
that maintains a correspondent account here and to request records relating to that account. 
 
Suspicious Activity Reporting by Broker-Dealers 
Pursuant to section 356 of the Act, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) 
adopted rules requiring brokers and dealers in securities to report suspicious activity. 31, 
C.F.R. § 103.19(a)(2). This reporting requirement  will be discussed in more detail later in this 
section (see “Securities Broker-Dealers” un der “Suspicious Activity Reports” below). 
 
Special Due Diligence for Foreign Accounts 
Section 312 of the PATRIOT Act requires financ ial institutions to establish due diligence 
policies, procedures, and controls that are reasonably designed to detect and report instances 
of money laundering through certain accounts held by non-U.S. citizens or their 
representatives. This provision applies to two types of foreign accounts:  
• Private banking accounts  
• Correspondent accounts  
 
A private banking account is defined by the Act as an account (or combination of accounts) that 
(1) requires a minimum aggregate deposit of funds or other assets of at least $1 million; (2) is 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1618                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
established on behalf of one or more individuals who have a direct or beneficial ownership 
in the account; and (3) is assigned to or admini stered by an officer, employee, or agent of the 
financial institution acting as a liaison between the financial institution and the owner of the 
account. 
 
For private banking accounts held by non-U.S. persons, the Act requires at a minimum that 
financial institutions take reasonable steps to:  
• Ascertain the identity of the nominal and beneficial owners of the account, and the 
source of funds deposited into the account as needed to guard against money laundering 
and report any suspicious transactions; and  
• Conduct enhanced scrutiny of any such account that is requested or maintained by, or 
on behalf of, a senior foreign political figure (or an immediate family member or close 
associate of such) that is reasonably designed to detect and report transactions that may 
involve the proceeds of foreign corruption. 
 
A correspondent account is defined as an account established to receive deposits from or make 
payments on behalf of a foreign financial institution, or handle other financial transactions 
related to such an institution. Enhanced due diligence is required for correspondent accounts 
maintained by or on behalf of foreign banks that operate under off-shore banking licenses or 
for banks that are licensed by foreign countries that have either been designated as 
noncooperative with international anti-money laundering principles or that have been 
designated by the Secretary of the Treasury as warranting special measures due to money 
laundering concerns. Enhanced due diligence for these correspondent accounts consists of, 
at a minimum:  
• Ascertaining the identity of the owners of any foreign bank whose shares are not  
publicly traded; 
• Determining the nature and extent of each owner’s interest; 
• Conducting enhanced scrutiny of the account to guard against money laundering and 
report suspicious transactions; and 
• Ascertaining whether the foreign bank provides correspondent accounts to other  
foreign banks and, if so, the identity of those foreign banks and related due  
diligence information. 
 
Currency Reports by Non-Financial Businesses 
Section 365 of the PATRIOT Act requires persons engaged in any trade or business to file a 
report with FinCEN when, in the course of their business, they receive more than $10,000 in 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1619 
coins or currency. This reporting requirement is discussed in more detail later in this section 
under the reporting and recordkeeping provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act.  
 
Sharing Information Between Financial Institutions 
Pursuant to section 314(b) of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a rule 
allowing financial institutions to share customer information with one another. The term 
“financial institution” includes any entity that is required to have an anti-money laundering 
program under the Bank Secrecy Act (see above). In order to share information with another 
financial institution, the sharing institution must follow these steps: 
• File a prescribed notice form with FinCEN stating that it intends to share customer 
information with other financial institutions (the notice remains effective for one year); 
• The institution may then share the information with another institution provided that it 
has verified that the other institution has also filed a notice with FinCEN (FinCEN will 
periodically release a list of institutions who have submitted notices; if an institution is 
on the list, then the sharing institution will be considered to have fulfilled its 
“verification” duty); 
• The institution must ensure that the shared information is secure and not used for any 
purpose other than to identify and, where appropriate, report on money laundering or 
terrorist activities; determine whether to establish or maintain an account or conduct a 
transaction; or assist the other sharing institution with its compliance of BSA regulations;  
• The institution must also file a Suspicious Activity Report if, based on the shared 
information, the institution suspects that the individual or entity may be involved in 
money laundering or terrorist activity. 
 
Section 355 of the Act also permits insured depository institutions to share information in 
written employment references about known or suspected  unlawful activity of their current or 
former directors, officers, employees, agents, or other persons affiliated with the institution. 
This provision, which is codified at 12, U.S.C., § 1828(w) does not make it mandatory for 
banks to disclose this information, but it does protect them from liability if they voluntarily 
make such disclosures, as long as the disclosures are not made with malicious intent.  
 
Government Access to Financial Information 
On September 18, 2002, the Treasury Department issued regulations that provide federal law 
enforcement agencies with greater power to obtain financial information. The two-part 
regulation is an amendment to the Bank Secrecy Act regulations and was mandated by 
section 314 of the PATRIOT Act. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1620                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If a federal agency provides FinCEN with a “written certification” that a person, entity, or 
organization about whom information is sought “is reasonably suspected based on credible 
information to be engaged in…, terrorist acti vity or money laundering.” FinCEN may then 
require any financial institution to search its records to determine if it “maintains or has 
maintained accounts for, or has engaged in transactions with” the subject. 
 
The information reported is limited to the name or account number of each cited person, 
entity, or organization; the number of the matching account or transaction; and the Social 
Security number, taxpayer ID, passport number, date of birth, or other identifying 
information the subject gave when opening the account or conducting the transaction. 
 
The institution may not disclose the information to anyone other than FinCEN or the 
requesting agency. The institution also cannot disclose that the information has been 
requested or provided. It may, however, use the information in the request to determine 
whether an account will be opened or a transaction conducted, and to comply with  
BSA regulations. 
 
The term “financial institution” is defined as it is under the BSA and includes banks, broker-dealers, 
insurance companies, money services businesses, as well as car and airplane dealers, 
travel agents, and pawnbrokers. 
 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Depar tment of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals that sponsor terrorism, and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(“SDNs”), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains over 5,000 variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
On September 24, 2001, President George W. Bush issued an executive order imposing 
enhanced trade sanctions on 27 individuals and entities, including Osama bin Laden and Al 
Qaeda. The immediate effect of the order is to block all assets of these individuals and 
entities under U.S. control and ban all dealings with the listed parties.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1621 
On July 26, 2001, OFAC issued a bulletin specific to the insurance industry, including 
underwriters, brokers, agents, primary insurers, and reinsurers. The bulletin affirms that U.S. 
insurers may not insure SDNs or individuals or entities located in certain prohibited 
countries or make payments to beneficiaries who are designated as prohibited persons or 
entities. Examples of prohibited transactions include: (1) issuing an insurance policy or 
annuity contract to an SDN; (2) issuing a life insurance policy naming an SDN as a 
beneficiary; and (3) receiving premium payments for any such transactions.  
 
The Bank Secrecy Act 
The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which went into effect in 1970, was the first major piece of 
legislation aimed at detecting and preventing money laundering. The purpose of the law as 
stated in section 5311 is “to require certain re ports or records where they have a high degree 
of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations or proceedings.” The BSA sets 
forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements designed to help track large or 
unusual financial transactions. 
 
The BSA consists of two titles. Title I contains provisions requiring that financial institutions 
and securities brokers and dealers keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of 
their customers. It is codified in Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 1829b 
and 1951–1959. Title II of the BSA (originally  entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions 
Reporting Act) requires banks, “financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities 
brokers and dealers, currency exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to 
report to the government certain transactions. Title II is codified at 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–
 5330. 
 
For more information on the examination process and the compliance procedures financial 
institutions are required to follow, please review the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money 
Laundering Examination Manual published by the Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council. It is available for viewing on their website (www.ffiec.gov). 
 
Title I — Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. Recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. All institutions are required to keep a record of any financial transaction of more 
than $10,000. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1622                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep for five years an original, microfilm, 
or other copy of certain documents relating to demand deposits and checking and savings 
accounts. The records that must be retained include: 
• Signature cards. 
• Statements, ledger cards, or other records disclosing all transactions; that is, deposits and 
withdrawals. 
• Copies of both sides of customers’ checks, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks of more than $100 drawn on the bank, or issued and payable by it. 
• Identity of each purchaser of a certificate of deposit. 
• Each deposit slip or credit ticket reflecting a transaction in excess of $100. 
 
In addition to these requirements, financial institutions are required to capture, verify, and 
retain information on the identity of purchasers of monetary instruments (such as cashier’s 
checks) in amounts of $3,000 or more, or any transmittal or transfer of funds involving 
$3,000 or more. These records are also required to be kept for five years. 
 
Banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a customer’s 
checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit tickets. They 
must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check deposited to a 
customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply only to checks written or deposits made in 
excess of $100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all such items rather than sorting out 
those less than $100. The Bank Secrecy Act also  requires financial institutions to retain a 
record of any extension of credit more than $1 0,000 as well as each transfer of $10,000 or 
more outside the United States. 
 
The penalties for failure to comply with these recordkeeping requirements are severe. Any 
insured depository institution and any director, officer, or employee who willfully or through 
gross negligence violates any regulation can be subject to a $10,000 civil penalty. The statute 
further provides that a separate violation occurs for each day  the violation continues and at 
each office, branch, or place of business at which the violation occurs. If a violation is 
committed in furtherance of a felony crime, criminal penalties can be imposed of up to five 
years in prison and/or a fine of not more than $10,000. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1623 
Title II — Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Title II of the Bank Secrecy Act is codified as 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5330. The purpose of 
these sections is to require certain reports or records to be filed or kept by “financial 
institutions.” Section 5312(a)(2) defines “financial institution” very broadly to include not 
only banks, but also securities brokers; currency exchange houses; insurance companies; loan 
companies; travel agencies; telegraph companies; issuers or cashiers of checks or money 
orders; auto, boat, and airplane dealers; casinos; and persons involved in real estate closings 
and settlements. Only recently has the Treasury Department begun to reign in much of the 
non-financial institution transaction business in the U.S. by requiring registration of these 
diverse enterprises (see the “Money Services Business” excerpt below). 
 
The regulations promulgated by the U.S. Treasury Department are contained primarily in 
Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal Regulations at Part 103, Subpart B and require the 
following reports: 
 
CURRENCY TRANSACTION REPORT (CTR) — FINCEN FORM 104 
All banks, and certain other financial institutions, are required to fill out currency transaction 
reports (CTR) whenever there is a currency transaction (deposit, withdrawal, exchange, or 
cashing of checks) of $10,000 or more.  The easiest way to summarize the filing requirement is 
to remember: if currency in excess of $10,000 is brought into a financial institution to conduct 
a transaction, or if as the result of a transaction, $10,000 in currency leaves the financial 
institution, a CTR must be filed.  
 
FinCEN Form 104 (formerly named IRS Form 4789) is prepared by the financial institution 
and contains the name(s) of the individual(s) conducting the transaction(s) or the name(s) of 
the person(s) or organization(s) on whose behalf the transaction is being conducted, as well as 
all identifying data of these individuals or entities. It also requires the details of the transaction 
and identifying data of the financial institution preparing the form. For purposes of reporting, 
multiple transactions must be treated as a single transaction if the financial institution has 
knowledge that the transactions are by or on behalf of the same person and the amounts total 
more than $10,000 during any one business day. 
 
Under Title 31, U.S.C., section 5313, the Treasury Department publishes a “mandatory 
exemption” list that specifically identifies entities whose transactions with a financial 
institution are exempt from these reporting requirements. The exempted entities include 
banks, departments or agencies of state or federal government, and other businesses “whose 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1624                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
reports have little or no value for law enforcement purposes.” The exempt list must be 
published periodically in the Federal Register.  
 
The Treasury Department can also provide “discretionary exemptions” for “qualified business 
customers,” which are defined as businesses that  (1) maintain transaction accounts (as defined 
by the Federal Reserve Act) at the particular institution; (2) frequently engage in transactions 
with the institution that are subject to the reporting requirements; and (3) meet the guidelines 
and criteria established by the Treasury Department to ensure that the failure to file reports on 
these entities will not interfere with the purposes of the Act. 
 
A copy of Form 104 is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
CURRENCY REPORTS BY CASINOS — FINCEN FORM 102 
Form 102 (formerly named IRS Form 8362) is required to be filed by casinos licensed by 
state or local government and having an annual gross revenue in excess of $1,000,000. 
Nevada casinos are exempt from filing these forms because of a strict state law that requires 
reporting for currency transactions. The filing requirements and transaction details for this 
form are almost identical to Form 104. 
 
CURRENCY REPORTS BY NON-FINANCIAL BUSINESSES — IRS FORM 8300 
The PATRIOT Act created Title 31, section 5331, of the U.S. Code, which requires persons 
engaged in any trade or business to file a report with FinCEN when, in the course of their 
business, they receive more than $10,000 in coins or currency, either in one transaction or in 
two or more related transactions. For purposes of computing the amount of multiple related 
transactions, the recipient must aggregate all payments made within one year of the first 
payment. Transactions covered by this Section must be reported within 15 days of receipt of 
payments in excess of $10,000. The rules govern ing these reports are codified at 31, CFR, § 
103.30. 
 
This section does not apply to financial institutions, which are already covered by 31, U.S.C., 
§ 5313 as described above. It also does not apply to transactions occurring entirely outside 
the United States. In addition, the rules exempt certain loans, installment sales, and down 
payment plans.  
 
The information required to be reported under section 5331 is very similar to the 
information that was already required by the IRS under section 6050I of the Internal 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1625 
Revenue Code. Because of the similarity between the two statutes, the reports are to be 
made on the same Form 8300, which is filed jointly with FinCEN and the IRS. Essentially, 
the rule imposes no new record-keeping burden (since Form 8300 already had to be filed 
with the IRS). 
 
Under the Internal Revenue Code, there are both civil and criminal penalties for failure to 
file Form 8300 or filing a false form. Criminal sanctions include imprisonment of up to five 
years (for a willful failure to file) and fines of up to $500,000 (for organizations knowingly 
filing a false return). 
 
REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT CUSTOMS (CMIR) — FINCEN FORM 105 
Pursuant to Title 31, U.S.C., § 5316, a person shall file a report if he transports or is about to 
transport monetary instruments of more than $10,000 into or out of the United States at one 
time or if he receives by transport, mail, or shipment monetary instruments in excess of 
$10,000 at one time transported into the United Sates from a place outside the United States. 
FinCEN Form 105 (formerly named Customs Form 4790) is to be filed at the time of 
transportation or within 15 days of receipt. 
 
For the purposes of this statute, the term “monetary instrument” means United States and 
foreign coin and currency; bearer instruments such as business, bank, or personal checks; 
money orders; promissory notes; bearer stocks; and bonds. 
 
There are exemptions from the CMIR filin g requirements that extend to banks for  
transfers of funds through normal banking procedures, the Federal Reserve, and certain 
common carriers. 
 
A copy of this form is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
REPORT OF FOREIGN BANK AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS (FBAR)—TREASURY FORM 90-22.1 
Treasury Department regulations require citizens of the United States and resident aliens to 
file a report when they maintain a financial interest or signature authority over a foreign bank 
account with a balance of more than $10,000 during the calendar year. Accounts in different 
foreign countries have to be aggregated. 
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1626                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PENALTIES 
Section 5321 of the BSA sets forth the civil penalties for noncompliance with the Act. A 
covered entity (including its partners, directors, officers, or employees) that willfully violates 
the reporting requirements can be hit with a penalty of up to the amount of the transaction 
(not to exceed $100,000) or $ 25,000, whichever is greater. A separate penalty can be imposed 
for each day the violation continues and at each branch or office. Civil penalties of up to 
$500 are also authorized for a negligent violati on. If there is a pattern of negligent activity, 
the penalty limit increases to $50,000. This section also sets forth other penalties applicable 
to structured transactions and foreign financial agency transactions. 
 
Criminal penalties are set forth in section 5322, which provides that a person willfully 
violating the statute or regulations can be fined up to $250,000 and/or imprisoned for up to 
five years. If the violation occurs while violating another federal law or as a pattern of illegal 
activity involving more than $100,000, the maximum fine increases to $500,000 and the 
maximum prison time increases to 10 years. As with the civil penalties, a separate violation 
occurs each day the conduct continues and at each location. 
 
FORFEITURES 
Section 5317(c) provides criminal and civil forfeiture penalties for violations of the currency 
reporting requirements in § 5313 (reports on domestic transactions), § 5316 (reports on 
exporting and importing monetary instruments), and § 5324 (structuring transactions to 
evade reporting requirements). A person convicted of an offense under any of these statutes, 
or of a conspiracy to violate any of these statutes, can be ordered to forfeit all property that 
was involved in the offense and any property traceable thereto.  
 
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs)   
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
The BSA also requires financial institutions to monitor suspicious activity and file suspicious 
activity reports (SARs) to disclose known or suspected criminal offenses or transactions that 
involve money laundering or violate the Act. For years, suspicious transactions were 
reported on the Currency Transaction Report (CTR). However, such activity is now reported 
using the Suspicious Activity Report (SAR). 
 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which charters, regulates, and 
supervises more than 2,500 national banks, adopted a requirement mandating that national 
banks file SARs with the appropriate federal law enforcement agencies and the Treasury 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1627 
Department, in accordance with the form’s instructions, by sending the reports to the 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). These reporting requirements are found 
in Title 12, Part 353 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This is an enormous improvement 
on the old reporting systems because it establishes a centralized reporting system that is 
shared throughout government agencies simultaneously. The DEA, for instance, can now 
access the same information as the IRS when working on a suspicious report. The reporting 
procedure has also been simplified for banks, making the information much easier for the 
Department of the Treasury to obtain.  
 
Financial institutions are also required to use SAR forms to report incidents of computer 
intrusion. The term “computer intrusion” is defined as gaining access to the computer 
system to remove, steal, or procure customers’  funds or other account information, or to 
access the institution’s computer system with the intention of damaging or disabling any 
critical computer systems. 
 
SARs are used to report a known or suspected criminal offense or a transaction that involves 
money laundering or violates the BSA. More specifically, a SAR must be filed with FinCEN 
in each of the following instances: 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution when the 
institution has a substantial basis for identifying one of its directors, officers, employees, 
agents, or affiliated parties as having committed the act or aided in its commission. 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution and 
aggregating $5,000 or more when the institution has a substantial basis for identifying a 
possible suspect or group of suspects. 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution and 
aggregating $25,000 or more regardless of whether the institution has a substantial basis 
for identifying possible suspects. 
• Any transaction conducted or attempted to be conducted through the financial 
institution when the institution has reason to suspect that (1) the funds were derived 
from illegal activities, (2) the transaction is designed to evade any regulations under the 
Bank Secrecy Act, or (3) the transaction appears to have no business purposes or appears 
unusual in normal banking practice. 
 
When a financial institution reports a suspicious transaction to a government agency, the Act 
(18, U.S.C., § 5318(g)(2)) makes it illegal for the financial institution to notify any person 
involved in the suspicious transaction that such a report has been made.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1628                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Section 5318(g)(3) of the BSA also contains a safe harbor provision for financial institutions 
that report suspicious transactions or that make voluntary disclosures to a government 
agency of any other possible violation of a law or regulation. The Act provides that these 
financial institutions shall not be liable under any law, regulation, or contract to any person 
for making the report. Note that this safe harbor provision only applies to reports made to 
government agencies, not to self-regulatory organizations.  
 
A copy of the SAR report form is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
MONEY SERVICES BUSINESSES 
Even before the passage of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department was in the process 
of expanding its reporting guidelines to include businesses that did not fall under the 
traditional definition of financial institutions but nevertheless perform a myriad of financial 
services. One of these categories included money services businesses (MSBs), which comprise 
various types of money transmitters, issuers of money orders and traveler’s checks, and 
check cashing businesses. MSBs have long been  required to file CTRs, but otherwise very 
little government regulation has been required.  
 
In August 1999, many of the reporting and registration obligations contained in the Bank 
Secrecy Act were extended to MS Bs. These businesses are now required to register with 
FinCEN under Chapter 31, C.F.R. part 103, subchapter D. Those that fail to register can 
incur substantial penalties.  
 
Under the rules (1) money transmitters, (2) issuers, sellers, and redeemers of money orders, 
(3) issuers, sellers, and redeemers of traveler’s checks, and (4) the U.S. Postal Service (except 
with regard to the sale of postage or philatelic products) are required to report certain classes 
of transactions that meet certain dollar thresholds to the Department of the Treasury after 
January 1, 2002.  
 
The reportable transactions include: 
• Transactions involving funds derived from illegal activity or intended or conducted in 
order to hide or disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activity; 
• Transactions designed, whether through structuring or other means, to evade the 
requirements of the BSA;  
• Transactions that appear to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose; and 
• Transactions that involve the use of a mutual fund to facilitate criminal activity. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1629 
The rule includes two different dollar thresholds depending on the stage and type of 
transaction involved: 
• For transactions conducted or attempted by, at, or through a money service business or 
its agent, a threshold of $2,000 applies; 
• For transactions identified by issuers of money orders or traveler’s checks from a review 
of clearance records or other similar records of instruments that have been sold or 
processed, a threshold of $5,000 applies. 
 
MSBs are given 30 days after becoming aware of a suspicious transaction to complete a 
Suspicious Activity Report by Money Services  Business (SAR-MSB; Form 109) and file it 
with FinCEN; in situations involving violations that require immediate attention, such as 
ongoing money laundering schemes, the MSB or MSBs are to notify the appropriate law 
enforcement authority immediately, by telephone, in addition to filing the required form. 
Supporting documentation relating to each SAR-MSB is to be collected and maintained by 
the reporting MSB for review as needed by law enforcement and regulatory agencies. 
Although the SAR-MSB form is not formatted for joint filing, MSBs may be included as 
joint filers with other reporting financial institutions. 
 
CURRENCY EXCHANGES 
In a rule issued February 10, 2003, U.S. currency exchanges are required to file Suspicious 
Activity Reports under the same rule that applies to money services businesses. 
 
MUTUAL FUNDS 
As part of the PATRIOT Act, mutual funds are also required to establish anti-money 
laundering programs. In May 2003, the Department of Treasury and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a regulation requiring mutual funds to implement 
“reasonable measures” to establish customer identification procedures and to verify whether 
customers appear on lists of any known or suspected terrorists.  
 
In May 2006, the Treasury Department issued fi nal approval to regulations that require 
mutual funds to report suspicious activities to FinCEN. Under these regulations, mutual 
funds are required to report suspicious currency and non-currency transactions (or 
attempted transactions) of $5,000 or more. The report would be filed on the “SAR-SF” 
(Suspicious Activity for Securities and Futures Industries) Form 101.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1630                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Rule states that four categories of transactions will require reporting. These are the same 
four categories that trigger reporting requirements for money service businesses and 
currency exchanges: 
• Transactions involving funds derived from criminal activity, or intended or conducted to 
hide or disguise funds from criminal activity; 
• Transactions designed to evade Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) requirements; 
• Transactions appearing to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose; or 
• Transactions involving the use of the mutual fund to facilitate criminal activity. 
 
SECURITIES BROKER-DEALERS 
In 2002, FinCEN announced a rule requiring brokers and dealers in securities to report 
suspicious activity via a Suspicious Activity Report by Securities and Futures Industries 
(SAR-SF; FinCEN Form 101). These firms are obligated to report suspicious transactions 
conducted or attempted by, at, or through a broker-dealer and involve or aggregate at least 
$5,000 in funds or assets. This requirement took effect December 31, 2002. 
 
Brokers and dealers in securities are required to report to FinCEN transactions that fall into 
one of the four categories below. Again, these categories are substantially similar to those 
that trigger reports by money service businesses and mutual funds (see above). 
• Transactions involving funds derived from illegal activity, or intended or conducted in 
order to hide or disguise funds derived from illegal activity; 
• Transactions designed, whether through structuring or other means, to evade the 
requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act; 
• Transactions that appear to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose or are not the 
sort of transactions in which the particular customer would be expected to engage, and 
for which the broker-dealer knows of no reasonable explanation after examining the 
available facts; or 
• Transactions that involve the use of the broker-dealer to facilitate criminal activity. 
 
Broker-dealers are also required to establish anti-money laundering programs that, among 
other things, are designed to detect suspicious transactions, under recently promulgated self-regulatory 
organization (SRO) rules. The SEC has the authority to examine broker-dealers 
for compliance with the rule, and it is expected that the SROs will also be reviewing 
compliance as part of the enforcement of their rules. 
 
A copy of SAR-SF is included at the end of the chapter. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1631 
CASINOS AND CARD CLUBS 
Effective March 25, 2003, casinos and card clubs with gross revenue over $1,000,000 must 
file suspicious activity reports on form SAR-C. Under the rule, casinos and card clubs must 
report suspicious activity if a transaction involves or aggregates at least $5,000 in funds and if 
it meets one of the four categories that generally trigger SARs. (See previous sections on 
Financial Institutions, Money Service Businesses, Mutual Funds, etc.) 
 
Some possible examples of suspicious activity, according to FinCEN, include: 
• Using wire transfers and cashier’s checks to deposit funds into casino accounts and using 
the money for little or no gaming activity before cashing out; and 
• Transferring chips to other individuals to cash out, or redeeming chips for casino checks 
that total “significantly more” than the amount deposited with “no apparent winnings to 
account for the excess amount.” 
 
Casinos are also required to file Currency Transaction Reports via FinCEN Form 102 or the 
Nevada state form (see above). 
 
INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Although insurance companies have always fallen under the definition of a “financial 
institution” under the BSA, the Treasury Department had never issued any rules pertaining 
to the industry. The PATRIOT Act, however, requires that all “financial institutions” 
establish anti-money laundering programs, and it gives the Secretary of the Treasury the 
discretion to determine which institutions would be required to file SARs. 
 
In November 2005, FinCEN published rules pertaining to insurance companies that sell 
certain types of insurance products. The rules apply only to companies that sell “covered 
products” that FinCEN deemed to be more at risk for money laundering activities than 
other types of insurance products. Companies that sell these covered products are required 
to file SARs and to implement anti-money laundering programs. The rules define “covered 
products” as any of the following: 
• A permanent life insurance policy (other than a group policy); 
• An annuity contract (other than a group annuity contract); or 
• Any other insurance product with cash value or investment features. 
 
Group insurance products, term life, property, casualty, health, and title insurance policies 
are not considered “covered products.” 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1632                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Also, insurance companies must report suspicious activities to FinCEN. FinCEN Form 
108—Suspicious Activity Report by Insurance Companies—has been proposed; however, 
until the Form is approved, insurance companies should use the Suspicious Activity 
Reporting Form used by the securities and futures industries (FinCEN Form 101) to report 
suspicious activities. 
 
DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, OR JEWELS 
Persons who deal in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones are required to establish 
anti-money laundering programs. “Dealers” are defined as persons who have purchased at 
least $50,000 and  sold more than $50,000 worth of jewels, stones, or metals during the 
preceding year. Additionally, the person must also be in the business of selling significant 
amounts of such items; therefore, the rule wo uld not apply to occasional sellers or hobbyists. 
Dealers, however, are not required to file SARs. FinCEN is developing a set of final rules to 
address in more detail who is covered under the rule and what procedures will be required. 
 
Other Federal Laws Related to Money Laundering 
The fraud examiner should be aware of the federal laws that are typically involved when 
prosecuting a money laundering transaction. Most such schemes will involve one or more of 
the following: 
 
Structuring Transaction to Evade Reporting Requirements, Title 31, U.S.C., § 5324 
If a person causes or attempts to cause a covered institution to fail to file a required report 
with the purpose of evading the reporting requirements, such person can be fined under the 
provisions of 18, U.S.C., § 3571 and/or imprisoned up to five years. If the violation occurs 
in the course of violating another federal law or as part of a pattern of illegal conduct 
involving more than $100,000 in a 12-month period, then the amount of the fine under § 
3571 can be doubled and the prison time increased to up to 10 years.  
 
Section 3571 of Title 18 provides for fines for individuals convicted of a felony of up to 
$250,000 and fines for organizations of up to $500,000. Alternatively, a fine can be imposed 
up to twice the amount of the ill-gotten gain to the criminal or twice the amount of the loss 
to the victim. 
 
Bulk Cash Smuggling Into or Out of the United States, Title 31, U.S.C., § 5332   
Section 5332, which was created by section 371 of the PATRIOT Act, makes it illegal for 
anyone to knowingly conceal more than $10,000 in currency or other monetary instruments 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1633 
and transport or attempt to transport such currency into or out of the United States with the 
intent to evade a currency reporting requirement under 18, U.S.C., § 1956 (see below). 
Violators of these sections may be imprisoned up to five years and may be required to forfeit 
any property involved in the offense, or any property traceable thereto. 
 
Money Laundering Statutes, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1956 and §  1957 
TRANSACTIONAL MONEY LAUNDERING 
Section 1956(a)(1) provides that anyone who knows that property involved in a  
financial transaction represents the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and conducts a 
financial transaction in any of the following ways:  
• With the intent to promote the carrying on of “specified unlawful activity” 
• With the intent to violate section 7201 (tax evasion) or 7206 (filing false return) of the 
Internal Revenue Code 
• Knowing that the transaction is designed to  conceal or disguise the nature, location, 
source, ownership, or control of the illegal proceeds 
• Knowing that the transaction is designed to avoid a reporting requirement 
 
Such individuals shall be fined up to $500,000 or twice the value of the monetary instrument 
or funds (whichever is greater) and/or imprisoned for not more than 20 years. “Specified 
unlawful activity” is defined in § 1956(c)(7) and includes a long list of federal crimes 
including RICO, fraud, embezzlement, theft, and false statements. Also, funds that are 
illegally transmitted in violation of this statute or any property traceable to those funds are 
subject to civil forfeiture under 18, U.S.C., § 981(a)(1)(A). 
 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORTATION AND LAUNDERING OF FUNDS 
Section 1956(a)(2) prohibits the transportation, transmission, or transfer of funds either into 
or out of the United States if the person knows the funds are the proceeds of unlawful 
activity and the transportation, transmission, or transfer is done with the intent to promote 
the carrying on of “specified unlawful conduct”; is done to conceal the nature, location, 
source, ownership, or control of the funds; or  is done to avoid reporting requirements. The 
penalties are the same as those set forth in subsection (a)(1). 
 
STING OPERATIONS 
Section 1956(a)(3) prohibits a person from engaging in financial transactions involving 
property the person believes  to be the proceeds of illegal activity. This is intended to cover 
“sting” operations in which a suspect engages in money laundering activity with funds he 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1634                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
believes to be illegally derived, even though the funds are actually supplied by government 
agents. The person can be imprisoned for up to 20 years and/or fined in accordance with 18, U.S.C., § 3571. 
 
ENGAGING IN MONETARY TRANSACTIONS WITH MONEY DERIVED FROM SPECIFIED UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY 
An offense occurs under section 1957 if a person knowingly engages or attempts to engage 
in a monetary transaction with criminally derived property that is greater than $10,000 and 
that is derived from “specified unlawful activity.” Section 1957 applies in situations where 
the offense takes place in the United States (or within its special maritime or territorial 
jurisdiction) or the offense takes place outside the U.S., but the defendant is a U.S. citizen or 
legal alien. 
 
Violations of this statute are punishable by a fine under 18, U.S.C., § 3571 and/or 10 years in 
prison. In addition, the illegally transmitted funds can be forfeited under 18, U.S.C., § 
981(a)(1)(A). 
 
CIVIL PENALTIES  
Section 1956(b) sets forth civil penalties for violations of sections 1956 and 1957. Under this 
section, those who violate either money laundering statute are liable to the United States for 
the value of the property, funds, or monetary instruments involved in the illegal transaction, 
or $10,000, whichever is greater.  
 
LONG-ARM JURISDICTION OVER FOREIGN MONEY LAUNDERERS 
Section 1956(b) also gives U.S. district courts jurisdiction over foreign persons or financial 
institutions when (1) the foreign person commits a money laundering offense under section 
1956(a) that occurs in whole or in part in the United States; (2) the foreign person converts 
to his own use property in which the United States has an ownership interest; or (3) the 
foreign financial institution maintains a bank account in the United States.  
 
Under section 1956(b)(3), a U.S. court can issue restraining orders to freeze the assets of 
foreign money launderers described above prior to trial to ensure that the defendant’s assets 
are available to satisfy a judgment. The court can also appoint a Federal Receiver to collect, 
marshal, and take control of the defendant’s assets to satisfy a civil or criminal judgment for 
money laundering, or a civil or criminal forfeiture judgment.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1635 
Prohibition of Illegal Money Transmitting Businesses—Title 18, U.S.C., § 1960 
This section prohibits the operation of a business that transfers funds by any means 
(whether by wire, check, or courier) if the business does not have the appropriate state 
license or fails to comply with the registration requirements established under Title 31 of the 
U.S. Code, section 5330. The offender can be fined under section 3571 of Title 18 and/or 
imprisoned not more than five years. Illegally transmitted funds can also be seized by the 
United States under 18, U.S.C., § 981(a)(1)(A). 
 
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO)—Title 18, U.S.C., §§ 1961–
 1968 
Violations of the money laundering crimes statutes (18, U.S.C., §§ 1956 and 1957) and 
certain violations of the Bank Secrecy Act are predicate offenses constituting “racketeering 
activity.” These acts can be prosecuted under the RICO statute, which includes criminal 
penalties of up to 20 years in prison and/or fines under section 3571 of Title 18. The statute 
also provides for a civil cause of action by “any person injured in his business or property” 
as a result of a violation of RICO. Remedies  include treble damages and attorney’s fees. 
 
Seizures and Forfeitures—Title 18, U.S.C., § 981, et seq. 
Section 981 provides for the civil seizure and forfeiture of property involved in certain 
crimes including money laundering. Section 982 deals with criminal forfeitures. Forfeiture may 
be defined as “the taking by the government of property that is illegally used or acquired, 
without compensating the owner.” These remedies are only available to the government and 
typically are used in connection with a criminal investigation and prosecution.  
 
When a piece of property is forfeited, all right, title, and interest in the property vests in the 
government; consequently, all the defendant’s ownership rights are extinguished. The 
transfer of rights dates back to the moment when the property became forfeitable; i.e., when 
the crime was committed. Any subsequent transfer by the defendant is of no effect. This is 
known as the relation back doctrine. In the eyes of the law, the subsequent judicial proceedings 
merely confirm that a forfeiture has, in theory, already taken place (although the government 
cannot claim any rights in the property until it receives a forfeiture judgment). Because the 
government’s right to the property and related proceeds dates back to when the crime was 
committed, the government is legally entitled to any gain accruing from the proceeds of the 
illegal activity.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1636                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal forfeitures are conducted in conjunction with a criminal trial. The proof necessary 
to perfect the forfeiture is the same as required to convict the individual of the criminal 
charge, that is, proof beyond a reasonable doubt. The criminal forfeiture is an action in 
personam (against the person). In such a proceeding the government has the same burden of 
proof as it does in a criminal case. If the government sustains a conviction, the judge will 
forfeit the property at time of sentencing, at which time the property can be seized. 
Civil forfeitures are conducted independently from a criminal proceeding. A civil forfeiture is 
an action in rem  (against the property). In response to perceived abuses on the part of the 
government, Congress passed the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act of 2000, which 
drastically amended the laws concerning civil forfeiture.  
 
Below are some of the highlights of the Act: 
• Sets forth notification requirements with respect to seized property and civil forfeiture 
proceedings, including a requirement that the government notify interested parties as 
soon as practicable but within 60 days after the date of the seizure. 
• Sets forth procedures for filing claims for seized property. After a claim is filed, the 
government has 90 days in which to file a complaint for forfeiture. If the government 
fails to do this, then it must return the property. In lieu of or in addition to filing a  
civil forfeiture complaint, the government may include a forfeiture allegation in a 
criminal indictment.  
• Provides that the court appoint counsel to represent anyone with an interest in the 
property if the person is financially unable to afford counsel. 
• Places the burden of proof on the government to establish, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that the property is subject to forfeiture.  
• Provides that if the forfeiture action is being prosecuted because the property was used 
to commit or facilitate the commission of a criminal offense, or was involved in such 
commission, the government must establish that there was a substantial connection 
between the property and the offense.  
• Provides an “innocent owner’s” defense to the forfeiture action. The owner must prove 
his innocence by a preponderance of the evidence. 
• Authorizes a claimant to petition the court to determine whether a forfeiture was 
constitutionally excessive. Directs the court to compare the forfeiture to the gravity of 
the offense. Places upon the claimant the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of 
the evidence at a hearing conducted by the court without a jury, that the forfeiture is 
grossly disproportional to the offense upon the claimant.  
• Amends the Federal Tort Claims Act to allow claimants to sue the government for any 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1637 
damage or loss of property while in possession of the government. 
• Authorizes the use of forfeited property to pay restitution to any victim of the offense 
giving rise to the forfeiture, including, in the case of a money laundering offense, any 
offense constituting the underlying specified activity.  
• Directs that all civil forfeitures of real property and interests in real property proceed as 
judicial forfeitures. Prohibits (with exceptions) (1) real property that is the subject of a 
civil forfeiture from being seized before entry of a forfeiture order; and (2) the owners or 
occupants of the real property from being evicted from, or otherwise deprived of the use 
and enjoyment of, real property that is the subject of a pending forfeiture action.  
• Provides for the forfeiture of the proceeds of “specified unlawful activity” under the 
money laundering statutes.  
 
FORFEITURE OF FUNDS IN INTERBANK ACCOUNTS 
Section 319 of the PATRIOT Act amended 18, U.S.C., § 981, expanding the United States’ 
ability to seize the proceeds of money laundering activity by providing for forfeiture of funds 
held in United States interbank accounts. An interbank account is an account one financial 
institution holds at another financial institution.  
 
If funds involved in a money laundering transaction or the proceeds of any “specified 
unlawful activity” as defined by the money laundering statute are deposited in a foreign bank, 
and if that foreign bank has an interbank account in the United States, then the tainted funds 
will be deemed to have been deposited into the U.S. account. In other words, the funds in 
the foreign bank’s U.S. interbank account can be seized, even if the laundered money was 
not deposited in that account. The government does not have to trace the money in the U.S. 
interbank account to the money that was deposited in the foreign account. It is enough that 
the U.S. interbank account is held by the same financial institution in which the laundered 
money was deposited overseas.  
 
False Statements—Title 18, U.S.C., § 1001 
Persons who violate the Bank Secrecy Act and other reporting laws might also be guilty of 
violating of 18, U.S.C., § 1001, which is the prin cipal federal false statements statute. Because 
most of the obligations imposed by the BSA involve recordkeeping and reporting, many 
BSA violations might also constitute false statements. Section 1001 prohibits knowingly 
falsifying, concealing, covering up, or making a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any U.S. department or agency. 
Violations of this section are often charged when  an individual is stopped at the border with 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1638                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
a large amount of unreported cash and responds falsely to the questions of customs officers 
or inspectors. It has been used to prosecute individuals for structuring a transaction so that it 
deceives a financial institution into filing a false report. 
 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States — Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
Although numerous federal statutes make conspiracy a crime, the most commonly used 
federal conspiracy statute is the general conspiracy statute under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. 
Code.  
 
Section 371 can be divided into two parts: (1) conspiracies to commit a crime against the 
United States, and (2) conspiracies to defraud the United States or its agencies. Several 
courts have upheld convictions based on the second prong of the statute solely for failure to 
file CTRs. Such prosecutions are based on the theory that the person deprived the IRS of 
accurate CTRs. In the case of United States v. Richter, 610 F.Supp. 480 (N.D. Ill. 1985), the 
court held that the division of large amounts of cash into smaller, nonreportable transactions 
by several individuals working as a team was a conspiracy to obstruct the government 
function of receiving CTRs. However, other courts have rejected this theory on the grounds 
that there is no duty on the part of the customer to inform the government or the bank of 
the nature of the transaction whether reportable or not. 
 
Travel Act — Title 18, U.S.C., § 1952 
The Travel Act is applicable if the offense involves the proceeds of illegal activity and 
interstate travel. The Act provides that it is an offense to travel in interstate or foreign 
commerce or use the mail with the intent to distribute the proceeds of any unlawful activity; 
commit any crime of violence to further unlawful activity; or otherwise establish, promote, 
or manage an establishment for the purposes of carrying on any unlawful activity. Unlawful 
activity  is defined to include the reporting requirements under 31, U.S.C., Chapter 53 as well 
as the Money Laundering Statutes (18, U.S. C., §§ 1956 and 1957). The fines established 
under § 3571 can be imposed and/or up to five years imprisonment. If a crime of violence is 
involved, the term of imprisonment increases to a maximum of 20 years or life if someone 
was killed. 
 
State Laws 
Approximately 30 states have enacted statutes that criminalize money laundering, most of 
which apply to businesspeople and professionals. Some of the state statutes are broader than 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1639 
the federal statutes, and they are often enforced more aggressively than their federal 
counterparts.  
 
Many states have criminalized attempted  money laundering with the same penalties as the 
completed crime. Some states contain a “sting provision,” which enables the prosecution of 
activity even though the laundered money is not actually derived from criminal activity, but 
rather supplied by government agents as part of a sting operation. Several states have also 
enacted legislation requiring financial institutions and businesses to file currency transaction 
reports that mirror the federal reports. Some require duplicate filing with the states; others 
are satisfied with the federal filing. 
 
 
International Anti-Money Laundering Efforts 
In the 1980s, the mounting global drug crisis led to the birth of international anti-money 
laundering (AML) efforts. As a result, international organizations began taking on initiatives 
to fight money laundering while others were created for that same purpose. The principal 
organizations include the United Nations (UN), the Financial Action Task Force on Money 
Laundering (FATF), and the Egmont Group. Fo llowing the events of September 11, 2001, 
however, the international community’s AML focus shifted from anti-drugs to anti-terrorism 
and many international organizations revised the AML framework to not only examine 
funds from illegal sources but to also examine funds whose purposes were illegitimate. 
 
The United Nations 
In 1988, the UN adopted the UN Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic Substances, a mandate to bring an end to money laundering. In response, the 
UN established the Global Programme against Money-Laundering (GPML), which provides 
member states with assistance in complying with international AML standards. In addition, 
the GPML, in participation with other international organizations, maintains the 
International Money Laundering Information Ne twork (IMoLIN), a website that provides 
the international community with information and tools concerning AML.   
 
The Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) 
In 1989, the Group of Seven (G-7) leading industrial nations established the Financial 
Action Task Force (FATF), a multilateral policy-making and standard-setting body designed 
to combat money laundering. The FATF developed a set of Forty Recommendations 
regarding the proper approach to combat money laundering through law enforcement 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1640                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
efforts, financial regulations, and international cooperation. In addition to observing the 
current FATF members carrying out these recommendations, the FATF also lobbies for 
other nations and territories to adopt them. The FATF also issues financial advisories that 
warn financial institutions against doing business in countries that seem to invite  
money laundering. 
 
The Egmont Group 
The Egmont Group is an informal international network of financial intelligence units 
(FIUs), national centers that collect information on suspicious or unusual financial activity, 
designed to fight money laundering by encouraging global cooperation and mutual exchange 
of information.  
 
 
Enforcement and Prevention Strategies 
Financial institutions, brokers, and insurance companies should be aware and should make 
their employees aware of situations that could indicate money laundering activity.  
 
Bank Secrecy Act Compliance Programs 
Most financial institutions are now required to have a Bank Secrecy Act compliance program 
in place. However, every business that has the potential for transactions dealing with 
significant amounts of cash should institute a compliance program and a money laundering 
awareness program. All employees should be made aware of the money laundering statutes 
and the serious implications of such laws on the institution and the employees. Employees 
should be educated to be aware of transactions that might suggest possible laundering 
activity. Procedures should be set out detailing what an employee should do if a customer or 
transaction appears suspicious. 
 
Minimum Standards 
Treasury regulations provide that, at a minimum, a written compliance program should be 
adopted that: 
• Establishes a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing BSA compliance. 
• Provides for independent testing of compliance by internal auditors and/or outside 
examiners. 
• Designates a compliance officer(s) to ensure day-to-day compliance with BSA. 
• Provides training on an ongoing basis for all personnel. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1641 
Compliance Officer 
A business should select a person or team responsible for the day-to-day monitoring of the 
compliance program. The compliance officer should be given broad authority to monitor all 
aspects of the institution’s compliance including the development and refinement of the 
program and the monitoring of employee training programs. Such individual should also 
have the authority to conduct regular and ad hoc audits to ensure that the program is 
functioning effectively and to hire outside consultants as necessary to investigate problems. 
 
Policy Statement 
All entities covered under the reporting and recordkeeping laws and regulations should have 
a written policy against handling the proceeds of drug trafficking or other criminal activity. 
The statement should provide that the institution requires its employees to operate with the 
highest moral and ethical principles. It should include a statement that the company refuses 
to do business with criminals and money launderers; a commitment to conduct business only 
with legitimate business organizations; a statem ent against doing business with organizations 
that fail to provide proper documentation of their identity and purpose; clear directions for 
referring all suspicious transactions to the appropriate department; and a commitment to 
comply with the provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. 
 
“Know Your Customer” Programs 
Most financial institutions have “Know Your Customer” programs as part of their BSA 
compliance program. Such programs should provide for effective customer identification, 
account monitoring, and appropriate action in suspicious circumstances. Both the CTR 
reporting requirements and the recordkeeping requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act 
mandate the identification of customers using the institution’s services. 
 
NEW DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS 
For individual deposit accounts, minimum identification standards should be established. 
The information to be obtained should include:  
• Name 
• Address 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number (or for non-U.S. citizens, a passport, visa, or alien registration 
number) 
• Current employer 
• Business and residence telephone numbers 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1642                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The customer should be required to submit some form of identification that includes a 
photo such as a driver’s license or passport, and a copy should be made and kept in the 
customer’s file. If there are any doubts or inconsistencies about the information provided, 
the employee should be instructed to notify the appropriate department. 
Minimum standards for new business accounts should include: 
• Business name and address 
• Telephone number 
• Taxpayer identification number 
• Documents establishing the formation of the business entity (articles of incorporation, 
partnership agreement, etc.) 
• Copies of all assumed name filings or DBAs (doing business as) 
• A full description of the operations of the business 
• Credit and banking references 
• The identity of the officers, directors, or other principals 
 
The account representative should also consider making a personal visit to the customer’s 
place of business. Besides promoting good customer relations, a personal visit will help 
identify whether the business is legitimate or simply a front. The representative can also use 
this opportunity to get to know the principals of the business. 
 
NEW LOAN ACCOUNTS 
An institution should perform due diligence in establishing a new loan account because if the 
customer is engaged in money laundering, there is a risk of forfeiture of collateral pledged on 
the loans. Real or personal property that is traceable to drug sales or that is purchased with 
laundered funds is subject to seizure by the government. If the property seized is pledged as 
collateral, the financial institution must prove that it was an innocent lienholder of the 
property and had no knowledge of the illegal activity. 
 
Minimum standards regarding the information to be gathered should include: 
• Reliable identifying information similar to that required for new deposit accounts. 
• Reliable financial information such as financial statements, W-2s, and copies of tax 
returns. 
• The purpose of the loan. 
• Credit history and prior banking references. 
• Verifiable, legitimate means of repayment. 
  
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1643 
• Assurance that the loan amount is consistent with the purpose of the loan and the nature 
of the business. 
 
SERVICES FOR NONACCOUNTHOLDERS 
Banks often issue cashier’s checks, money orders, and traveler’s checks and perform 
currency exchanges, wire transfers, or check cashing services. Strict identification 
requirements should be established for transactions with persons who are not regular bank 
customers. In fact, regulations require that in some instances banks keep a record of the 
identity of persons who are not established customers. Such regulations usually require at a 
minimum the person’s name and address, driver’s license number (or other number of 
identifying document produced), and Social Security number or employer identification 
number. 
 
MONITORING ACCOUNTS 
While identification of customers is important, it is equally important to monitor the activity 
of accounts. The institution should identify unusual transactions that might not be consistent 
with the normal business of the customer. Unusual and dramatic changes in wire transfer, 
monetary instrument, and check transactions are important to identify. If unusual 
transactions or activities are noted, the institution should take some action to protect itself. 
The appropriate action in some cases might be to discuss the changes with the customer to 
find out the reasons for said inconsistencies. Increased transactions might be the result of an 
increase in sales or the result of a promotional activity. However, if the discussion leads to a 
reasonable suspicion that the transactions are illegitimate, the institution might be required to 
notify the appropriate government agency and/or file a Suspicious Activity Report. 
 
 
Special Problems for Insurance Companies 
Although financial institutions such as banks are primarily associated with money laundering 
activities, insurance companies have become major targets of money laundering operations 
because of the variety of services and investment vehicles they offer that can be used to 
conceal the source of funds. 
 
The most common form of money laundering that insurance companies face involves single 
premium contracts or policies. Examples include purchases of annuities, lump sum top-ups 
to an existing life insurance contract, and lump sum contributions to personal pension 
contracts.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1644                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Insurance companies, like other financial institutions, should educate their employees to look 
out for transactions that appear to be inconsistent with a customer’s known legitimate 
business or personal activities or the normal transactions for that type of account. To that 
end, insurance companies should institute “Know Your Customer” programs such as those 
described above. 
 
Red Flags 
The following transactions might indicate money laundering is taking place. The list should be 
used to identify those transactions and customers that might require further investigation. 
• Large purchase of a lump sum contract when the customer typically purchases small, 
regular payment contracts. 
• Use of a third-party check to make a purchase or investment. 
• Lack of concern for the performance of an investment but great concern for the early 
cancellation of the contract. 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction that is typically handled with checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy or account or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with the customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, the customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to a third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Request to borrow the maximum cash value of a single premium policy soon after 
paying for the policy. 
 
Detection 
Insurance companies must file all appropriate reports and follow all the requirements of the 
Bank Secrecy Act, including the implementation of an effective BSA compliance program.  
 
Certain other reports can help companies identify suspicious transactions. Incoming and 
outgoing wire transfer logs  can help companies identify possible patterns suggestive of money 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1645 
laundering. Account activity reports generally show weekly and/or monthly balances, deposits, 
and withdrawals. Review of these statements can identify those accounts with large increases 
in average balances and numbers of transactions. Policy cancellation reports should identify 
policies canceled within a specific time period. Report details should include the amount of 
the cash surrender value, the identity of the sales agent, and the actual term of the policy. 
 
The “Tracing Illicit Transactions” chapter in the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners  
Manual provides more information about techniques for detecting illicit income and 
payments. Included in that chapter are details on analyzing financial records, financial and 
behavioral profiles, and net worth analysis.  
  
Currency Transaction Report
 OMB No. 1506-0004
 FINCEN Form   104
 (Formerly Form 4789)
 (Eff. December 2003)
 (Complete all parts that apply--See Instructions)
 1     Check all box(es) that apply:
 Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 Department of the Treasury
 FinCEN
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B -- Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 If Section B is left blank or incomplete, check the box(es) below to indicate the reason(s)
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 44  Title of approving official
 47  Type or print preparer’s name
 45   Signature of approving official
 48  Type or print name of person to contact 49  Telephone number
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (If not U.S.)
 40    City
 38    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 Enter Regulator or BSA
 Examiner code number
       (see instructions)
 37   Name of financial institution
 42   ZIP code 43  Routing (MICR) number41  State
 26     Total cash in $ .00
 Cat. No. 37683N FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly Form 4789) (Rev. 8-03)
 Previous editions will not be accepted after August 31, 2004.
 Please type or print.
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 b          Mail Deposit or Shipment c          Night Deposit or Automated Teller Machine d          Multiple Transactionsa          Armored Car Service
 8  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 b           Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other f    Number:
 Part  II Amount and Type of Transaction(s).  Check all boxes that apply.
 28  Date of  transaction
 ___/ __/______
 MM  DD YYYY
 26a   Foreign cash in .00
 27     Total cash out $                 .00
 27a    Foreign cash out .00
 30          Wire Transfer(s) 31           Negotiable Instrument(s) Purchased
 34           Deposit(s)/Withdrawal(s)
 35           Account Number(s) Affected (if any): 36           Other (specify)
 Part  III Financial Institution Where Transaction(s) Takes Place
 39   EIN or SSN
 For Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 4.
 Sign
 Here
 ___/__ /_______
 MM DD YYYY
 ( )
 46   Date of signature
  a        Amends prior report         b        Multiple persons        c        Multiple transactions
 e   Issued by:
 33          Currency Exchange(s)
 d          Other
 b          Passport c           Alien registrationa          Driver’s license/State I.D.
 f    Number:e   Issued by:
 e          Conducted On Own Behalf
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D.
  (see instructions, page 3)
 32           Negotiable Instrument(s) Cashed
 29           Foreign Country
  (see instructions, page 3)
Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B--Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 f    Number:e   Issued by:
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 8  Date of birth
 ____/__ /_______
 MM  DD  YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/__ /_____
 MM  DD  YYYY
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b           Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other e   Issued by: f  Number:
 Multiple Persons
 Complete applicable parts below if box 1b on page 1 is checked
 FinCEN Form 104 (formerly Form 4789) (Rev. 8-03) Page 2
 Section A--Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s) Is Conducted
 5    Doing business as (DBA)
 4  Middle initial3  First name2    Individual’s last name or entity’s name
 6  SSN or EIN
 7    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 9     City 10  State 11  ZIP code 12  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 25    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 Section B--Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s) (if other than above).
 14    If an individual, describe method used to verify identity:
 f    Number:
 18    Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
 17  Middle initial16  First name15    Individual’s last name
 19  SSN
 20     City 21  State 22  ZIP code 23  Country code
        (if not U.S.)
 Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)Part  I
 8  Date of birth
 ____/____/___ 
MM  DD  YYYY
 24  Date of birth
 ___/_ _______
 MM DD YYYY
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b           Passport c           Alien registration
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b          Passport c           Alien registration
 d          Other
 a          Driver’s license/State I.D. b          Passport c           Alien registration
 e   Issued by:
 d          Other
 f    Number:e   Issued by:d          Other
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
 13  Occupation, profession, or business
FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly Form 4789 (Rev. 8-03) Page 3
 Suspicious Transactions
 This Currency Transaction Report (CTR) should NOT be
 filed for suspicious transactions involving $10,000 or less
 in currency OR to note that a transaction of more than
 $10,000 is suspicious.  Any suspicious or unusual activity
 should be reported by a financial institution in the
 manner prescribed by its appropriate federal regulator
 or BSA examiner. (See the instructions for Item 37.) If a
 transaction is suspicious and in excess of $10,000 in
 currency, then both a CTR and the appropriate
 Suspicious Activity Report form must be filed.
 Should the suspicious activity require immediate
 attention, financial institutions should telephone
 1-800-800-CTRS. An Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
 employee will direct the call to the local office of the
 IRS Criminal Investigation Division (CI). This toll-free
 number is operational Monday through Friday, from
 approximately 9:00 am to 6:00 pm Eastern Standard
 Time.  If an emergency, consult directory assistance for
 the local IRS CID Office.
 General Instructions
 Who Must File.  Each financial institution (other than a
 casino, which instead must file FinCEN Form 103, and
 the U.S. Postal Service for which there are separate rules)
 must file FinCEN Form 104 (formerly 4789) (CTR) for
 each deposit, withdrawal, exchange of currency, or other
 payment or transfer, by, through, or to the financial
 institution which involves a transaction in currency of
 more than $10,000.  Multiple transactions must be
 treated as a single transaction if the financial institution
 has knowledge that (1) they are by or on behalf of the
 same person, and (2) they result in either currency
 received (Cash In) or currency disbursed (Cash Out) by
 the financial institution totaling more than $10,000
 during any one business day.  For a bank, a business day
 is the day on which transactions are routinely posted to
 customers’ accounts, as normally communicated to
 depository customers.  For all other financial institutions,
 a business day is a calendar day.
 Generally, financial institutions are defined as banks,
 other types of depository institutions, brokers or dealers
 in securities, money transmitters, currency exchangers,
 check cashers, and issuers and sellers of money orders
 and traveler’s checks.  Should you have questions, see
 the definitions in 31 CFR Part 103.
 When and Where To File.  File this CTR by the 15th
 calendar day after the day of the transaction with the:
 IRS Detroit Computing Center
 ATTN: CTR
 P.O. Box 33604
 Detroit, MI 48232-5604
 Keep a copy of each CTR for five years from the date
 filed.
 A financial institution may apply to file the CTRs
 magnetically. To obtain an application to file magnetically,
 write to the:
 IRS Detroit Computing Center
 ATTN: CTR Magnetic Media Coordinator
 P.O. Box 33604
 Detroit, MI 48232-5604
 Identification Requirements.  All individuals (except
 employees of armored car services) conducting a
 reportable transaction(s) for themselves or for another
 person, must be identified by means of an official
 document(s). Acceptable forms of identification include
 a driver’s license, military and military/dependent
 identification cards, passport, state issued identification
 card, cedular card (foreign), non-resident alien
 identification cards, or any other identification document
 or documents, which contain name and preferably
 address   and a photograph and are normally acceptable
 by financial institutions as a means of identification when
 cashing checks for persons other than established
 customers.
 Acceptable identification information obtained
 previously and maintained in the financial institution’s
 records may be used.  For example, if documents
 verifying an individual’s identity were examined and
 recorded on a signature card when an account was
 opened, the financial institution may rely on that
 information. In completing the CTR, the financial
 institution must indicate on the form the method, type,
 and number of the identification. Statements such as
 “known customer” or “signature card on file” are not
 sufficient for form completion.
 Penalties.  Civil and criminal penalties are provided for
 failure to file a CTR or to supply information or for filing
 a false or fraudulent CTR.  See 31 U.S.C. 5321, 5322
 and 5324.
 For purposes of this CTR, the terms below have the
 following meanings:
 Currency.  The coin and paper money of the United
 States or any other country, which is circulated and
 customarily used and accepted as money.
 Person.  An individual, corporation, partnership, trust
 or estate, joint stock company, association, syndicate,
 joint venture or other unincorporated organization or
 group.
 Organization.  Entity other than an individual.
 Transaction in Currency.  The physical transfer of
 currency from one person to another.  This does not
 include a transfer of funds by means of bank check, bank
 draft, wire transfer or other written order that does not
 involve the physical transfer of currency.
 Negotiable Instruments.  All checks and drafts (including
 business, personal, bank, cashier’s and third-party),
 money orders, and promissory notes. For purposes of
 this CTR, all traveler’s checks shall also be considered
 negotiable instruments whether or not they are in bearer
 form.
 Foreign exchange rates. If completing items 26a/27a,
 use the exchange rate in effect for the business day of
 the transaction. The source of the exchange rate that is
 used will be determined by the reporting institution.
 Specific Instructions
 Because of the limited space on the front and back of
 the CTR, it may be necessary to submit additional
 information on attached sheets. Submit this additional
 information on plain paper attached to the CTR. Be sure
 to put the individual’s or entity’s name and identifying
 number (items 2, 3, 4, and 6 of the CTR) on any
 additional sheets so that if it becomes separated, it may
 be associated with the CTR.
 Item 1a. Amends Prior Report. If this CTR is being
 filed because it  amends a report  filed previously, check
 Item 1a.  Staple a copy of the original CTR to the
 amended one, complete Part III fully and only those other
 entries which are being amended.
 Item 1b. Multiple Persons.  If this transaction is being
 conducted by more than one person or on behalf of
 more than one person, check Item 1b. Enter information
 in Part I for one of the persons and provide information
 on any other persons on the back of the CTR.
 Item 1c. Multiple Transactions.  If the financial
 institution has knowledge that there are multiple
 transactions, check Item 1c.
 PART I - Person(s) Involved in Transaction(s)
 Section A must be completed.  If an individual conducts
 a transaction on his own behalf, complete Section A and
 leave Section “B” BLANK.  If an individual conducts a
 transaction on his own behalf and on behalf of another
 person(s), complete Section “A” for each person and leave
 Section “B” BLANK.  If an individual conducts a
 transaction on behalf of another person(s), complete
 Section “B” for the individual conducting the transaction,
 and complete Section “A” for each person on whose
 behalf the transaction is conducted of whom the financial
 institution has knowledge.
 Section A. Person(s) on Whose Behalf Transaction(s)
 Is Conducted.  See instructions above.
 Items 2, 3, and 4. Individual/Organization Name.  If
 the person on whose behalf the transaction(s) is
 conducted is an individual, put his/her last name in Item
 2, first name in Item 3, and middle initial in Item 4.  If
 there is no middle initial, leave item 4 BLANK. If the
 transaction is conducted on behalf of an entity, put its
 name in Item 2 and leave Items 3 and 4 BLANK.
 Item 5. Doing Business As (DBA).  If the financial
 institution has knowledge of a separate “doing business
 as” name, enter it in Item 5. For example, Smith
 Enterprise DBA MJ’s Pizza.
 Item 6. SSN/ITIN or EIN.  Enter the Social Security
 Number (SSN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification
 Number (ITIN) or Employer Identification Number (EIN)
 of the person or entity identified in Item 2.  If none,
 write NONE.
 Items 7, 9, 10, 11, and 12.  Address.  Enter the
 permanent address including ZIP Code of the person
 identified in Item 2.  Use the U.S. Postal Service’s two
 letter state abbreviation code.  A P. O. Box should not
 be used by itself, and may only be used if there is no
 street address.  If a P. O. Box is used, the name of the
 apartment or suite number, road or route number where
 the person resides must also be provided.  If the address
 is outside the U.S., provide the street address, city,
 province or state, postal code (if known), and the two
 letter country code. For country code list go to
 www.fincen.gov/reg_bsaforms.html or telephone
 1-800-949-2732 and select option number 5. If U.S.,
 leave item 12 blank.
 Item 8. Date of Birth.  Enter the date of birth.  Eight
 numerals must be inserted for each date.  The first two
 will reflect the month, the second two the day, and the
 last four the year.  A zero (0) should precede any single
 digit number.  For example, if an individual’s birth date
 is April 3 1948, Item 8 should read 04 03 1948.
 Item 13. Occupation, Profession, or Business.  Identify
 the occupation, profession, or business of the person on
 whose behalf the transaction was conducted.  For
 example: secretary, shoe salesman, carpenter, attorney,
 housewife, restaurant, liquor store,etc.  Do not use non-
 specific terms such as merchant, self-employed,
 businessman, etc.
 Item 14. If an Individual, Describe Method Used To
 Verify Identity.  If an individual conducts the
 transaction(s) on his/her own behalf, his/her identity must
 be verified by examination of an acceptable document
 (see General Instructions). For example, check box a if
 a driver’s license is used to verify an individual’s identity,
 and enter the state that issued the license and the number
 in items e and f. If the transaction is conducted by an
 individual on behalf of another individual not present
 or on behalf of an entity, enter N/A in Item 14.
 Section B. Individual(s) Conducting Transaction(s)
 (if other than above).  Financial institutions should enter
 as much information as is available.
FinCEN Form 104 (Formerly 4789 (Rev. 8-03) Page 4
 However, there may be instances in which Items 15-25
 may be left BLANK or incomplete. If Items 15-25 are
 left BLANK or incomplete, check one or more of the
 boxes provided to indicate the reasons.
 Example: If there are multiple transactions that, if only
 when aggregated, the financial institution has knowledge
 the transactions exceed the reporting threshold, and
 therefore, did not identify the transactor(s), check box d
 for Multiple Transactions.
 Items 15, 16, and 17. Individual’s Name. Complete
 these items if an individual conducts a transaction(s) on
 behalf of another person.  For example, if John Doe, an
 employee of XYZ Grocery Store, makes a deposit to the
 store’s account, XYZ Grocery Store should be identified
 in Section A and John Doe should be identified in section
 B.
 Items 18, 20, 21, 22, and 23. Address. Enter the
 permanent street address including ZIP Code of the
 individual.  (See the instructions for Items 7 and 9 through
 12.) Enter country code if not U.S. (Reference item 12).
 Item 19. SSN/ITIN.  If the individual has a Social Security
 Number, or Individual Taxpayer Indentifcation Number,
 enter it in Item 19.  If the individual does not have an
 SSN/ITIN, enter NONE.
 Item 24. Date of Birth.  Enter the individual’s date of
 birth.  (See the instructions for Item 8.)
 Item 25. If an Individual, Describe Method Used To
 Verify Identity.  Enter the method used to identify the
 individual’s identity. (See General Instructions and the
 instructions for Item 14.)
 PART II - Amount and Type of Transaction(s)
 Complete Part II to identify the type of transaction(s)
 and the amount(s) involved.
 Items 26 and 27. Total Cash In/Total Cash Out.  In the
 spaces provided, enter the total amount of currency
 received (Total Cash In) or total currency disbursed (Total
 Cash Out) by the financial institution. If foreign currency
 is exchanged, use the U.S. dollar equivalent on the day
 of the transaction (See “Foreign exchange rates”), and
 complete item 26a or 27a, whichever is appropriate.
 If less than a full dollar amount is involved, increase
 that figure to the next highest dollar.  For example, if the
 currency totals $20,000.05, show the total as
 $20,001.00.
 Items 26a and 27a. Foreign cash in/Foreign cash out.
 If foreign currency is exchanged, enter the amount of
 foreign currency in items 26a and 27a. Report country
 of origin in item 29.
 Item 28. Date of Transaction.  Insert eight numerals for
 each date. (See instructions for Item 8.)
 Item 29. Foreign Country.  If items 26a and/or 27a are
 completed indicating that foreign currency is involved,
 check Item 29 and identify the country.  If multiple
 foreign currencies are involved, check box 36 and
 identify the additional country(s) and/or currency(s)
 involved.
 Determining Whether Transactions Meet the
 Reporting Threshold.
 Only cash transactions that, if alone or when
 aggregated, exceed $10,000 should be reported on the
 CTR.  Transactions shall not be offset against one another.
 If there are both Cash In and Cash Out transactions
 that are reportable, the amounts should be considered
 separately and not aggregated.  However, they may be
 reported on a single CTR.
 If there is a currency exchange, it should be aggregated
 separately with each of the Cash In and Cash Out totals.
 Example 1: A person deposits $11,000 in currency to
 his savings account and withdraws $3,000 in currency
 from his checking account. The CTR should be
 completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000 and no entry for Cash Out.  This is
 because the $3,000 transaction does not meet the
 reporting threshold.
 Example 2: A person deposits $11,000 in currency to
 his savings account and withdraws $12,000 in currency
 from his checking account. The CTR should be
 completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000, Cash Out $12,000.  This is because
 there are two reportable transactions.  However, one
 CTR may be filed to reflect both.
 Example 3: A person deposits $6,000 in currency to his
 savings account and withdraws $4,000 in currency from
 his checking account. Further, he presents $5,000 in
 currency to be exchanged for the equivalent in French
 Francs. The CTR should be completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000 and no entry for Cash Out.  This is
 because in determining whether the transactions are
 reportable, the currency exchange is aggregated with
 each of the Cash In and Cash Out amounts. The result is
 a reportable $11,000 Cash In transaction.  The total Cash
 Out amount is $9,000, which does not meet the
 reporting threshold.  Therefore, it is not entered on the
 CTR.
 Example 4: A person deposits $6,000 in currency to his
 savings account and withdraws $7,000 in currency from
 his checking account.  Further, he presents $5,000 in
 currency to be exchanged for the equivalent in French
 francs. The CTR should be completed as follows:
 Cash In $11,000, Cash Out $12,000.  This is because
 in determining whether the transactions are reportable,
 the currency exchange is aggregated with each of the
 Cash In and Cash Out amounts.  In this example, each
 of the Cash In and Cash Out totals exceed $10,000 and
 must be reflected on the CTR.
 Items 30-33.  Check the appropriate item(s) to identify
 the following type of transaction(s):
 30. Wire Transfer(s)
 31. Negotiable Instrument(s) Purchased
 32. Negotiable Instrument(s) Cashed
 33. Currency Exchange(s)
 Item 34. Deposits/Withdrawals.  Check this item to
 identify deposits to or withdrawals from  accounts, e.g.
 demand deposit accounts, savings accounts, time
 deposits, mutual fund accounts, or any other account
 held at the financial institution.  Enter the account
 number(s) in Item 35.
 Item 35. Account Numbers Affected (if any).  Enter
 the account numbers of any accounts affected by the
 transactions that are maintained at the financial
 institution conducting the transaction(s).  If necessary,
 use additional sheets of paper to indicate all of the
 affected accounts.
 Example 1:  If a person cashes a check drawn on an
 account held at the financial institution, the CTR should
 be completed as follows:
 Indicate negotiable instrument(s) cashed and provide
 the account number of the check.
 If the transaction does not affect an account, make no
 entry.
 Example 2: A person cashes a check drawn on another
 financial institution.  In this instance, negotiable
 instrument(s) cashed would be indicated, but no account
 at the financial institution has been affected.  Therefore,
 Item 35 should be left BLANK.
 Item 36. Other (specify).  If a transaction is not identified
 in Items 30-34, check Item 36 and provide an additional
 description.  For example, a person presents a check to
 purchase “foreign currency.” Also list multiple foreign
 currencies from item 29.
 PART III - Financial Institution Where Transaction(s) Take
 Place
 Item 37. Name of Financial Institution and Identity of
 Regulator or BSA Examiner.  Enter the financial institution’s
 full legal name and identify the regulator  or BSA examiner,
 using the following codes:
 Regulator or BSA Examiner                                              CODE
 Comptroller of the Currency (OCC).........................1
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)........2
 Federal Reserve System (FRS)...........................................3
 Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS)......................................4
 National Credit Union Administration (NCUA)........5
 Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).............6
 Internal Revenue Service (IRS).........................................7
 U.S. Postal Service (USPS).................................................8
 Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC)...............9
 State Regulator.................................................................10
 Items 38, 40, 41, and 42. Address.  Enter the street address,
 city, state, and ZIP Code of the financial institution where
 the transaction occurred.  If there are multiple transactions,
 provide information of the office or branch where any one
 of the transactions has occurred.
 Item 39. EIN or SSN.  Enter the financial institution’s EIN.
 If the financial institution does not have an EIN, enter the
 SSN of the financial institution’s principal owner.
 Item 43. Routing (MICR) Number.  If a depository
 institution, enter the routing (Magnetic Ink Character
 Recognition (MICR)) number.
 SIGNATURE
 Items 44 and 45. Title and signature of Approving
 Official.  The official who reviews and approves the CTR
 must indicate his/her title and sign the CTR.
 Item 46. Date of Signature.  The approving official must
 enter the date the CTR is signed. (See the instructions for
 Item 8.)
 Item 47. Preparer’s Name.  Type or print the full name of
 the individual preparing the CTR. The preparer and the
 approving official may not necessarily be the same
 individual.
 Items 48 and 49. Contact Person/Telephone Number.
 Type or print the name and telephone number of an
 individual to contact concerning questions about the CTR.
 Paperwork Reduction Act Notice.  The requested
 information is useful in criminal, tax, and regulatory
 investigations and proceedings.  Financial institutions are
 required to provide the information under 31 U.S.C.
 5313 and 31 CFR Part 103, commonly referred to as the
 Bank Secrecy Act (BSA). The BSA is administered by the
 U.S. Department of the Treasury’s Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network (FinCEN).  You are not required
 to provide the requested information unless a form
 displays a valid OMB control number.
 The time needed to complete this form will vary
 depending on individual circumstances. The estimated
 average time is 19 minutes.  If you have comments
 concerning the accuracy of this time estimate or
 suggestions for making this form simpler, you may write
 to the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, P. O.
 Box 39, Vienna, VA 22183. Do not send this form to
 this office. Instead, see When and Where to File in the
 instructions.
Report of Cash Payments Over $10,000
 Received in a Trade or Business
  
 IRS
 Form
  
8300 
OMB No. 1545-0892 
(Rev. March 2008) 
' See instructions for definition of cash. 
Department of the Treasury
 Internal Revenue Service
  
For Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction Act Notice, see page 5. 
Suspicious transaction.
  
b
  
Amends prior report;
  
a
  
Check appropriate box(es) if:
  
1
  Identity of Individual From Whom the Cash Was Received 
If more than one individual is involved, check here and see instructions '
  
2
  Taxpayer identification number
  
6
  
M.I.
  
5
  
First name
  
4
  
Last name
  
3
  
Occupation, profession, or business
  
13
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
7
  
Date of birth '
  
8
  
Country (if not U.S.)
  
12
  
ZIP code
  
11
  
State
  
10
  
City
  
9
  
Describe ID '
  
a
  
Identifying
 document (ID)
  
14
  c
  Person on Whose Behalf This Transaction Was Conducted 
If this transaction was conducted on behalf of more than one person, check here and see instructions '
  
15
  19
  
M.I.
  
18
  
First name
  
17
  
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
  
16
  
Employer identification number
  
Occupation, profession, or business
  
22
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
21
  
Country (if not U.S.)
  
26
  
ZIP code
  
25
  
State
  
24
  
City
  
23
  
Description of Transaction and Method of Payment 
Business services provided
  
d
  
Personal property purchased
  
a
  
Intangible property purchased
  
e
  
Real property purchased
  
b
  Personal services provided
  
c
  
32
  
Date cash received
  
28
  
.00
  
$
  
Business That Received Cash 
Employer identification number
  
36
  
Name of business that received cash
  
35
  
Social security number
  
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
  
37
  
Nature of your business
  
41
  
ZIP code
  
40
  
State
  
39
  
City
  
38
  
Under penalties of perjury, I declare that to the best of my knowledge the information I have furnished above is true, correct,
 and complete.
  
42
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Cat. No. 62133S
  
Part IV
  
Part I
  
Part II
  
Part III
  
U.S. currency
  b
  
Foreign currency
  
20
  
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
  
Total cash received
  
29
  
$ .00
  
If cash was received in
 more than one payment,
 check here '
  
30
  
Total price if different from
 item 29
  
31
  
$ .00
  Amount of cash received (in U.S. dollar equivalent) (must equal item 29) (see instructions):
  
a
  .00
  .00
  .00
  .00
  .00
  
c
  
Cashier’s check(s)
  d
  
Money order(s)
  e
  
Bank draft(s)
  f
  
Traveler’s check(s)
  
(Amount in $100 bills or higher $ )
  (Country ' )
  
.00
  
Type of transaction
  
33
  
Exchange of cash
  
g
  Escrow or trust funds
  
h
  
Other (specify in item 34) '
  
j
  
Debt obligations paid
  
f
  
Specific description of property or service shown in
 33. Give serial or registration number, address, docket
 number, etc. '
  
34
  
 
 
Issuer’s name(s) and serial number(s) of the monetary instrument(s) '
  
 
 
% 
(see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
Bail received by court clerks
Signature
Title
Date of
 signature
Type or print name of contact person
Contact telephone number
' Use this form for transactions occurring after March 31, 2008. Do not use prior versions after this date. 
FinCEN
 Form
  
8300 
OMB No. 1506-0018 
(Rev. March 2008) 
Department of the Treasury
 Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network
  
Authorized official
  
' ' 
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
b
  
Issued by '
  Number '
  
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
  
Continued — Complete if box 2 on page 1 is checked 
Continued — Complete if box 15 on page 1 is checked 
Part I
  
Part II
  
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Page 2
  Multiple Parties
  (Complete applicable parts below if box 2 or 15 on page 1 is checked)
  
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Last name
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Date of birth '
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Last name
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Date of birth '
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
First name
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
Employer identification number
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
M.I.
First name
Individual’s last name or Organization’s name
Employer identification number
Occupation, profession, or business
Address (number, street, and apt. or suite no.)
Country (if not U.S.)
ZIP code
State
City
Doing business as (DBA) name (see instructions)
Taxpayer identification number
IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008)
  
Describe ID '
Identifying
 document (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Identifying
 document (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Describe ID '
Alien
 identification (ID)
Issued by '
  Number '
Comments – Please use the lines provided below to comment on or clarify any information you entered on any line in Parts I, II, III, and IV
Page 3 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Important Reminders
  
Clerks of federal or state courts must
 file Form 8300 if more than $10,000 in
 cash is received as bail for an
 individual(s) charged with certain criminal
 offenses. For these purposes, a clerk
 includes the clerk’s office or any other
 office, department, division, branch, or
 unit of the court that is authorized to
 receive bail. If a person receives bail on
 behalf of a clerk, the clerk is treated as
 receiving the bail. See the instructions
 for Item 33 on page 5.
  
General Instructions
  Who must file. Each person engaged in
 a trade or business who, in the course
 of that trade or business, receives more
 than $10,000 in cash in one transaction
 or in two or more related transactions,
 must file Form 8300. Any transactions
 conducted between a payer (or its
 agent) and the recipient in a 24-hour
 period are related transactions.
 Transactions are considered related
 even if they occur over a period of more
 than 24 hours if the recipient knows, or
 has reason to know, that each
 transaction is one of a series of
 connected transactions.
  
Exceptions. Cash is not required to be
 reported if it is received:
  
When to file. File Form 8300 by the
 15th day after the date the cash was
 received. If that date falls on a Saturday,
 Sunday, or legal holiday, file the form on
 the next business day.
  
Statement to be provided. You must
 give a written or electronic statement to
 each person named on a required Form
 8300 on or before January 31 of the
 year following the calendar year in which
 the cash is received. The statement
 must show the name, telephone number,
 and address of the information contact
 for the business, the aggregate amount
 of reportable cash received, and that the
 information was furnished to the IRS.
 Keep a copy of the statement for your
 records.
  Multiple payments. If you receive more
 than one cash payment for a single
 transaction or for related transactions,
 you must report the multiple payments
 any time you receive a total amount that
 exceeds $10,000 within any 12-month
 period. Submit the report within 15 days
 of the date you receive the payment that
  
Taxpayer identification number (TIN).
 You must furnish the correct TIN of the
 person or persons from whom you
 receive the cash and, if applicable, the
 person or persons on whose behalf the
 transaction is being conducted. You may
 be subject to penalties for an incorrect
 or missing TIN.
  
Penalties. You may be subject to
 penalties if you fail to file a correct and
 complete Form 8300 on time and you
 cannot show that the failure was due to
 reasonable cause. You may also be
 subject to penalties if you fail to furnish
 timely a correct and complete statement
 to each person named in a required
 report. A minimum penalty of $25,000
 may be imposed if the failure is due to
 an intentional or willful disregard of the
 cash reporting requirements.
  
c By a financial institution required to file
 Form 104, Currency Transaction Report.
  
c By a casino required to file (or exempt
 from filing) Form 103, Currency
 Transaction Report by Casinos, if the
 cash is received as part of its gaming
 business.
  
c By an agent who receives the cash
 from a principal, if the agent uses all of
 the cash within 15 days in a second
 transaction that is reportable on Form
 8300 or on Form 104, and discloses all
 the information necessary to complete
 Part II of Form 8300 or Form 104 to the
 recipient of the cash in the second
 transaction.
  
c In a transaction occurring entirely
 outside the United States. See
 Publication 1544, Reporting Cash
 Payments of Over $10,000 (Received in
 a Trade or Business), regarding
 transactions occurring in Puerto Rico
 and territories and possessions of the
 United States.
  
c In a transaction that is not in the
 course of a person’s trade or business.
  
If multiple payments are made in cash
 to satisfy bail and the initial payment
 does not exceed $10,000, the initial
 payment and subsequent payments
 must be aggregated and the information
 return must be filed by the 15th day
 after receipt of the payment that causes
 the aggregate amount to exceed
 $10,000 in cash. In such cases, the
 reporting requirement can be satisfied
 either by sending a single written
 statement with an aggregate amount
 listed or by furnishing a copy of each
 Form 8300 relating to that payer.
 Payments made to satisfy separate bail
 requirements are not required to be
 aggregated. See Treasury Regulations
 section 1.6050I-2.
  
Voluntary use of Form 8300. Form
 8300 may be filed voluntarily for any
 suspicious transaction (see Definitions
 on page 4) for use by FinCEN and the
 IRS, even if the total amount does not
 exceed $10,000.
  
If you have requested but are not able
 to get a TIN for one or more of the
 parties to a transaction within 15 days
 following the transaction, file the report
 and attach a statement explaining why
 the TIN is not included.
  Exception: You are not required to
 provide the TIN of a person who is a
 nonresident alien individual or a foreign
 organization if that person or foreign
 organization:
  
Keep a copy of each Form 8300 for 5
 years from the date you file it.
  
Where to file. File the form with the
 Internal Revenue Service, Detroit
 Computing Center, P.O. Box 32621,
 Detroit, Ml 48232.
  
The TIN for an individual (including a
 sole proprietorship) is the individual’s
 social security number (SSN). For certain
 resident aliens who are not eligible to
 get an SSN and nonresident aliens who
 are required to file tax returns, it is an
 IRS Individual Taxpayer Identification
 Number (ITIN). For other persons,
 including corporations, partnerships, and
 estates, it is the employer identification
 number (EIN).
  
Casinos must file Form 8300 for
 nongaming activities (restaurants, shops,
 etc.).
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Section references are to the Internal
 Revenue Code unless otherwise noted.
  
c Section 6050I (26 United States Code
 (U.S.C.) 6050I) and 31 U.S.C. 5331
 require that certain information be
 reported to the IRS and the Financial
 Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN).
 This information must be reported on
 IRS/FinCEN Form 8300.
  
c Item 33 box i is to be checked only by
 clerks of the court; box d is to be
 checked by bail bondsmen. See the
 instructions on page 5.
  
c The meaning of the word “currency” 
for purposes of 31 U.S.C. 5331 is the
 same as for the word “cash” (See Cash
 on page 4).
  
Penalties may also be imposed for
 causing, or attempting to cause, a trade
 or business to fail to file a required
  
causes the total amount to exceed
 $10,000. If more than one report is
 required within 15 days, you may file a
 combined report. File the combined
 report no later than the date the earliest
 report, if filed separately, would have to
 be filed.
  
c Does not have income effectively
 connected with the conduct of a U.S.
 trade or business;
  
c Does not have an office or place of
 business, or a fiscal or paying agent in
 the United States;
  
c Does not furnish a withholding
 certificate described in §1.1441-1(e)(2) or
 (3) or §1.1441-5(c)(2)(iv) or (3)(iii) to the
 extent required under §1.1441-1(e)(4)(vii);
 or
  
c Does not have to furnish a TIN on any
 return, statement, or other document as
 required by the income tax regulations
 under section 897 or 1445.
  
Page 4 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Part I
  Item 2. If two or more individuals
 conducted the transaction you are
 reporting, check the box and complete
 Part I for any one of the individuals.
 Provide the same information for the
 other individual(s) on the back of the
 form. If more than three individuals are
 involved, provide the same information
 on additional sheets of paper and attach
 them to this form.
  Item 6. Enter the taxpayer identification
 number (TIN) of the individual named.
 See Taxpayer identification number (TIN)
 on page 3 for more information.
  Item 8. Enter eight numerals for the date
 of birth of the individual named. For
 example, if the individual’s birth date is
 July 6, 1960, enter 07 06 1960.
  
Item 13. Fully describe the nature of the
 occupation, profession, or business (for
 example, “plumber,” “attorney,” or
 “automobile dealer”). Do not use general
 or nondescriptive terms such as
 “businessman” or “self-employed.”
  Item 14. You must verify the name and
 address of the named individual(s).
 Verification must be made by
 examination of a document normally
 accepted as a means of identification
 when cashing checks (for example, a
 driver’s license, passport, alien
 registration card, or other official
 document). In item 14a, enter the type of
 document examined. In item 14b,
 identify the issuer of the document. In
 item 14c, enter the document’s number.
 For example, if the individual has a Utah
 driver’s license, enter “driver’s license” 
in item 14a, “Utah” in item 14b, and the
 number appearing on the license in item
 14c.
  
Part II
  Item 15. If the transaction is being
 conducted on behalf of more than one
 person (including husband and wife or
 parent and child), check the box and
 complete Part II for any one of the
 persons. Provide the same information
 for the other person(s) on the back of
 the form. If more than three persons are
 involved, provide the same information
 on additional sheets of paper and attach
 them to this form.
  
Specific Instructions
  You must complete all parts. However,
 you may skip Part II if the individual
 named in Part I is conducting the
 transaction on his or her behalf only. For
 voluntary reporting of suspicious
 transactions, see Item 1 below.
  Item 1. If you are amending a prior
 report, check box 1a. Complete the
 appropriate items with the correct or
 amended information only. Complete all
 of Part IV. Staple a copy of the original
 report to the amended report.
  To voluntarily report a suspicious
 transaction (see Suspicious transaction
 above), check box 1b. You may also
 telephone your local IRS Criminal
 Investigation Division or call
 1-866-556-3974.
  
FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Note. You must complete all three items
 (a, b, and c) in this line to make sure
 that Form 8300 will be processed
 correctly.
  
Definitions
  Cash. The term “cash” means the
 following:
  
c U.S. and foreign coin and currency
 received in any transaction.
  
c A cashier’s check, money order, bank
 draft, or traveler’s check having a face
 amount of $10,000 or less that is
 received in a designated reporting
 transaction (defined below), or that is
 received in any transaction in which the
 recipient knows that the instrument is
 being used in an attempt to avoid the
 reporting of the transaction under either
 section 6050I or 31 U.S.C. 5331.
  
Designated reporting transaction. A
 retail sale (or the receipt of funds by a
 broker or other intermediary in
 connection with a retail sale) of a
 consumer durable, a collectible, or a
 travel or entertainment activity.
  Retail sale. Any sale (whether or not
 the sale is for resale or for any other
 purpose) made in the course of a trade
 or business if that trade or business
 principally consists of making sales to
 ultimate consumers.
  Consumer durable. An item of tangible
 personal property of a type that, under
 ordinary usage, can reasonably be
 expected to remain useful for at least 1
 year, and that has a sales price of more
 than $10,000.
  Collectible. Any work of art, rug,
 antique, metal, gem, stamp, coin, etc.
  Travel or entertainment activity. An
 item of travel or entertainment that
 pertains to a single trip or event if the
 combined sales price of the item and all
 other items relating to the same trip or
 event that are sold in the same
 transaction (or related transactions)
 exceeds $10,000.
  Exceptions. A cashier’s check, money
 order, bank draft, or traveler’s check is
 not considered received in a designated
 reporting transaction if it constitutes the
 proceeds of a bank loan or if it is
 received as a payment on certain
 promissory notes, installment sales
 contracts, or down payment plans. See
 Publication 1544 for more information.
  
Note. Cash does not include a check
 drawn on the payer’s own account, such
 as a personal check, regardless of the
 amount.
  
Person. An individual, corporation,
 partnership, trust, estate, association, or
 company.
  Recipient. The person receiving the
 cash. Each branch or other unit of a
 person’s trade or business is considered
 a separate recipient unless the branch
 receiving the cash (or a central office
 linking the branches), knows or has
 reason to know the identity of payers
 making cash payments to other
 branches.
  Transaction. Includes the purchase of
 property or services, the payment of
 debt, the exchange of a negotiable
 instrument for cash, and the receipt of
 cash to be held in escrow or trust. A
 single transaction may not be broken
 into multiple transactions to avoid
 reporting.
  Suspicious transaction. A suspicious
 transaction is a transaction in which it
 appears that a person is attempting to
 cause Form 8300 not to be filed, or to
 file a false or incomplete form.
  
report; for causing, or attempting to
 cause, a trade or business to file a
 required report containing a material
 omission or misstatement of fact; or for
 structuring, or attempting to structure,
 transactions to avoid the reporting
 requirements. These violations may also
 be subject to criminal prosecution which,
 upon conviction, may result in
 imprisonment of up to 5 years or fines of
 up to $250,000 for individuals and
 $500,000 for corporations or both.
  
Items 16 through 19. If the person on
 whose behalf the transaction is being
 conducted is an individual, complete
 items 16, 17, and 18. Enter his or her
 TIN in item 19. If the individual is a sole
 proprietor and has an employer
 identification number (EIN), you must
 enter both the SSN and EIN in item 19.
 If the person is an organization, put its
 name as shown on required tax filings in
 item 16 and its EIN in item 19.
  Item 20. If a sole proprietor or
 organization named in items 16 through
 18 is doing business under a name other
 than that entered in item 16 (for
 example, a “trade” or “doing business
 as (DBA)” name), enter it here.
  Item 27. If the person is not required to
 furnish a TIN, complete this item. See
 Taxpayer Identification Number (TIN) on
 page 3. Enter a description of the type
 of official document issued to that
 person in item 27a (for example, a
 “passport”), the country that issued the
 document in item 27b, and the
 document’s number in item 27c.
  
Page 5 IRS Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) FinCEN Form 8300 (Rev. 3-2008) 
Item 31. Enter the total price of the
 property, services, amount of cash
 exchanged, etc. (for example, the total
 cost of a vehicle purchased, cost of
 catering service, exchange of currency) if
 different from the amount shown in item
 29.
  Item 32. Enter the dollar amount of each
 form of cash received. Show foreign
 currency amounts in U.S. dollar
 equivalent at a fair market rate of
 exchange available to the public. The
 sum of the amounts must equal item 29.
 For cashier’s check, money order, bank
 draft, or traveler’s check, provide the
 name of the issuer and the serial number
 of each instrument. Names of all issuers
 and all serial numbers involved must be
 provided. If necessary, provide this
 information on additional sheets of paper
 and attach them to this form.
  Item 33. Check the appropriate box(es)
 that describe the transaction. If the
 transaction is not specified in boxes a–i,
 check box j and briefly describe the
 transaction (for example, “car lease,” 
“boat lease,” “house lease,” or “aircraft
 rental”). If the transaction relates to the
 receipt of bail by a court clerk, check
 box i, “Bail received by court clerks.” 
This box is only for use by court clerks.
 If the transaction relates to cash
 received by a bail bondsman, check box
 d, “Business services provided.”
  
Part IV
  Item 36. If you are a sole proprietorship,
 you must enter your SSN. If your
 business also has an EIN, you must
 provide the EIN as well. All other
 business entities must enter an EIN.
  
Item 41. Fully describe the nature of
 your business, for example, “attorney” or
 “jewelry dealer.” Do not use general or
 nondescriptive terms such as “business” 
or “store.”
  
Privacy Act and Paperwork Reduction
 Act Notice. Except as otherwise noted,
 the information solicited on this form is
 required by the Internal Revenue Service
 (IRS) and the Financial Crimes
 Enforcement Network (FinCEN) in order
 to carry out the laws and regulations of
 the United States Department of the
 Treasury. Trades or businesses, except
 for clerks of criminal courts, are required
 to provide the information to the IRS and
 FinCEN under both section 6050I and 31
 U.S.C. 5331. Clerks of criminal courts
 are required to provide the information
 to the IRS under section 6050I. Section
 6109 and 31 U.S.C. 5331 require that
 you provide your social security number
 in order to adequately identify you and
 process your return and other papers.
 The principal purpose for collecting the
 information on this form is to maintain
 reports or records which have a high
 degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or
 regulatory investigations or proceedings,
 or in the conduct of intelligence or
 counterintelligence activities, by directing
 the federal Government’s attention to
 unusual or questionable transactions.
  
Generally, tax returns and return
 information are confidential, as stated in
 section 6103. However, section 6103
 allows or requires the IRS to disclose or
 give the information requested on this
 form to others as described in the Code.
 For example, we may disclose your tax
 information to the Department of Justice,
 to enforce the tax laws, both civil and
 criminal, and to cities, states, the District
 of Columbia, to carry out their tax laws.
 We may disclose this information to
 other persons as necessary to obtain
 information which we cannot get in any
 other way. We may disclose this
 information to federal, state, and local
 child support agencies; and to other
 federal agencies for the purposes of
 determining entitlement for benefits or
 the eligibility for and the repayment of
 loans. We may also provide the records
 to appropriate state, local, and foreign
 criminal law enforcement and regulatory
 personnel in the performance of their
 official duties. We may also disclose this
 information to other countries under a
 tax treaty, or to federal and state
 agencies to enforce federal nontax
 criminal laws and to combat terrorism. In
 addition, FinCEN may provide the
 information to those officials if they are
 conducting intelligence or
 counter-intelligence activities to protect
 against international terrorism.
  
You are not required to provide
 information as to whether the reported
 transaction is deemed suspicious.
 Failure to provide all other requested
 information, or providing fraudulent
 information, may result in criminal
 prosecution and other penalties under
 Title 26 and Title 31 of the United States
 Code.
  
Item 42. This form must be signed by an
 individual who has been authorized to
 do so for the business that received the
 cash.
  
You are not required to provide the
 information requested on a form that is
 subject to the Paperwork Reduction Act
 unless the form displays a valid OMB
 control number. Books or records
 relating to a form or its instructions must
 be retained as long as their contents
 may become material in the
 administration of any law under Title 26
 or Title 31.
  The time needed to complete this
 form will vary depending on individual
 circumstances. The estimated average
 time is 21 minutes. If you have
 comments concerning the accuracy of
 this time estimate or suggestions for
 making this form simpler, you can write
 to the Internal Revenue Service, Tax
 Products Coordinating Committee,
 SE:W:CAR:MP:T:T:SP, 1111 Constitution
 Ave. NW, IR-6526, Washington, DC
 20224. Do not send Form 8300 to this
 address. Instead, see Where to File on
 page 3.
  
Comments
  Use this section to comment on or
 clarify anything you may have entered
 on any line in Parts I, II, III, and IV. For
 example, if you checked box b
 (Suspicious transaction) in line 1 above
 Part I, you may want to explain why you
 think that the cash transaction you are
 reporting on Form 8300 may be
 suspicious.
  
 
Part III
  Item 28. Enter the date you received the
 cash. If you received the cash in more
 than one payment, enter the date you
 received the payment that caused the
 combined amount to exceed $10,000.
 See Multiple payments on page 3 for
 more information.
  Item 30. Check this box if the amount
 shown in item 29 was received in more
 than one payment (for example, as
 installment payments or payments on
 related transactions).
  
Note. You must complete all three items
 (a, b, and c) in this line to make sure
 that Form 8300 will be processed
 correctly.
  
 REPORT OF INTERNATIONAL
 TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY
 OR MONETARY INSTRUMENTS
 OMB NO. 1506-0014
 To be filed with the Bureau of
 Customs and Border Protection
 AIRLINE/FLIGHT/VESSEL INSPECTOR (Name and Badge Number) LICENSE PLATE
 DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
 FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK
 For Paperwork Reduction Act
 Notice and Privacy Act Notice,
 see back of form.
 2. IDENTIFICATION NO.  (See instructions) 3. DATE OF BIRTH (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 4. PERMANENT ADDRESS IN UNITED STATES OR ABROAD 5. YOUR COUNTRY OR COUNTRIES OF
      CITIZENSHIP
 10. IMMIGRATION ALIEN NO.
 FinCEN FORM 105
 7. PASSPORT NO. & COUNTRY
 9. PLACE UNITED STATES VISA WAS ISSUED
 31 U.S.C. 5316;  31 CFR 103.23 and 103.27
 (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
 CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION USE ONLY
 1. NAME (Last or family, first, and middle)
 8. U.S. VISA DATE (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 6. ADDRESS WHILE IN THE UNITED STATES
 Departed From: (U.S. Port/City in U.S.) Arrived At: (City in U.S.)
 11. IF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT IS ACCOMPANIED BY A PERSON, COMPLETE 11a OR 11b
 B. IMPORTED INTO THE UNITED STATES
 CURRENCY AND MONETARY INSTRUMENT INFORMATION (SEE INSTRUCTIONS ON REVERSE)(To be completed by everyone)
 A. EXPORTED FROM THE UNITED STATES
 12a. DATE  SHIPPED (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 12e. SHIPPED TO (Name and Address)
 15. TYPE OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY, OCCUPATION, OR PROFESSION
 12f. RECEIVED FROM (Name and Address)
 17. IF OTHER THAN U.S. CURRENCY
 IS INVOLVED, PLEASE COMPLETE
 BLOCKS A AND B.
 SIGNATURE OF PERSON COMPLETING THIS REPORT
 Under penalties of perjury, I declare that I have examined this report, and to the best of my knowledge and belief it is true, correct and complete.
 18. NAME AND TITLE (Print) 20. DATE OF REPORT (Mo./Day/Yr.)
 PART IV
 PART  I
 16. TYPE AND AMOUNT OF CURRENCY/MONETARY INSTRUMENTS
 (TOTAL)
 Other Monetary Instruments
 (Specify type, issuing entity and date, and serial or other identifying number.)
 Currency and Coins
 FOR A PERSON DEPARTING OR ENTERING THE UNITED STATES, OR A PERSON SHIPPING, MAILING, OR RECEIVING CURRENCY OR
 MONETARY INSTRUMENTS. (IF ACTING FOR  ANYONE ELSE, ALSO COMPLETE PART II BELOW.)
 19. SIGNATURE
 STATE/COUNTRY NUMBER
 DATE
 COUNT VERIFIED VOLUNTARY
 REPORT
 Yes           No Yes          No
 A. Currency Name
 B. Country
 PART  III
 PART  II
 Yes                         No
 15a. IS THE BUSINESS A BANK?
 INFORMATION ABOUT PERSON(S) OR BUSINESS ON WHOSE BEHALF IMPORTATION OR EXPORTATION WAS CONDUCTED
 13. NAME (Last or family, first, and middle or Business Name)
 14. PERMANENT ADDRESS IN UNITED STATES OR ABROAD
 FinCEN Form  105
  (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
               (Rev. July 2003)
 Department of the Treasury
 FinCEN
 Departed From: (Foreign City/Country)Arrived At: (Foreign City/Country)
 12. IF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT WAS MAILED OR OTHERWISE SHIPPED, COMPLETE 12a THROUGH 12f
 12d. NAME OF CARRIER12b. DATE  RECEIVED (Mo./Day/Yr.) 12c. METHOD OF SHIPMENT (e.g. u.s. Mail, Public Carrier, etc.)
 Please type or print.
 GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS
 This report is required by 31 U.S.C. 5316 and Treasury Department regulations (31 CFR
 103).
 WHO MUST FILE:
 (1) Each person who physically transports, mails, or ships, or causes to be physically
 transported, mailed, or shipped currency or other monetary instruments in an aggregate
 amount exceeding $10,000 at one time from the United States to any place outside the
 United States or into the United States from any place outside the United States, and
 (2) Each person who receives in the United States currency or other monetary
 instruments In an aggregate amount exceeding $10,000 at one time which have been
 transported, mailed, or shipped to the person from any place outside the United States.
 A TRANSFER OF FUNDS THROUGH NORMAL BANKING PROCEDURES, WHICH
 DOES NOT INVOLVE THE PHYSICAL TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY OR
 MONETARY INSTRUMENTS, IS NOT REQUIRED TO BE REPORTED.
 Exceptions: Reports are not required to be filed by:
 (1) a Federal Reserve bank,
 (2) a bank, a foreign bank, or a broker or dealer in securities in respect to currency
 or other monetary instruments mailed or shipped through the postal service or by common
 carrier,
 (3) a commercial bank or trust company organized under the laws of any State or of
 the United States with respect to overland shipments of currency or monetary instruments
 shipped to or received from an established customer maintaining a deposit relationship
 with the bank, in amounts which the bank may reasonably conclude do not exceed
 amounts commensurate with the customary conduct of the business, industry, or profession
 of the customer concerned,
 (4) a person who is not a citizen or resident of the United States in respect to
 currency or other monetary instruments mailed or shipped from abroad to a bank or
 broker or dealer in securities through the postal service or by common carrier,
 (5) a common carrier of passengers in respect to currency or other monetary
 instruments in the possession of its passengers,
 (6) a common carrier of goods in respect to shipments of currency or monetary
 instruments not declared to be such by the shipper,
 (7) a travelers’ check issuer or its agent in respect to the transportation of travelers’
 checks prior to their delivery to selling agents for eventual sale to the public,
 (8) a person with a restrictively endorsed traveler’s check that is in the collection
 and reconciliation process after the traveler’s check has been negotiated, nor by
 (9) a person engaged as a business in the transportation of currency, monetary
 instruments and other commercial papers with respect to the transportation of currency
 or other monetary instruments overland between established offices of banks or brokers
 or dealers in securities and foreign persons.
 WHEN AND WHERE TO FILE:
 A. Recipients — Each person who receives currency or other monetary instruments in the
 United States shall file FinCEN Form 105, within 15 days after receipt of the currency or
 monetary instruments, with the Customs officer in charge at any port of entry or departure
 or by mail with the Commissioner of Customs, Attention: Currency Transportation
 Reports, Washington DC 20229.
 B. Shippers or Mailers — If the currency or other monetary instrument does not accompany
 the person entering or departing the United States, FinCEN Form 105 may be filed by
 mail on or before the date of entry, departure, mailing, or shipping with the Commissioner
 of Customs, Attention: Currency Transportation Reports, Washington DC 20229.
 C. Travelers — Travelers carrying currency or other monetary instruments with them shall
 file FinCEN Form 105 at the time of entry into the United States or at the time of departure
 from the United States with the Customs officer in charge at any Customs port of entry or
 departure.
 An additional report of a particular transportation, mailing, or shipping of currency or
 the monetary instruments is not required if a complete and truthful report has already
 been filed. However, no person otherwise required to file a report shall be excused from
 liability for failure to do so if, in fact, a complete and truthful report has not been filed.
 Forms may be obtained from any Bureau of Customs and Border Protection office.
 PENALTIES: Civil and criminal penalties, including under certain circumstances a
 fine of not more than $500,000 and Imprisonment of not more than ten years, are
 provided for failure to file a report, filing a report containing a material omission or
 misstatement, or filing a false or fraudulent report. In addition, the currency or
 monetary instrument may be subject to seizure and forfeiture. See 31 U.S.C.5321
 and 31 CFR 103.57; 31 U.S.C. 5322 and 31 CFR 103.59; 31 U.S.C. 5317 and 31 CFR
 103.58, and U.S.C. 5332.
 DEFINITIONS:
 Bank — Each agent, agency, branch or office within the United States of any person doing
 business in one or more of the capacities listed: (1) a commercial bank or trust company
 organized under the laws of any State or of the United States; (2) a private bank; (3)
 asavings association, savings and loan association, and building and loan association
 organized under the laws of any State or of the United States; (4) an insured institution as
 defined in section 401 of the National Housing Act; (5) a savings bank, industrial bank or
 other thrift institution; (6) a credit union organized under the laws of any State or of the
 United States; (7) any other organization chartered under the banking laws of any State
 and subject to the supervision of the bank supervisory authorities of a State other than a
 money service business; (8) a bank organized under foreign law; and (9) any national
 banking association or corporation acting under the provisions of section 25A of the
 Federal Reserve Act (12 U.S.C. Sections 611-632).
 Foreign Bank — A bank organized under foreign law, or an agency, branch or office located
 outside the United States of a bank. The term does not include an agent, agency, branch
 or office within the United States of a bank organized under foreign law.
 Broker or Dealer in Securities—A broker or dealer in securities, registered or required
 to be registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities
 Exchange Act of 1934.
 Identification Number — Individuals must enter their social security number, if any.
 However, aliens who do not have a social security number should enter passport or alien
 registration number. All others should enter their employer identification number.
 Monetary Instruments — (1) Coin or currency of the United States or of any other country,
 (2) traveler’s checks in any form, (3) negotiable instruments (including checks, promissory
 notes, and money orders) in bearer form, endorsed without restriction, made out to a
 fictitious payee, or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery, (4)
 incomplete instruments (including checks, promissory notes, and money orders) that are
 signed but on which the name of the payee has been omitted, and (5) securities or stock
 in bearer form or otherwise in such form that title thereto passes upon delivery. Monetary
 instruments do not include (i) checks or money orders made payable to the order of a
 named person which have not been endorsed or which bear restrictive endorsements,
 (ii) warehouse receipts, or (iii) bills of lading.
 Person — An individual, a corporation, a partnership, a trust or estate, a joint stock
 company, an association, a syndicate, joint venture or other unincorporated organization
 or group, an Indian Tribe (as that term is defined in the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act),
 and all entities cognizable as legal personalities.
 SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS
 You should complete each line that applies to you. PART II. -Block 13; provide the
 complete name of the shipper or recipient on whose behalf the exportation or importation
 was conducted. PART III. — Specify type of instrument, issuing entity, and date, serial or
 other identifying number, and payee (if any). PART IV. — Block 22A and 22B; enter the
 exact date you shipped or received currency or monetary instrument(s). Block 21, if
 currency or monetary instruments of more than one country is involved, attach a list
 showing each type, country or origin and amount.
 PRIVACY ACT AND PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT NOTICE:
 Pursuant to the requirements of Public law 93-579 (Privacy Act of 1974), notice is hereby
 given that the authority to collect information on Form 4790 in accordance with 5 U.S.C.
 552a(e)(3) is Public law 91-508; 31 U.S.C. 5316; 5 U.S.C. 301; Reorganization Plan
 No.1 of 1950; Treasury Department Order No. 165, revised, as amended; 31 CFR 103;
 and 44 U.S.C. 3501.
 The principal purpose for collecting the information is to assure maintenance of reports
 or records having a high degree of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations
 or proceedings. The information collected may be provided to those officers and
 employees of the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection and any other constituent
 unit of the Department of the Treasury who have a need for the records in the performance
 of their duties. The records may be referred to any other department or agency of the
 Federal Government upon the request of the head of such department or agency. The
 information collected may also be provided to appropriate state, local, and foreign criminal
 law enforcement and regulatory personnel in the performance of their official duties.
 Disclosure of this information is mandatory pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5316 and 31 CFR Part
 103 (See Penalities).
 Disclosure of the social security number is mandatory. The authority to collect this number
 is 31 U.S.C. 5316(b) and 31 CFR 103.27(d). The social security number will be used as a
 means to identify the individual who files the record.
 An agency may not conduct or sponsor, and a person is not required to respond to, a
 collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number. The
 collection of this information is mandatory pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 5316.
 Statement required by 5 CFR 1320.8(b)(3)(iii): The estimated average burden associated
 with this collection of information is 11 minutes per respondent or record keeper
 depending on individual circumstances. Comments concerning the accuracy of this burden
 estimate and suggestions for reducing this burden should be directed to the Department
 of the Treasury, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network, P.O. Box 39 Vienna, Virginia
 22183.  DO NOT send completed forms to this office—See When and Where To File
 above.
 FinCEN FORM 105
 (Formerly Customs Form 4790)
1  Check box below only if correcting a prior report.
 Corrects Prior Report (see instruction #3 under “How to Make a Report”)
 d
   31  Is the relationship an insider relationship?          a          Yes          b          No
  Closed?
          Yes        No
   Yes        No
 a
 b
 1Suspicious
 Activity Report
 July 2003
 Previous editions will not be accepted after December 31, 2003
 ALWAYS COMPLETE ENTIRE REPORT
 (see instructions)
 FRB: FR 2230 OMB No. 7100-0212
 FDIC: 6710/06 OMB No. 3064-0077
 OCC: 8010-9,8010-1 OMB No. 1557-0180
 OTS: 1601 OMB No. 1550-0003
 NCUA: 2362 OMB No. 3133-0094
 TREASURY: TD F 90-22.47 OMB No. 1506-0001
 Part I Reporting Financial Institution Information
 2  Name of Financial Institution
 4  Address of Financial Institution
 6  City
 11  State 12  Zip Code10  City
  9   Address of Branch Office(s) where activity occurred Multiple Branches (include information in narrative, Part V)
 14  Account number(s) affected, if any
 Part II Suspect Information
 15  Last Name or Name of Entity 16  First Name 17  Middle
 18   Address 19  SSN, EIN or TIN
 7  State 8  Zip Code
 20  City 21  State 22  Zip Code 23  Country
 27  Date of Birth
       _______ / _______ / _________
 24  Phone Number - Residence (include area code)
      (        )
 25  Phone Number - Work (include area code)
      (        )
 26  Occupation/Type of Business
 29  Forms of Identification for Suspect:
 a         Driver’s License/State ID          b         Passport          c           Alien Registration          d         Other ______________
            Number  __________________________              Issuing Authority  ______________________
    MM            DD                  YYYY
 c       Still employed at financial institution   e        Terminated
 d       Suspended                                         f         Resigned
 32  Date of Suspension, Termination, Resignation
       _______ / _______ / __________
           MM                DD                   YYYY
 c
 Suspect Information Unavailable
  Closed?
          Yes        No
   Yes        No
    MM       DD            YYYY
 3  EIN
 5   Primary Federal Regulator
    a Federal Reserve d OCC
    b FDIC e OTS
    c NCUA
 If Yes specify:
 13  If institution closed, date closed
         ____ / ____ / _______
 28  Admission/Confession?
       a     Yes       b          No
 30  Relationship to Financial Institution:
        a Accountant d Attorney g Customer j Officer
        b Agent e Borrower h Director k Shareholder
        c Appraiser f Broker i Employee l Other  ________________________________
37  Dollar amount of recovery (if applicable)
                                                                              .00
       f Computer Intrusion
       g Consumer Loan Fraud
       h Counterfeit Check
       i Counterfeit Credit/Debit Card
       j Counterfeit Instrument (other)
       k Credit Card Fraud
      (         )
 34  Total dollar amount involved in known or suspicious activity
       $                                                          .00
 40  Has any law enforcement agency already been advised by telephone, written communication, or otherwise?
 a DEA d Postal Inspection g Other Federal
 b FBI e Secret Service h State
 c IRS f U.S. Customs i Local
  j Agency Name (for g, h or i)
 2
 35  Summary characterization of suspicious activity:
       a Bank Secrecy Act/Structuring/
 Money Laundering
       b Bribery/Gratuity
       c Check Fraud
       d Check Kiting
       e Commercial Loan Fraud
       s Other
 Part III Suspicious Activity Information
 33  Date or date range of suspicious activity
 From   ____ / _____ / _______    To  ____ / _____ / _______
 36  Amount of loss prior to recovery
                                                                       .00
 38  Has the suspicious activity had a
       material impact on, or otherwise
       affected, the financial soundness
      of the institution?
      a Yes b          No
 51   Agency (if not filed by financial institution)
    MM       DD            YYYY    MM       DD            YYYY
 39  Has the institution’s bonding company been notified?
      a Yes b          No
 Part IV Contact for Assistance
 45  Last Name 46  First Name
 50  Date Prepared
       _______ / _______ /_________
 48  Title/Occupation
    MM            DD                  YYYY
 49 Phone Number (include area code)
       (          )
 47  Middle
        (type of activity)
 ,,,
 ,,
 $
  (if applicable)
 ,,
 $
 41  Name of person(s) contacted at Law Enforcement Agency 42  Phone Number (include area code)
 44  Phone Number (include area code)
       (         )
 43  Name of person(s) contacted at Law Enforcement Agency
       l Debit Card Fraud
       m Defalcation/Embezzlement
       n False Statement
       o Misuse of Position or Self Dealing
       p Mortgage Loan Fraud
       q Mysterious Disappearance
       r Wire Transfer Fraud
       t Terrorist Financing
       u  Identity Theft
3Part V Suspicious Activity Information Explanation/Description
 Explanation/description of known or suspected violation
 of law or suspicious activity.
 This section of the report is critical. The care with which it is
 written may make the difference in whether or not the described
 conduct and its possible criminal nature are clearly understood.
 Provide below a chronological and complete account of the
 possible violation of law, including what is unusual, irregular or
 suspicious about the transaction, using the following checklist as
 you prepare your account. If necessary, continue the
 narrative on a duplicate of this page.
 a Describe supporting documentation and retain for 5 years.
 b Explain who benefited, financially or otherwise, from the
 transaction, how much, and how.
 c Retain any confession, admission, or explanation of the
 transaction provided by the suspect and indicate to
 whom and when it was given.
 d Retain any confession, admission, or explanation of the
 transaction provided by any other person and indicate
 to whom and when it was given.
 e Retain any evidence of cover-up or evidence of an attempt
 to deceive federal or state examiners or others.
 f Indicate where the possible violation took place
 (e.g., main office, branch, other).
 g Indicate whether the possible violation is an isolated
 incident or relates to other transactions.
 h Indicate whether there is any related litigation; if so,
 specify.
 i Recommend any further investigation that might assist law
 enforcement authorities.
 j Indicate whether any information has been excluded from
 this report; if so, why?
 k If you are correcting a previously filed report, describe the
 changes that are being made.
 For Bank Secrecy Act/Structuring/Money Laundering reports,
 include the following additional information:
 l Indicate whether currency and/or monetary instruments
 were involved. If so, provide the amount and/or description
 of the instrument (for example, bank draft, letter of
 credit, domestic or international money order, stocks,
 bonds, traveler’s checks, wire transfers sent or received,
 cash, etc.).
 m Indicate any account number that may be involved
 or affected.
 Paperwork Reduction Act Notice:  The purpose of this form is to provide an effective and consistent means for financial institutions to notify appropriate law enforcement agencies of known
 or suspected criminal conduct or suspicious activities that take place at or were perpetrated against financial institutions. This report is required by law, pursuant to authority contained in
 the following statutes.  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:  12 U.S.C. 324, 334, 611a, 1844(b) and (c), 3105(c) (2) and 3106(a).  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation:
 12 U.S.C. 93a, 1818, 1881-84, 3401-22.  Office of the Comptroller of the Currency:  12 U.S.C. 93a, 1818, 1881-84, 3401-22.  Office of Thrift Supervision:  12 U.S.C. 1463 and 1464.
 National Credit Union Administration:  12 U.S.C. 1766(a), 1786(q).  Financial Crimes Enforcement Network:  31 U.S.C. 5318(g).  Information collected on this report is confidential (5
 U.S.C. 552(b)(7) and 552a(k)(2), and 31 U.S.C. 5318(g)).  The Federal financial institutions’ regulatory agencies and the U.S. Departments of Justice and Treasury may use and share the information.
 Public reporting and recordkeeping burden for this information collection is estimated to average 30 minutes per response, and includes time to gather and maintain data in the required report, review
 the instructions, and complete the information collection.  Send comments regarding this burden estimate, including suggestions for reducing the burden, to the Office of Management and Budget,
 Paperwork Reduction Project, Washington, DC 20503 and, depending on your primary Federal regulatory agency, to Secretary, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC 20551;
 or Assistant Executive Secretary, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Washington, DC 20429; or Legislative and Regulatory Analysis Division, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Washington,
 DC 20219; or Office of Thrift Supervision, Enforcement Office, Washington, DC 20552; or National Credit Union Administration, 1775 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA 22314; or Office of the Director, Financial
 Crimes Enforcement Network, Department of the Treasury, 2070 Chain Bridge Road, Vienna, VA 22182.  The agencies may not conduct or sponsor, and an organization (or a person) is not required
 to respond to, a collection of information unless it displays a currently valid OMB control number.
  Tips on SAR Form preparation and filing are available in the SAR Activity Review at www.fincen.gov/pub_reports.html
Suspicious Activity Report
 Instructions
  Safe Harbor  Federal law (31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(3)) provides complete protection from civil liability for all reports of suspicious
  transactions made to appropriate authorities, including supporting documentation, regardless of whether such reports are
  filed pursuant to this report’s instructions or are filed on a voluntary basis. Specifically, the law provides that a financial
  institution, and its directors, officers, employees and agents, that make a disclosure of any possible violation of law or
  regulation, including in connection with the preparation of suspicious activity reports, “shall not be liable to any person
  under any law or regulation of the United States, any constitution, law, or regulation of any State or political subdivision of
  any State, or under any contract or other legally  enforceable agreement (including any arbitration agreement), for such
  disclosure or for any failure to provide notice of such  disclosure to the person who is the subject of such disclosure or any
  other person identified in the disclosure”.
  Notification Prohibited Federal law (31 U.S.C. 5318(g)(2)) requires that a financial institution, and its directors, officers,
  employees and agents who, voluntarily or by means of a suspicious activity report, report suspected or known criminal
  violations or suspicious activities may not notify any person involved in the transaction that the transaction has been reported.
  In situations involving violations requiring immediate attention, such as when a reportable violation is ongoing, the
  financial institution shall immediately notify, by telephone, appropriate law enforcement and financial institution
  supervisory authorities in addition to filing a timely suspicious activity report.
 WHEN TO MAKE A REPORT:
 1. All financial institutions operating in the United States, including insured banks, savings associations, savings
 association service corporations, credit unions, bank holding companies, nonbank subsidiaries of bank holding
 companies, Edge and Agreement corporations, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, are re-
 quired to make this report following the discovery of:
 a. Insider abuse involving any amount. Whenever the financial institution detects any known or suspected
 Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, committed or attempted against the financial
 institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted through the financial institution, where the
 financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series of
 criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, and the
 financial institution has a substantial basis for identifying one of its directors, officers, employees, agents or
 other institution-affiliated parties as having committed or aided in the commission of a criminal act regardless
 of the amount involved in the violation.
 b. Violations aggregating $5,000 or more where a suspect can be identified. Whenever the financial
 institution detects any known or suspected Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, com-
 mitted or attempted against the financial institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted
 through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $5,000 or more in funds or other assets, where
 the financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series
 of criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, and the
 financial institution has a substantial basis for identifying a possible suspect or group of suspects. If it is
 determined prior to filing this report that the identified suspect or group of suspects has used an “alias,” then
 information regarding the true identity of the suspect or group of suspects, as well as alias identifiers, such
 as drivers’ licenses or social security numbers, addresses and telephone numbers, must be reported.
 c. Violations aggregating $25,000 or more regardless of a potential suspect. Whenever the financial
 institution detects any known or suspected Federal criminal violation, or pattern of criminal violations, com-
 mitted or attempted against the financial institution or involving a transaction or transactions conducted
 through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $25,000 or more in funds or other assets, where
 the financial institution believes that it was either an actual or potential victim of a criminal violation, or series
 of criminal violations, or that the financial institution was used to facilitate a criminal transaction, even though
 there is no substantial basis for identifying a possible suspect or group of suspects.
 d. Transactions aggregating $5,000 or more that involve potential money laundering or violations of the
 Bank Secrecy Act. Any transaction (which for purposes of this subsection means a deposit, withdrawal,
 transfer between accounts, exchange of currency, loan, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any stock,
 bond, certificate of deposit, or other monetary instrument or investment security, or any other payment, transfer,
 or delivery by, through, or to a financial institution, by whatever means effected) conducted or attempted by, at
or through the financial institution and involving or aggregating $5,000 or more in funds or other assets, if the financial
 institution knows, suspects, or has reason to suspect that:
           i.  The transaction involves funds derived from illegal activities or is intended or conducted in order to hide or
                disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activities (including, without limitation, the ownership, nature,
       source, location, or control of such funds or assets) as part of a plan to violate or evade any law or regulation or
       to avoid any transaction reporting requirement under Federal law;
 ii.  The transaction is designed to evade any regulations promulgated under the Bank Secrecy Act; or
 iii. The transaction has no business or apparent lawful purpose or is not the sort in which the particular customer
 would normally be expected to engage, and the financial institution knows of no reasonable explanation for the
 transaction after examining the available facts, including the background and possible purpose of the transaction.
       The Bank Secrecy Act requires all financial institutions to file currency transaction reports (CTRs) in accordance with
    the Department of the Treasury’s implementing regulations (31 CFR Part 103). These regulations require a financial
    institution to file a CTR whenever a currency transaction exceeds $10,000. If a currency transaction exceeds $10,000
    and is suspicious, the institution must file both a CTR (reporting the currency transaction) and a suspicious activity
    report (reporting the suspicious or criminal aspects of the transaction). If a currency transaction equals or is below
    $10,000 and is suspicious, the institution should only file a suspicious activity report.
   2. Computer Intrusion.  For purposes of this report, “computer intrusion” is defined as gaining access to a
    computer system of a financial institution to:
 a. Remove, steal, procure, or otherwise affect funds of the institution or the institution’s customers;
            b. Remove, steal, procure or otherwise affect critical information of the institution including customer account
          information; or
 c. Damage, disable or otherwise affect critical systems of the institution.
    For purposes of this reporting requirement, computer intrusion does not mean attempted intrusions of websites or
    other non-critical information systems of the institution that provide no access to institution or customer financial or
    other critical information.
   3. A financial institution is required to file a suspicious activity report no later than 30 calendar days after the date of
       initial detection of facts that may constitute a basis for filing a suspicious activity report. If no suspect was identified
    on the date of detection of the incident requiring the filing, a financial institution may delay filing a suspicious activity
    report for an additional 30 calendar days to identify a suspect. In no case shall reporting be delayed more than 60
    calendar days after the date of initial detection of a reportable transaction.
   4. This suspicious activity report does not need to be filed for those robberies and burglaries that are reported to local
    authorities, or (except for savings associations and service corporations) for lost, missing, counterfeit, or stolen
    securities that are reported pursuant to the requirements of 17 CFR 240.17f-1.
 HOW TO MAKE A REPORT:
   1. Send each completed suspicious activity report to:
 Detroit Computing Center, P.O. Box 33980, Detroit, Ml 48232-0980
   2. For items that do not apply or for which information is not available, leave blank.
   3. If you are correcting a previously filed report, check the box at the top of the report (line 1). Complete the report in its
   entirety and include the corrected information in the applicable boxes. Then describe the changes that are being made
   in Part V (Description of Suspicious Activity), line k.
   4. Do not include any supporting documentation with the suspicious activity report. Identify and retain a copy
   of the suspicious activity report and all original supporting documentation or business record equivalent for five (5)
   years from the date of the suspicious activity report. All supporting documentation must be made available to
   appropriate authorities upon request.
   5. If more space is needed to report additional suspects, attach copies of page 1 to provide the additional information. If
   more space is needed to report additional branch addresses, include this information in the narrative, Part V.
   6. Financial institutions are encouraged to provide copies of suspicious activity reports to state and local authorities,
   where appropriate.
*17 Government issued identification (If available)
   a Driver’s license/state ID   b Passport    c  Alien registration    d          Corporate/Partnership Resolution
   e Other ___________________________________________
   f    ID number            g  Issuing state or country (2 digit code)
 FinCEN
 Form 101
 Effective May 2004
 Suspicious Activity Report by the
 Securities and Futures Industries
    Please type or print. Always complete entire report. Items
 marked with an asterisk * are considered critical. (See instructions.) OMB No. 1506 - 0019
 Subject Information 2   Check box   a         if multiple subjects       box   b         subject information unavailablePart I
 *4 First name 5  Middle initial
 6  Also known as (AKA - individual), doing business as (DBA - entity)
 *3  Individual’s last name or entity’s full name
 7 Occupation or type of business
 16  Date of birth 
____/_____/_______ 
  MM        DD           YYYY
  *12
 *14 SSN/ITIN (individual), or EIN (entity)
  *8 Address
 *15  Account number(s) affected, if any. Indicate if closed.
 Part IIIPart III
 *21 Date or date range of suspicious activity
 18 Phone number - work
  23 Instrument type (Check all that apply)
 Suspicious Activity Information
 From  _____/_____/_________
              MM         DD            YYYY
 To  _____/_____/_________
         MM          DD             YYYY
 Part II
 20 Is individual/business associated/affiliated
 with the reporting institution? (See instructions)
        a         Yes           b         No
 13  E-mail address (If available)
 *9  City
   *11 ZIP code
 *30  Type of suspicious activity:
 o Significant wire or other transactions
               without economic purpose
 p Suspicious documents or ID presented
 q Terrorist financing
 r Wash or other fictitious trading
 s Wire fraud
 t Other (Describe in Part VI)
 24 CUSIP® number
 27 CUSIP® number
 25 CUSIP® number
 28 CUSIP® number
 26 CUSIP® number
 29 CUSIP® number
 Catalog No. 35349U
 Acc’t #
 ______________________
  yes      Acc’t #
 ______________________ 
yes
 Acc’t #______________________  yes      Acc’t #______________________ yes
     Country code (If not U.S.)
     (See instructions)
 a Bonds/Notes
 b Cash or equiv.
 c Commercial paper
 d Commodity futures contract
 e Money Market Mutual Fund
 f Mutual Fund
 g OTC Derivatives
 h Other derivatives
 q Commodity type ________________________
         
(Please identify)
 r Instrument description ___________________
 s Market where traded ____________________
 (Enter approprite three or four-letter code.)
 t Other (Explain in Part IV)
 i Commodity options
 j Security futures products
 k Stocks
 l Warrants
 m Other securities
 n Other non-securities
 o Foreign currency futures/options
 p Foreign currencies
 a Bribery/gratuity
 b Check fraud
 c Computer intrusion
 d Credit/debit card fraud
 e Embezzlement/theft
 f Commodity futures/options fraud
 g Forgery
 h Identity theft
 i Insider trading
 j Mail fraud
 k Market manipulation
 l Money laundering/Structuring
 m Prearranged or other non-competitive trading
 n Securities fraud
 1  Check the box if this report corrects a prior report (See instructions)
 *22  Total dollar amount involved in suspicious activity
 Rev. 05/22/04
 19 Phone number - home
 ( )( )
 $
          .00, ,,
   *10 State
Part VIPart IV
 *55  Title/Position
 *54 Middle initial*52  Last name of individual to be contacted regarding this report *53  First name
       _____/_____/_________
          MM         DD              YYYY
 *57 Date report prepared*56  Work phone number
 Contact For Assistance
 Reporting Financial Institution InformationPart IV
  Part V
    2
 31  If a law enforcement or regulatory authority has been contacted (excluding submission of a SAR) check the appropriate box.
 a DEA                           f           Secret Service    k    NYSE     p State securities regulator
  d  FBI                             i            NASD                  n     Other state/local
  e  ICE                             j            NFA                     o          Other SRO-securites (PHLX, PCX, CBOE, AMEX, etc.)
  b  U.S. Attorney (**32)    g           CFTC                   l     Other RFA      q  Foreign
 Law Enforcement or Regulatory Contact InformationPart III
  c  IRS                             h           SEC                    m      Other RE-futures (CME, CBOT, NYMEX, NYBOT)      r  Other (Explain in Part VI)
       _____/_____/_________
         MM         DD              YYYY
 32  Other authority contacted (for Item 31 l through r) ** List U.S. Attorney office here. 33  Name of individual contacted (for all of Item 31)
  35  Date contacted
 *36  Name of financial institution or sole proprietorship
  *39  City  *41  ZIP code
 *37  EIN / SSN / ITIN
   42  Additional branch address locations handling account, activity or customer.           43          Multiple locations (See instructions)
         *40 State
     *38 Address
  j I A
 k Investment company - mutual fund
 l Market maker
 m Municipal securities dealer
 n NFA
 o RE-futures
 p Other RFA
 q Securities broker - clearing
 r Securities broker - introducing
  51  Type of institution or individual- Check box(es) for functions that apply to this report
 s Securities dealer
 t Securities floor broker
 u Securities options broker-dealer
  v SRO-securities
 w Specialist
 x Subsidiary of bank
 y U.S. Government broker-dealer
 z U.S. Government interdealer broker
 aa          Other (Describe in Part VI)
        a       Agricultural trade option merchant
        b         Affiliate of bank holding company
        c         CPO
        d         CTA
        e         Direct participation program
        f          FCM
        g         Futures floor broker
        h         Futures floor trader
        i           IB-C
   44  City
 49  NFA  ID number
  47  Central Registration Depository number
   46  ZIP code45  State
      50  Has this reporting individual/entity coordinated this report with another reporting individual/entity?  Yes        (Provide details in Part VI)   No
 48 SEC ID number
 34  Telephone number of individual contacted (Item 33)
 ( )
 ( )
 Send completed reports to:
 Detroit Computing Center
 Attn: SAR-SF
 P.O. Box 33980
 Detroit, MI 48232
Suspicious Activity Information - Narrative *Part VI 3
 Explanation/description of suspicious activity(ies).  This section of the report is critical.  The care with which it is completed may determine whether
 or not the described activity and its possible criminal nature are clearly understood by investigators. Provide a clear, complete and chronological
 description (not exceeding this page and the next page) of the activity, including what is unusual, irregular or suspicious about the transaction(s), using
 the checklist below as a guide, as you prepare your account.
  a. Describe conduct that raised suspicion.
  b. Explain whether the transaction(s) was completed or only attempted.
  c. Describe supporting documentation (e.g. transaction records, new
 account information, tape recordings, E-mail messages, correspon-
 dence, etc.) and retain such documentation in your file for five years.
  d. Explain who benefited, financially or otherwise, from the
 transaction(s), how much, and how (if known).
  e. Describe and retain any admission or explanation of the transaction(s)
 provided by the subject(s) or other persons. Indicate to whom and
 when it was given.
  f. Describe and retain any evidence of cover-up or evidence of an
 attempt to deceive federal or state examiners, SRO, or others.
  g. Indicate where the possible violation of law(s) took place (e.g., main
 office, branch, other).
  h. Indicate whether the suspicious activity is an isolated incident or
 relates to another transaction.
  i. Indicate whether there is any related litigation. If so, specify the
 name of the litigation and the court where the action is pending.
  j. Recommend any further investigation that might assist law
 enforcement authorities.
 k. Indicate whether any information has been excluded from this report;
 if so, state reasons.
  l. Indicate whether U.S. or foreign currency and/or U.S. or foreign
 negotiable instrument(s) were involved.  If foreign, provide the
 amount, name of currency, and country of origin.
 m. Indicate “Market where traded” and “Wire transfer identifier”
 information when appropriate.
 n. Indicate whether funds or assets were recovered and, if so, enter the
 dollar value of the recovery in whole dollars only.
 o. Indicate any additional account number(s), and any foreign bank(s)
 account number(s) which may be involved.
 p. Indicate for a foreign national any available information on subject’s
 passport(s), visa(s), and/or identification card(s). Include date, country,
  city of issue, issuing authority, and nationality.
 q. Describe any suspicious activities that involve transfer of funds to or
 from a foreign country, or transactions in a foreign currency. Identify
 the country, sources and destinations of funds.
 r. Describe subject(s) position if employed by the financial institution.
 s. Indicate whether securities, futures, or options were involved.  If so,
 list the type, CUSIP® number or ISID® number, and amount.
 t. Indicate the type of institution filing this report, if this is not clear
 from Part IV. For example, an IA that is managing partner of a limited
 partnership that is acting as a hedge fund that detects suspicious activity
 tied in part to its hedge fund activities should note that it is operating as
 a hedge fund.
 u. Indicate, in instances when the subject or entity has a CRD or NFA
 number, what that number is.
 v. If correcting a prior report (box in Item 1 checked), complete the form
 in its entirety and note the corrected items here in Part VI
      Information already provided in earlier parts of this form need not necessarily be repeated if the meaning is clear.
    Supporting documentation should not be filed with this report. Maintain the information for your files.
  Tips on SAR form preparation and filing are available in the SAR Activity Review at www.fincen.gov/pub_reports.html
  Enter explanation/description in the space below. Continue on the next page if necessary.
Suspicious Activity Report Narrative (continued) 4
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1701 



:


monei launder
introduct
monei launder is the disguis of the exist natur sourc ownership locat and
disposit of properti deriv from crimin activ although it is not current possibl
to quantifi the total volum of monei launder global or in the us it is clearli an
enorm problem exist within everi financi system nevertheless the continu
demand to know how much monei is launder annual ha led mani organ to
calcul and offer their own estim for exampl the intern monetari fund
estim that monei launder caus a total monetari loss of 590 billion to 15 trillion
global in 1996 the unit nation estim a loss of 500 billion to 1 trillion global in
2005 and a 2007 kpmg survei found that moneylaund flow exce 1 trillion per
year
the wash of monei includ all form of illeg activ in most instanc the goal is
to conduct transact in cash currenc in such a wai as to conceal the true natur of
transact problem occur regard larg volum of cash transport it convert
small denomin bill to larger denomin bill and convert cash into asset that
can be invest or spent monei launder is gener accomplish in three stage 1
placement 2 layer and 3 integr
the monei launder process
placement
placement of fund into a financi institut is the initi step in the process it is at thi
step that legisl ha been develop to prevent launder from deposit or convert
larg amount of cash at financi institut or take cash out of the countri monei
launder scheme ar most often detect at thi stage
placement can take ani number of form if the monei launder ha a larg amount of
cash he can move the monei out of the countri in a suitcas and deposit it in an offshor
bank anoth choic is to break up the monei into smaller amount and deposit it into
bank account or purchas cashier check travel check or monei order the process
of break transact up into smaller amount to evad the report requir is
monei launder financi transact
11602 2011 fraud examin manual
known as smurf a sophist smurf oper might involv hundr of bank
account in dozen of citi
layer
if the placement of the initi fund goe undetect financi transact can be design
in complex pattern in order to prevent detect thi stage of the process is refer to as
layer and repres the most difficult area of detect onc the fund have been
deposit into a financi institut a launder can move the fund around by us layer
of financi transact design to confus the audit trail the monei can even be
transport out of the countri through wire transfer
integr
the final stage in the launder process is the integr of the monei back into the
economi in such a wai as to make it appear to be a legitim busi transact thi
stage of the process is also difficult to detect howev if the integr process creat a
paper trail such as deed for real estat invoic loan document currenc transact
report ctr or checksand if there is cooper from inform or foreign entiti
then the chanc of detect ar improv
a monei launder scheme cannot be success until the paper trail is elimin or made
so complex that the flow of illeg incom cannot be easili trace the number of step us
to launder fund depend on how much distanc the monei launder wish to put between
the illeg earn cash and the launder asset into which it is convert a greater number
of step increas the complex of trace the fund but it also increas the length of the
paper trail and the chanc that the transact will be report
the object of monei launder is not onli to disguis the sourc of illeg fund but also to
convert larg store of currenc into other asset in some case illeg fund ar spent on
person asset such as home car jewelri and furnitur but the typic monei launder
will not dispos of all hi illeg currenc in thi manner he will want to have a certain
amount of liquid reserv for spend keep larg bundl of cash is ineffici becaus
thei ar difficult to hide and transport therefor monei launder will often convert
substanti portion of their currenc into negoti instrument such as cashier check
and monei order which ar routin issu by financi institut crimin prefer these
negoti instrument for two reason first cashier check and monei order ar bearer
instrument and the holder can us them or deposit them without have to prove the
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11603
sourc of the fund second thei ar liquid asset becaus the holder can us
them immedi
the follow is an exampl of how a monei launder scheme oper
exampl
alberto barrera dub papa smurf by the feder agent investig him ran a rather
sophist smurf oper out of miami involv bank account in citi all over the
countri barrera and hi accomplic would fly to phoenix denver omaha portland and
other citi when thei arriv thei would immedi travel to variou bank the scheme
would begin with the purchas of cashier check and monei order in amount less than
10000 to avoid feder report ing requir thi would be repeat sever time at
differ bank the smurf would then travel to anoth citi where some of the
previous purchas check and monei order would be deposit in account control by
barrera then more purchas of cashier check and monei order would be made befor
the group travel on to the next citi onc the monei wa convert or deposit much of
it wa transfer to offshor bank
us a legitim busi to launder fund
on of the most comm on method of launder fund is to filter the monei through a
legitim busi otherwis known as a front busi a front busi can be a veri
effect wai to launder monei becaus it provid a safe place for organ and manag
crimin activ where the come and go of larg number of peopl will not arous
undu suspicion in addit a front that doe legitim busi provid cover for
deliveri and transport relat to illeg activ the expens from illeg activ can be
attribut to the legitim enterpris and illeg revenu can be easili place into the
enterpris
the three method most commonli us to hide asset or launder monei through a front
busi ar overstat of report revenu overstat of report expens and
balanc sheet launder
overstat of report revenu
overst revenu also known as incom statement launder occur when the monei
launder record more incom on the book of a busi than is actual gener by that
monei launder financi transact
11604 2011 fraud examin manual
busi the fictiti revenu account for the illeg fund that ar secretli insert into
the compani
exampl
abc us car encourag custom to pai with cash if the custom pai in cash
he receiv a discount that might be as high as 25 percent the invoic howev make
no mention of thi cash discount the compani report the full sale amount as incom
depend on the number of car sold the compani can launder thousand of dollar
in illeg incom
overstat of report expens
the disadvantag of overst revenu is that tax will be due on the report incom
therefor if a compani overst it revenu it will also want to overst it expens to
offset it tax liabil the fictiti expens also enabl the perpetr to siphon monei
out of the busi in order to make payoff bui illeg good or invest in other
crimin ventur
overst expens can be accomplish veri easili by report payment for suppli
never receiv profession servic never render or wage for fictiti employe
exampl
abc us car report wage for three mechan and an assist manag who do
not exist the compani also report payment of over 200000 a year to sever
lawyer account and other consult who do littl if ani actual work
incom statement launder which includ both overst revenu and expens can be
difficult to detect when artifici price inflat is appli in moder percentag to good
and servic whose market valu is difficult to establish eg artwork us car consult
fee advertis expens detect is exceedingli difficult without insid inform
complet fabric of transact on the other hand or creation of ghost employe is
somewhat easier to spot
deposit cash and write check in excess of report revenu and expens balanc sheet launder
rather than attempt to disguis monei as normal busi revenu excess fund can
simpli be deposit into the bank account of the busi thi techniqu is known as
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11605
balanc sheet launder becaus it is independ of the monei that flow in and out of
the busi
exampl
abc us car deposit an addit 30000 per month in it account although
there ar no record sale for thi amount at the end of the year the compani ha an
extra 360000 in cash in it account
thi type of scheme can be detect by examin the revenu record of the busi
everi legitim asset in a compani possess had to have come from somewher if not
from revenu then from a limit number of other credibl altern the basic
altern sourc ar loan sale of properti or equip and capit invest from
sharehold all of these transact requir signific documentari evid which the
examin should seek out to explain ani suspici infus of cash into a suspect busi
favorit busi for hide or launder monei
in gener term the busi chosen for monei launder possess on or more of the
follow characterist
revenu a revenu base that is difficult to measur becaus most revenu come from
cash transact with a highli variabl amount per custom thi allow extra monei
to be brought into the busi and disguis as revenu
expens expens that ar variabl and difficult to measur can enabl the launder
to extract monei from the front busi without give rise to undu suspicion
histori histor ti either with the ethnic base of a particular crimin group or with
industri that have tradition serv as a base for crimin activ
bar restaur and night club
busi that ar commonli us to front monei launder oper includ bar
restaur and nightclub these busi charg rel high price and custom
vari wide in their purchas sale ar gener in cash and it is notori difficult to
match the cost of provid food liquor and entertain with the revenu thei produc
fast food restaur ar also frequent us to front for monei launder oper
although thei tend to charg lower price than other type of restaur most of their sale
ar made in cash and expens can be easili inflat
monei launder financi transact
11606 2011 fraud examin manual
vend machin
vend machin oper also possess mani characterist favor to a monei
launder oper thei have a highli variabl and difficult to measur volum of cash
receipt and in larg oper there is a fair amount of flexibl with variou
transport instal and promot expens provid cover for the withdraw of
launder fund
wholesal distribut
wholesal distribut busi have histor been a promin part of monei
launder the revenu in a wholes busi ar not typic as flexibl as in food
servic and vend machin oper but with a divers product line and falsifi
invoic it is still possibl to inject a good deal of illeg cash into the busi more
importantli the industri is ideal for monei launder from the standpoint of expens the
activ requir to run thi kind of busi ar so divers and difficult to measur that
expens ar easi to inflat furthermor a wholesal businesss build warehous
transport fleet and it contact with retail establish ar all attract factor mani
of the classic crimin activ such as drug fenc and contraband ar themselv
noth more than distribut oper and can hide behind thi type of busi cover
the real estat industri
monei launder often us the real estat industri to launder illicitli obtain monei
gener the real estat industri is attract to monei launder for variou reason for
exampl the vast arrai of financi transact link to real estat provid monei
launder an except rang of option for abus these procedur to launder and us
illeg obtain fund in addit real estat transact often involv multipl parti
such as broker agent and apprais which can obscur the sourc of invest fund
and the ident of the true owner final monei launder mai earn addit profit
from introduc illicit fund into the real estat industri especi in vibrant real
estat market
although there is a vast number of method to launder monei in the real estat industri
there ar a few common scheme that warrant identif and discuss includ
loanback scheme
backtoback loan scheme
shell compani
apprais fraud
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11607
monetari instrument
mortgag scheme
indirect invest in the real estat industri
loanback scheme
monei launder often us loanback scheme to financ the purchas of properti directli
or indirectli through purchas share in properti invest fund in a typic loanback
scheme monei launder will deposit illicit fund in an oversea entiti that thei own and
then the entiti loan the fund back to the launder the purpos of the loan is to make
the monei sourc appear legitim and to conceal the parti ident or the natur of the
financi transact associ with the loan
backtoback loan scheme
as with loanback scheme monei launder often us backtoback loan scheme to
purchas properti in a backtoback loan scheme a monei launder obtain a loan by
present collater which origin from illicit fund to a financi institut like the
loanback scheme thi techniqu give the loan monei the appear of a genuin loan
shell compani
monei launder often us shell compani which ar discuss in more detail below to
purchas real estat gener defin shell compani ar busi entiti includ
limit liabil compani trust busi trust and corpor without activ busi
or signific asset becaus there is a lack of transpar in the format of shell
compani monei launder often us them to hide the ident of the true owner the
sourc of the monei or the destin of the monei
apprais fraud
apprais fraud is often associ with monei launder scheme monei launder mai
purchas properti to launder monei or mai us illicit fund to servic the interest on the
debt such scheme can conceal the true ident of the properti owner and the true origin
of the fund us in the transact
apprais fraud occur where apprais fail to accur evalu the properti or when the
apprais deliber becom parti to a scheme to defraud the lender the borrow or
both a common techniqu is the over or undervalu of properti which consist of
buyingsel properti at a price abovebelow it market valu in addit to manipul
monei launder financi transact
11608 2011 fraud examin manual
apprais monei launder also overvalu properti through a seri of subsequ sale
each time at a higher price which tend to conceal the true purpos of the transact
monetari instrument
in mani instanc monei launder purchas build or renov properti with cash wire
transfer or other payablethrough account thi allow the integr of larg sum of
illicit monei into legal financi system later if sold it is difficult to relat the transact
to ani crimin activ and therefor successfulli conceal the true origin of the illicit fund
and their ownership
mortgag scheme
often monei launder will us illicit fund to pai the interest or repai the princip on
mortgag loan and in so do the illicit incom is convert into seemingli legitim
profit when the properti is sold mortgag scheme also involv under and overvalu
of properti for exampl in a common undervalu scheme a monei launder will
undervalu the purchas price of properti obtain a mortgag loan for the undervalu
amount us the loan to pai for the undervalu price and pai the excess amount under the
tabl with illicit fund
indirect invest in the real estat industri
indirect invest which ar those in which the investor ha no direct control over the
asset or invest vehicl in the real estat industri offer opportun to conceal an
investor identif and monetari sourc primarili becaus multipl parti ar involv
with the process
atm
law enforc offici ar also report an increas us of automat teller machin
atm to launder monei atm can be purchas for as littl as 3000 monei launder
purchas the machin and place them either in establish thei control or in legitim
busi the machin work the same as ani other atm machin and all transact
ar legitim the monei launder simpli fill the machin with cash from illeg activ
the custom us the machin and never realiz the sourc of the cash
the atm bank system debit the cardhold account and credit the atm owner bank
account at the end of the month the launder receiv a bank statement show fund
be deposit from a legitim financi institut
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11609
thi option is attract for monei launder becaus there ar current no regul
govern the us and oper of privatelyown atm there is no requir to
check the background of purchas of the machin and there ar no mandatori report
procedur and no rule for maintain atm sale record
gift card
although gift card ar a conveni wai to show someon you care the eas with which
thei can be purchas and us make them attract for monei launder it is estim
that american consum purchas more than 100 billion each year in storedvalu card
closedsystem card ar those that can be us at onli on retail or group of retail
opensystem card such as those issu by visa mastercard and american express can
be us at ani merchant who accept those credit card
although closedcard can onli be us at certain locat there is no oversight as to their
purchas as long as the purchas doe not involv a cash transact greater than 10000
there is no oblig on the part of the retail to perform ani type of due dilig or even
obtain the ident of the purchas
even for opensystem card purchas at financi institut there is no requir that
purchas have an account at the bank or provid identif if the transact is under
10000 bank ar not requir to perform due dilig on individu purchas
monei launder can anonym purchas storedvalu card at a number of differ
locat and then easili transport them out of the countri a small box contain just 200
card could store almost 2000000 without the necess of currenc report
bank and other depositori financi institut
bank and other depositori institut ar suscept to individu attempt to launder
illicit fund becaus thei ar the primari gatewai to the us financi system onc place in
a depositori institut illeg proce can be transfer instantli by wire or disguis by
commingl with legitim fund a challeng current face by depositori institut
includ monei launder conceal their ident and sourc of incom to open
account and launder illeg proce addition the increas us of the internet to
open or access account make it difficult for depositori institut to verifi custom
identif
monei launder financi transact
11610 2011 fraud examin manual
monei servic busi
monei servic busi msb refer to nondepositori financi servic provid
oper in on or more of the follow capac
currenc exchang
check casher
issuer seller or redeem of travel check monei order or store valu
the unit state postal servic and
monei transmitt
msb offer an altern to depositori institut for both financi servic and monei
launder for thi reason an individu unabl to transfer illeg fund into the us
bank system mai turn to msb in a ddition most msb oper without feder
regulatori supervis
insur compani
due to the recent growth in the financi product offer by insur agent and broker
includ save product invest product and tax plan servic the insur
industri ha becom increasingli attract to monei launder accord to the 2007
nation monei launder strategi thi de velop is occur primarili becaus
insur agent and broker now offer a rang of invest servic featur financi
product that can be purchas and subsequ transfer redeem or sold creat
new opportun for monei launder gener the independ broker and agent
who often sell insur product do not work directli for the insur compani as a
result these intermediari mai lack the knowledg or incent to screen client or to
question payment method and it is thi factor that monei launder often exploit
casino
casino oper in a highvolum cashintens industri and provid a broad rang of
financi servic such as deposit and credit account fund transfer check cash and
currenc exchang servic outsid the tradit financi servic system as a result
casino ar suscept to monei launder
accord to the 2005 us monei launder threat assess crimin typic
launder monei through casino by exchang illicit cash for casino chip and then either
hold the chip for a period of time and later cash them in for a casino check or
have the casino wire the monei elsewher
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11611
us the chip as currenc to purchas narcot with the drug dealer later cash in
the chip or
us the chip to gambl in hope of gener certifi win
shell compani
shell compani refer to nonpublicli trade corpor limit liabil compani
llc and trust which gener do not have ani physic presenc other than a mail
address and gener littl to no independ econom valu in most situat individu
and busi form shell compani for legitim reason such as hold the stock or
intellectu properti right of anoth busi entiti facilit domest and crossbord
currenc and asset transfer or foster domest and crossbord currenc corpor
merger howev shell compani have becom common tool for monei launder
primarili becaus thei have the abil to hide ownership and mask financi detail and
becaus monei launder can creat them with minim public disclosur of person
inform regard control interest and ownership thi lack of transpar
prevent the discoveri of suspici transact and imped investig and
prosecut
other common method of monei launder
in the 2005 us monei launder threat assess the us govern identifi
other common method that crimin us to integr illicit monei into the financi system
1 onlin payment system 2 bulk cash smuggl and 3 tradebas monei launder
onlin payment system
in respons to market demand onlin payment servic which accept fund in a varieti of
wai to transfer payment either to an individu or a merchant ar emerg in addit the
increas demand for new payment method ha led a grow number of onlin market
to embrac onlin payment system which set their own clear and settlement term and
offer no consum protect or financi regul sinc most transact through these
servic provid ar consid final and provid no recours to individu who believ
thei have been defraud feder law enforc agenc suggest that thei have becom a
popular payment system for individu perpetr onlin fraud
onlin payment system ar often vulner to monei launder becaus mani of them
function as intern persontoperson payment system which cross jurisdict
boundari creat difficulti for author pursu enforc or legal action
monei launder financi transact
11612 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor mani servic provid do not have effect custom identif or
recordkeep practic while other promot anonym payment
bulk cash smuggl
bulk cash smuggl which is the smuggl cash out of the us for deposit in foreign
jurisdict with lax financi institut or to fund crimin enterpris is also on the rise
the rise is bulk cash smuggl is due to the increasingli effect antimonei launder
polici and procedur at us financi institut in typic bulk cash smuggl
oper smuggler hide cash in vehicl luggag express packag commerci
shipment privat aircraft or privat boat
tradebas monei launder
tradebas monei launder is gener the most complex of the monei launder
method thi method encompass a varieti of scheme which util intern trade to
disguis the transfer of illicit fund the most common method of tradebas monei
launder is the black market peso exchang bmpe a scheme where broker purchas
narcot proce in the us from the cartel and exchang them for clean peso in
columbia other common tradebas monei launder method includ manipul
trade document to over and underpai for import and export and us crimin
proce to bui gem or preciou metal
call in a specialist
convert illgotten gain into cashier check or monei order is not particularli difficult
for even the most unsophist crimin howev becaus mani launder fear
detect thei turn to more sophist specialist courier arrang for the transport
of monei to a site where it is convert into anoth form of currenc for instanc drug
traffick will physic transport monei to a foreign jurisdict where it is deposit into
a bank account or convert directli to check or monei order sinc the courier ha no
appar connect with the true owner of the fund the monei launder retain
hi anonym
whitecollar profession such as attornei account and broker might also serv to
launder illeg fund through invest trust account fund transfer and tax avoid
scheme these profession can manipul the financi commerci and legal system to
conceal the origin and ownership of asset
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11613
hawala exchang
although the theoret work of hawala have been around for at least a centuri onli
recent ha the unit state publicli recogn it as a threat to homeland secur
hawala often refer to as hundi is an inform remitt system primarili exploit in
asia and the middl east becaus the system is unregul and leav virtual no paper
trail it is ripe for monei launder
how it work
hawala network oper with the nonphys transfer of monei typic on who want
to send monei abroad will call on a hawala dealer known as a hawaladar hawala
transact ar often disguis by legitim busi eg travel agenc cell phone
compani movi store conveni store and car wash the hawaladar will contact
anoth hawaladar in the countri where the monei is to be distribut and with whom he
ha a famili relat or is a trustworthi connect the hawaladar will discuss the
transact and arrang for deliveri of the monei to the recipi sometim the hawaladar
will give the giver a receipt but with veri littl inform inform typic contain
therein includ a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipi onc hawaladar have
exchang the basic inform of the transact the hawaladar for the recipi will
locat and deliv the monei to the recipi the recipi will then us the code to verifi
hi identif with the hawaladar who is distribut the monei the onli record kept of
the transact ar the amount ow on hawaladar to anoth becaus most hawala
transact ar disguis by legitim busi record of such transact ar gener
disguis as well
exampl
1 ana in new york contact and give 5000 in cash to hawaladar a in new
york to get 4800 to andi in dubai
2 hawaladar a contact hawaladar b in dubai and arrang the transfer a code is
exchang
3 hawaladar a give ana a code to be commun to andi
4 ana commun the code to andi
5 hawaladar b and andi make contact in dubai
6 andi relat code to hawaladar b and is then given the monei
7 hawaladar a ow hawaladar b 4800 worth of the big appl tshirt
hawaladar a send the merchandis from new york to hawaladar b in dubai
8 transact is complet
monei launder financi transact
11614 2011 fraud examin manual
often hawaladar ar busi partner who do legitim busi with each other on a
regular basi becaus it can be difficult to transfer larg amount of monei between
countri a debt might be paid with merchandis or a favor eg hawaladar b ow
hawaladar a monei from a past transact and in a new transact pai the recipi
therebi relinquish hi debt to hawaladar a from the former transact
the hawala exchang is a tempt opportun for mani becaus it
doesnt requir formal identif
take hour rather than dai to transfer the monei oversea
is cheaper than pai bank and ship fee becaus hawaladar gener take a veri
small commiss
no currenc convers is necessari and
lack a coher paper trail
the hawala exchang and monei launder
the veri essenc of hawala exchang bypass regul such that monei can be
transfer independ of govern and financi institut oversight while mani
hawala exchang ar remitt free of malint and therefor legitim in some
countri known as white hawala the system lend itself to abus the us of a hawala
exchang for illeg purpos such as monei launder drug traffick or terror is
refer to as a black hawala
monei launder specif is the disguis of the exist natur sourc ownership
locat and disposit of properti deriv from crimin activ for hawaladar who
oper storefront retail or servic busi in addit to their side hawala exchang
bank deposit will rare trigger investig by a financi institut unless deposit ar
exceedingli high for the particular busi as alwai such monei can go undetect by
us it toward person and busi expens it is import to note that in the us all
cash transact over 10000 must be report to the feder govern hawala monei
can easili be layer becaus paper trail ar meager at most furthermor becaus most
hawala exchang ar hidden behind busi veil monei receiv from such transact
can unnotic be recoup into busi account and thu integr into bank account
unfortun due to the hidden natur of the hawala busi much of thi monei is
us to fund danger activ such as the import of heroin and the purchas of
unauthor weapon
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11615
sign of a hawala exchang
red flag of monei launder could also indic a hawala exchang the follow
transact could indic monei launder via a hawala exchang the list should be us
to identifi those transact and custom which might requir further investig
us of cash as payment for a transact which is typic handl by check or other
form of payment
sever check deposit from variou ethnic commun
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
servic provid internation but paid for local
feder and state law
patriot act of 2001
on octob 26 2001 pre sident georg w bush sign into law the unit and strengthen
america by provid appropri tool requir to intercept and obstruct terror act the
patriot act the patriot act wa a respons to the tragedi of septemb 11 2001
and reflect congression concern with the monei launder activ of the terrorist
who commit those attack
titl iii of the act is entitl the intern monei launder abat and anti
terrorist financ act of 2001 titl iii creat signific requir for financi
institut aim at curtail monei launder the most signific antimonei
launder provis of the law includ the follow
financi institut ar requir to establish antimonei launder program
financi institut ar requir to establish program for identifi custom
monei launder financi transact
11616 2011 fraud examin manual
us bank ar prohibit from maintain correspond account with foreign shell
bank
secur brokerdeal ar requir to file suspici activ report
financi institut ar requir to adopt special due dilig procedur for foreign
correspond account and privat bank account
nonfinanci busi ar requir to file currenc transact report
financi institut have increas author to share custom inform relat to
monei launder
the govern ha greater power to obtain inform from financi institut
antimonei launder program
section 352 of the patriot act requir all financi institut to establish antimonei
launder program which must includ at a minimum
the develop of intern polici procedur and control to prevent monei
launder
the design of a monei launder complianc offic
an ongo train program for awar of monei launder
an independ audit function to test the program
the act defin the term financi institut broadli to includ not onli insur and
commerci bank but also secur broker and dealer invest compani currenc
exchang issuer of cashier check and monei order credit card compani insur
compani travel agenc and a host of other busi the complet list can be found at
31 usc 312 a2
identif and verif of accounthold
section 326 of the act expand the bank secreci act discuss below by requir
financi institut to implement custom identif program cip these cip ar
to be incorpor into financi institut monei launder program and at a
minimum thei must includ reason procedur for
verifi the ident of ani person seek to open an account to the extent reason
and practic
maintain record of the inform us to verifi a person ident includ
name address and other identifi inform and
consult list of known or suspect terrorist or terrorist organ to determin
if the person seek to open the account appear on ani such list
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11617
prohibit against foreign shell bank account
pursuant to section 313 and 319 of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a
farreach final regul that appli to over 9000 foreign financi institut that have
correspond account in the unit state the rule prohibit foreign shell bank those
without a physic presenc in ani countri from maintain correspond account at ani
us financi institut it also requir us financi intuit to maintain the name and
contact inform of the owner of the foreign bank for whom thei maintain
correspond account the rule strongli encourag us intuit to obtain
certif from their foreign bank custom s the certif can be us by the us
institut to help ensur that the custom is not a shell bank although not requir
obtain the certif and verifi the inform can creat a safe harbor from civil
liabil
us institut ar also requir to take reason step to ensur that correspond
account provid to foreign bank ar not us to provid servic indirectli to foreign
shell bank foreign bank that have account in the us ar requir to appoint someon in
the us to accept servic of legal process the rule also give the secretari of the treasuri
and the attornei gener the author to issu a summon or subpoena to ani foreign bank
that maintain a correspond account here and to request record relat to that account
suspici activ report by brokerdeal
pursuant to section 356 of the act the financi crime enforc network fincen
adopt rule requir broker and dealer in secur to report suspici activ 31
cfr 10319a2 thi report requir will be discuss in more detail later in thi
section see secur brokerdeal un der suspici activ report below
special due dilig for foreign account
section 312 of the patriot act requir financ ial institut to establish due dilig
polici procedur and control that ar reason design to detect and report instanc
of monei launder through certain account held by nonu citizen or their
repres thi provis appli to two type of foreign account
privat bank account
correspond account
a privat bank account is defin by the act as an account or combin of account that
1 requir a minimum aggreg deposit of fund or other asset of at least 1 million 2 is
monei launder financi transact
11618 2011 fraud examin manual
establish on behalf of on or more individu who have a direct or benefici ownership
in the account and 3 is assign to or admini stere by an offic employe or agent of the
financi institut act as a liaison between the financi institut and the owner of the
account
for privat bank account held by nonu person the act requir at a minimum that
financi institut take reason step to
ascertain the ident of the nomin and benefici owner of the account and the
sourc of fund deposit into the account as need to guard against monei launder
and report ani suspici transact and
conduct enhanc scrutini of ani such account that is request or maintain by or
on behalf of a senior foreign polit figur or an immedi famili member or close
associ of such that is reason design to detect and report transact that mai
involv the proce of foreign corrupt
a correspond account is defin as an account establish to receiv deposit from or make
payment on behalf of a foreign financi institut or handl other financi transact
relat to such an institut enhanc due dilig is requir for correspond account
maintain by or on behalf of foreign bank that oper under offshor bank licens or
for bank that ar licens by foreign countri that have either been design as
noncoop with intern antimonei launder principl or that have been
design by the secretari of the treasuri as warrant special measur due to monei
launder concern enhanc due dilig for these correspond account consist of
at a minimum
ascertain the ident of the owner of ani foreign bank whose share ar not
publicli trade
determin the natur and extent of each owner interest
conduct enhanc scrutini of the account to guard against monei launder and
report suspici transact and
ascertain whether the foreign bank provid correspond account to other
foreign bank and if so the ident of those foreign bank and relat due
dilig inform
currenc report by nonfinanci busi
section 365 of the patriot act requir person engag in ani trade or busi to file a
report with fincen when in the cours of their busi thei receiv more than 10000 in
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11619
coin or currenc thi report requir is discuss in more detail later in thi section
under the report and recordkeep provis of the bank secreci act
share inform between financi institut
pursuant to section 314b of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a rule
allow financi institut to share custom inform with on anoth the term
financi institut includ ani entiti that is requir to have an antimonei launder
program under the bank secreci act see abov in order to share inform with anoth
financi institut the share institut must follow these step
file a prescrib notic form with fincen state that it intend to share custom
inform with other financi institut the notic remain effect for on year
the institut mai then share the inform with anoth institut provid that it
ha verifi that the other institut ha also file a notic with fincen fincen will
period releas a list of institut who have submit notic if an institut is
on the list then the share institut will be consid to have fulfil it
verif duti
the institut must ensur that the share inform is secur and not us for ani
purpos other than to identifi and where appropri report on monei launder or
terrorist activ determin whether to establish or maintain an account or conduct a
transact or assist the other share institut with it complianc of bsa regul
the institut must also file a suspici activ report if base on the share
inform the institut suspect that the individu or entiti mai be involv in
monei launder or terrorist activ
section 355 of the act also permit insur depositori institut to share inform in
written employ refer about known or suspect unlaw activ of their current or
former director offic employe agent or other person affili with the institut
thi provis which is codifi at 12 usc 1828w doe not make it mandatori for
bank to disclos thi inform but it doe protect them from liabil if thei voluntarili
make such disclosur as long as the disclosur ar not made with malici intent
govern access to financi inform
on septemb 18 2002 the treasuri depart issu regul that provid feder law
enforc agenc with greater power to obtain financi inform the twopart
regul is an amend to the bank secreci act regul and wa mandat by
section 314 of the patriot act
monei launder financi transact
11620 2011 fraud examin manual
if a feder agenc provid fincen with a written certif that a person entiti or
organ about whom inform is sought is reason suspect base on credibl
inform to be engag in terrorist acti viti or monei launder fincen mai then
requir ani financi institut to search it record to determin if it maintain or ha
maintain account for or ha engag in transact with the subject
the inform report is limit to the name or account number of each cite person
entiti or organ the number of the match account or transact and the social
secur number taxpay id passport number date of birth or other identifi
inform the subject gave when open the account or conduct the transact
the institut mai not disclos the inform to anyon other than fincen or the
request agenc the institut also cannot disclos that the inform ha been
request or provid it mai howev us the inform in the request to determin
whether an account will be open or a transact conduct and to compli with
bsa regul
the term financi institut is defin as it is under the bsa and includ bank brokerdeal
insur compani monei servic busi as well as car and airplan dealer
travel agent and pawnbrok
offic of foreign asset control ofac
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depar tment of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu that sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain over 5000 variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
on septemb 24 2001 presid georg w bush issu an execut order impos
enhanc trade sanction on 27 individu and entiti includ osama bin laden and al
qaeda the immedi effect of the order is to block all asset of these individu and
entiti under us control and ban all deal with the list parti
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11621
on juli 26 2001 ofac issu a bulletin specif to the insur industri includ
underwrit broker agent primari insur and reinsur the bulletin affirm that us
insur mai not insur sdn or individu or entiti locat in certain prohibit
countri or make payment to beneficiari who ar design as prohibit person or
entiti exampl of prohibit transact includ 1 issu an insur polici or
annuiti contract to an sdn 2 issu a life insur polici name an sdn as a
beneficiari and 3 receiv premium payment for ani such transact
the bank secreci act
the bank secreci act bsa which went into effect in 1970 wa the first major piec of
legisl aim at detect and prevent monei launder the purpos of the law as
state in section 5311 is to requir certain re port or record where thei have a high degre
of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig or proceed the bsa set
forth a system of report and recordkeep requir design to help track larg or
unusu financi transact
the bsa consist of two titl titl i contain provis requir that financi institut
and secur broker and dealer keep extens record of the transact and account of
their custom it is codifi in titl 12 of the unit state code usc section 1829b
and 19511959 titl ii of the bsa origin entitl currenc and foreign transact
report act requir bank financi institut which includ casino secur
broker and dealer currenc exchang and other and in some case individu to
report to the govern certain transact titl ii is codifi at 31 usc 5311
5330
for more inform on the examin process and the complianc procedur financi
institut ar requir to follow pleas review the bank secreci actantimonei
launder examin manual publish by the feder financi institut
examin council it is avail for view on their websit wwwffiecgov
titl i recordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani financi transact of more
than 10000
monei launder financi transact
11622 2011 fraud examin manual
these regul provid in part that bank must keep for five year an origin microfilm
or other copi of certain document relat to demand deposit and check and save
account the record that must be retain includ
signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw
copi of both side of custom check bank draft monei order and cashier
check of more than 100 drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
ident of each purchas of a certif of deposit
each deposit slip or credit ticket reflect a transact in excess of 100
in addit to these requir financi institut ar requir to captur verifi and
retain inform on the ident of purchas of monetari instrument such as cashier
check in amount of 3000 or more or ani transmitt or transfer of fund involv
3000 or more these record ar also requir to be kept for five year
bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a custom
check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit ticket thei
must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check deposit to a
custom check account
although some of these requir appli onli to check written or deposit made in
excess of 100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all such item rather than sort out
those less than 100 the bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a
record of ani extens of credit more than 1 0000 as well as each transfer of 10000 or
more outsid the unit state
the penalti for failur to compli with these recordkeep requir ar sever ani
insur depositori institut and ani director offic or employe who willfulli or through
gross neglig violat ani regul can be subject to a 10000 civil penalti the statut
further provid that a separ violat occur for each dai the violat continu and at
each offic branch or place of busi at which the violat occur if a violat is
commit in further of a feloni crime crimin penalti can be impos of up to five
year in prison andor a fine of not more than 10000
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11623
titl ii report and recordkeep
titl ii of the bank secreci act is codifi as 31 usc 53115330 the purpos of
these section is to requir certain report or record to be file or kept by financi
institut section 5312a2 defin financi institut veri broadli to includ not
onli bank but also secur broker currenc exchang hous insur compani loan
compani travel agenc telegraph compani issuer or cashier of check or monei
order auto boat and airplan dealer casino and person involv in real estat close
and settlement onli recent ha the treasuri depart begun to reign in much of the
nonfinanci institut transact busi in the us by requir registr of these
divers enterpris see the monei servic busi excerpt below
the regul promulg by the us treasuri depart ar contain primarili in
chapter 31 of the code of feder regul at part 103 subpart b and requir the
follow report
currenc transact report ctr fincen form 104
all bank and certain other financi institut ar requir to fill out currenc transact
report ctr whenev there is a currenc transact deposit withdraw exchang or
cash of check of 10000 or more the easiest wai to summar the file requir is
to rememb if currenc in excess of 10000 is brought into a financi institut to conduct
a transact or if as the result of a transact 10000 in currenc leav the financi
institut a ctr must be file
fincen form 104 formerli name ir form 4789 is prepar by the financi institut
and contain the name of the individu conduct the transact or the name of
the person or organ on whose behalf the transact is be conduct as well as
all identifi data of these individu or entiti it also requir the detail of the transact
and identifi data of the financi institut prepar the form for purpos of report
multipl transact must be treat as a singl transact if the financi institut ha
knowledg that the transact ar by or on behalf of the same person and the amount total
more than 10000 dure ani on busi dai
under titl 31 usc section 5313 the treasuri depart publish a mandatori
exempt list that specif identifi entiti whose transact with a financi
institut ar exempt from these report requir the exempt entiti includ
bank depart or agenc of state or feder govern and other busi whose
monei launder financi transact
11624 2011 fraud examin manual
report have littl or no valu for law enforc purpos the exempt list must be
publish period in the feder regist
the treasuri depart can also provid discretionari exempt for qualifi busi
custom which ar defin as busi that 1 maintain transact account as defin
by the feder reserv act at the particular institut 2 frequent engag in transact
with the institut that ar subject to the report requir and 3 meet the guidelin
and criteria establish by the treasuri depart to ensur that the failur to file report on
these entiti will not interfer with the purpos of the act
a copi of form 104 is includ at the end of thi chapter
currenc report by casino fincen form 102
form 102 formerli name ir form 8362 is requir to be file by casino licens by
state or local govern and have an annual gross revenu in excess of 1000000
nevada casino ar exempt from file these form becaus of a strict state law that requir
report for currenc transact the file requir and transact detail for thi
form ar almost ident to form 104
currenc report by nonfinanci busi ir form 8300
the patriot act creat titl 31 section 5331 of the us code which requir person
engag in ani trade or busi to file a report with fincen when in the cours of their
busi thei receiv more than 10000 in coin or currenc either in on transact or in
two or more relat transact for purpos of comput the amount of multipl relat
transact the recipi must aggreg all payment made within on year of the first
payment transact cover by thi section must be report within 15 dai of receipt of
payment in excess of 10000 the rule govern ing these report ar codifi at 31 cfr
10330
thi section doe not appli to financi institut which ar alreadi cover by 31 usc
5313 as describ abov it also doe not appli to transact occur entir outsid
the unit state in addit the rule exempt certain loan instal sale and down
payment plan
the inform requir to be report under section 5331 is veri similar to the
inform that wa alreadi requir by the ir under section 6050i of the intern
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11625
revenu code becaus of the similar between the two statut the report ar to be
made on the same form 8300 which is file jointli with fincen and the ir essenti
the rule impos no new recordkeep burden sinc form 8300 alreadi had to be file
with the ir
under the intern revenu code there ar both civil and crimin penalti for failur to
file form 8300 or file a fals form crimin sanction includ imprison of up to five
year for a will failur to file and fine of up to 500000 for organ knowingli
file a fals return
report of intern transport of currenc or monetari instrument custom cmir fincen form 105
pursuant to titl 31 usc 5316 a person shall file a report if he transport or is about to
transport monetari instrument of more than 10000 into or out of the unit state at on
time or if he receiv by transport mail or shipment monetari instrument in excess of
10000 at on time transport into the unit sate from a place outsid the unit state
fincen form 105 formerli name custom form 4790 is to be file at the time of
transport or within 15 dai of receipt
for the purpos of thi statut the term monetari instrument mean unit state and
foreign coin and currenc bearer instrument such as busi bank or person check
monei order promissori note bearer stock and bond
there ar exempt from the cmir filin g requir that extend to bank for
transfer of fund through normal bank procedur the feder reserv and certain
common carrier
a copi of thi form is includ at the end of thi chapter
report of foreign bank and financi account fbartreasuri form 90221
treasuri depart regul requir citizen of the unit state and resid alien to
file a report when thei maintain a financi interest or signatur author over a foreign bank
account with a balanc of more than 10000 dure the calendar year account in differ
foreign countri have to be aggreg
monei launder financi transact
11626 2011 fraud examin manual
penalti
section 5321 of the bsa set forth the civil penalti for noncompli with the act a
cover entiti includ it partner director offic or employe that willfulli violat
the report requir can be hit with a penalti of up to the amount of the transact
not to exce 100000 or 25000 whichev is greater a separ penalti can be impos
for each dai the violat continu and at each branch or offic civil penalti of up to
500 ar also author for a neglig violati on if there is a pattern of neglig activ
the penalti limit increas to 50000 thi section also set forth other penalti applic
to structur transact and foreign financi agenc transact
crimin penalti ar set forth in section 5322 which provid that a person willfulli
violat the statut or regul can be fine up to 250000 andor imprison for up to
five year if the violat occur while violat anoth feder law or as a pattern of illeg
activ involv more than 100000 the maximum fine increas to 500000 and the
maximum prison time increas to 10 year as with the civil penalti a separ violat
occur each dai the conduct continu and at each locat
forfeitur
section 5317c provid crimin and civil forfeitur penalti for violat of the currenc
report requir in 5313 report on domest transact 5316 report on
export and import monetari instrument and 5324 structur transact to
evad report requir a person convict of an offens under ani of these statut
or of a conspiraci to violat ani of these statut can be order to forfeit all properti that
wa involv in the offens and ani properti traceabl thereto
suspici activ report sar
financi institut
the bsa also requir financi institut to monitor suspici activ and file suspici
activ report sar to disclos known or suspect crimin offens or transact that
involv monei launder or violat the act for year suspici transact were
report on the currenc transact report ctr howev such activ is now report
us the suspici activ report sar
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which charter regul and
supervis more than 2500 nation bank adopt a requir mandat that nation
bank file sar with the appropri feder law enforc agenc and the treasuri
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11627
depart in accord with the form instruct by send the report to the
financi crime enforc network fincen these report requir ar found
in titl 12 part 353 of the code of feder regul thi is an enorm improv
on the old report system becaus it establish a central report system that is
share throughout govern agenc simultan the dea for instanc can now
access the same inform as the ir when work on a suspici report the report
procedur ha also been simplifi for bank make the inform much easier for the
depart of the treasuri to obtain
financi institut ar also requir to us sar form to report incid of comput
intrus the term comput intrus is defin as gain access to the comput
system to remov steal or procur custom fund or other account inform or to
access the institut comput system with the intent of damag or disabl ani
critic comput system
sar ar us to report a known or suspect crimin offens or a transact that involv
monei launder or violat the bsa more specif a sar must be file with fincen
in each of the follow instanc
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut when the
institut ha a substanti basi for identifi on of it director offic employe
agent or affili parti as have commit the act or aid in it commiss
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut and
aggreg 5000 or more when the institut ha a substanti basi for identifi a
possibl suspect or group of suspect
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut and
aggreg 25000 or more regardless of whether the institut ha a substanti basi
for identifi possibl suspect
ani transact conduct or attempt to be conduct through the financi
institut when the institut ha reason to suspect that 1 the fund were deriv
from illeg activ 2 the transact is design to evad ani regul under the
bank secreci act or 3 the transact appear to have no busi purpos or appear
unusu in normal bank practic
when a financi institut report a suspici transact to a govern agenc the act
18 usc 5318g2 make it illeg for the financi institut to notifi ani person
involv in the suspici transact that such a report ha been made
monei launder financi transact
11628 2011 fraud examin manual
section 5318g3 of the bsa also contain a safe harbor provis for financi institut
that report suspici transact or that make voluntari disclosur to a govern
agenc of ani other possibl violat of a law or regul the act provid that these
financi institut shall not be liabl under ani law regul or contract to ani person
for make the report note that thi safe harbor provis onli appli to report made to
govern agenc not to selfregulatori organ
a copi of the sar report form is includ at the end of thi chapter
monei servic busi
even befor the passag of the patriot act the treasuri depart wa in the process
of expand it report guidelin to includ busi that did not fall under the
tradit definit of financi institut but nevertheless perform a myriad of financi
servic on of these categori includ monei servic busi msb which compris
variou type of monei transmitt issuer of monei order and travel check and
check cash busi msb have long been requir to file ctr but otherwis veri
littl govern regul ha been requir
in august 1999 mani of the report and registr oblig contain in the bank
secreci act were extend to ms bs these busi ar now requir to regist with
fincen under chapter 31 cfr part 103 subchapt d those that fail to regist can
incur substanti penalti
under the rule 1 monei transmitt 2 issuer seller and redeem of monei order
3 issuer seller and redeem of travel check and 4 the us postal servic except
with regard to the sale of postag or philatel product ar requir to report certain class
of transact that meet certain dollar threshold to the depart of the treasuri after
januari 1 2002
the report transact includ
transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or intend or conduct in
order to hide or disguis fund or asset deriv from illeg activ
transact design whether through structur or other mean to evad the
requir of the bsa
transact that appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos and
transact that involv the us of a mutual fund to facilit crimin activ
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11629
the rule includ two differ dollar threshold depend on the stage and type of
transact involv
for transact conduct or attempt by at or through a monei servic busi or
it agent a threshold of 2000 appli
for transact identifi by issuer of monei order or travel check from a review
of clearanc record or other similar record of instrument that have been sold or
process a threshold of 5000 appli
msb ar given 30 dai after becom awar of a suspici transact to complet a
suspici activ report by monei servic busi sarmsb form 109 and file it
with fincen in situat involv violat that requir immedi attent such as
ongo monei launder scheme the msb or msb ar to notifi the appropri law
enforc author immedi by telephon in addit to file the requir form
support document relat to each sarmsb is to be collect and maintain by
the report msb for review as need by law enforc and regulatori agenc
although the sarmsb form is not format for joint file msb mai be includ as
joint filer with other report financi institut
currenc exchang
in a rule issu februari 10 2003 us currenc exchang ar requir to file suspici
activ report under the same rule that appli to monei servic busi
mutual fund
as part of the patriot act mutual fund ar also requir to establish antimonei
launder program in mai 2003 the depart of treasuri and the secur and
exchang commiss sec issu a regul requir mutual fund to implement
reason measur to establish custom identif procedur and to verifi whether
custom appear on list of ani known or suspect terrorist
in mai 2006 the treasuri depart issu fi nal approv to regul that requir
mutual fund to report suspici activ to fincen under these regul mutual
fund ar requir to report suspici currenc and noncurr transact or
attempt transact of 5000 or more the report would be file on the sarsf
suspici activ for secur and futur industri form 101
monei launder financi transact
11630 2011 fraud examin manual
the rule state that four categori of transact will requir report these ar the same
four categori that trigger report requir for monei servic busi and
currenc exchang
transact involv fund deriv from crimin activ or intend or conduct to
hide or disguis fund from crimin activ
transact design to evad bank secreci act bsa requir
transact appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos or
transact involv the us of the mutual fund to facilit crimin activ
secur brokerdeal
in 2002 fincen announc a rule requir broker and dealer in secur to report
suspici activ via a suspici activ report by secur and futur industri
sarsf fincen form 101 these firm ar oblig to report suspici transact
conduct or attempt by at or through a brokerdeal and involv or aggreg at least
5000 in fund or asset thi requir took effect decemb 31 2002
broker and dealer in secur ar requir to report to fincen transact that fall into
on of the four categori below again these categori ar substanti similar to those
that trigger report by monei servic busi and mutual fund see abov
transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or intend or conduct in
order to hide or disguis fund deriv from illeg activ
transact design whether through structur or other mean to evad the
requir of the bank secreci act
transact that appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos or ar not the
sort of transact in which the particular custom would be expect to engag and
for which the brokerdeal know of no reason explan after examin the
avail fact or
transact that involv the us of the brokerdeal to facilit crimin activ
brokerdeal ar also requir to establish antimonei launder program that among
other thing ar design to detect suspici transact under recent promulg selfregulatori
organ sro rule the sec ha the author to examin brokerdeal
for complianc with the rule and it is expect that the sro will also be review
complianc as part of the enforc of their rule
a copi of sarsf is includ at the end of the chapter
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11631
casino and card club
effect march 25 2003 casino and card club with gross revenu over 1000000 must
file suspici activ report on form sarc under the rule casino and card club must
report suspici activ if a transact involv or aggreg at least 5000 in fund and if
it meet on of the four categori that gener trigger sar see previou section on
financi institut monei servic busi mutual fund etc
some possibl exampl of suspici activ accord to fincen includ
us wire transfer and cashier check to deposit fund into casino account and us
the monei for littl or no game activ befor cash out and
transfer chip to other individu to cash out or redeem chip for casino check
that total significantli more than the amount deposit with no appar win to
account for the excess amount
casino ar also requir to file currenc transact report via fincen form 102 or the
nevada state form see abov
insur compani
although insur compani have alwai fallen under the definit of a financi
institut under the bsa the treasuri depart had never issu ani rule pertain
to the industri the patriot act howev requir that all financi institut
establish antimonei launder program and it give the secretari of the treasuri the
discret to determin which institut would be requir to file sar
in novemb 2005 fincen publish rule pertain to insur compani that sell
certain type of insur product the rule appli onli to compani that sell cover
product that fincen deem to be more at risk for monei launder activ than
other type of insur product compani that sell these cover product ar requir
to file sar and to implement antimonei launder program the rule defin cover
product as ani of the follow
a perman life insur polici other than a group polici
an annuiti contract other than a group annuiti contract or
ani other insur product with cash valu or invest featur
group insur product term life properti casualti health and titl insur polici
ar not consid cover product
monei launder financi transact
11632 2011 fraud examin manual
also insur compani must report suspici activ to fincen fincen form
108suspici activ report by insur companiesha been propos howev
until the form is approv insur compani should us the suspici activ
report form us by the secur and futur industri fincen form 101 to report
suspici activ
dealer in preciou metal stone or jewel
person who deal in jewel preciou metal and preciou stone ar requir to establish
antimonei launder program dealer ar defin as person who have purchas at
least 50000 and sold more than 50000 worth of jewel stone or metal dure the
preced year addition the person must also be in the busi of sell signific
amount of such item therefor the rule wo uld not appli to occasion seller or hobbyist
dealer howev ar not requir to file sar fincen is develop a set of final rule to
address in more detail who is cover under the rule and what procedur will be requir
other feder law relat to monei launder
the fraud examin should be awar of the feder law that ar typic involv when
prosecut a monei launder transact most such scheme will involv on or more of
the follow
structur transact to evad report requir titl 31 usc 5324
if a person caus or attempt to caus a cover institut to fail to file a requir report
with the purpos of evad the report requir such person can be fine under the
provis of 18 usc 3571 andor imprison up to five year if the violat occur
in the cours of violat anoth feder law or as part of a pattern of illeg conduct
involv more than 100000 in a 12month period then the amount of the fine under
3571 can be doubl and the prison time increas to up to 10 year
section 3571 of titl 18 provid for fine for individu convict of a feloni of up to
250000 and fine for organ of up to 500000 altern a fine can be impos
up to twice the amount of the illgotten gain to the crimin or twice the amount of the loss
to the victim
bulk cash smuggl into or out of the unit state titl 31 usc 5332
section 5332 which wa creat by section 371 of the patriot act make it illeg for
anyon to knowingli conceal more than 10000 in currenc or other monetari instrument
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11633
and transport or attempt to transport such currenc into or out of the unit state with the
intent to evad a currenc report requir under 18 usc 1956 see below
violat of these section mai be imprison up to five year and mai be requir to forfeit
ani properti involv in the offens or ani properti traceabl thereto
monei launder statut titl 18 usc 1956 and 1957
transact monei launder
section 1956a1 provid that anyon who know that properti involv in a
financi transact repres the proce of some form of unlaw activ and conduct a
financi transact in ani of the follow wai
with the intent to promot the carri on of specifi unlaw activ
with the intent to violat section 7201 tax evas or 7206 file fals return of the
intern revenu code
know that the transact is design to conceal or disguis the natur locat
sourc ownership or control of the illeg proce
know that the transact is design to avoid a report requir
such individu shall be fine up to 500000 or twice the valu of the monetari instrument
or fund whichev is greater andor imprison for not more than 20 year specifi
unlaw activ is defin in 1956c7 and includ a long list of feder crime
includ rico fraud embezzl theft and fals statement also fund that ar
illeg transmit in violat of thi statut or ani properti traceabl to those fund ar
subject to civil forfeitur under 18 usc 981a1a
intern transport and launder of fund
section 1956a2 prohibit the transport transmiss or transfer of fund either into
or out of the unit state if the person know the fund ar the proce of unlaw
activ and the transport transmiss or transfer is done with the intent to promot
the carri on of specifi unlaw conduct is done to conceal the natur locat
sourc ownership or control of the fund or is done to avoid report requir the
penalti ar the same as those set forth in subsect a1
sting oper
section 1956a3 prohibit a person from engag in financi transact involv
properti the person believ to be the proce of illeg activ thi is intend to cover
sting oper in which a suspect engag in monei launder activ with fund he
monei launder financi transact
11634 2011 fraud examin manual
believ to be illeg deriv even though the fund ar actual suppli by govern
agent the person can be imprison for up to 20 year andor fine in accord with 18 usc 3571
engag in monetari transact with monei deriv from specifi unlaw activ
an offens occur under section 1957 if a person knowingli engag or attempt to engag
in a monetari transact with crimin deriv properti that is greater than 10000 and
that is deriv from specifi unlaw activ section 1957 appli in situat where
the offens take place in the unit state or within it special maritim or territori
jurisdict or the offens take place outsid the us but the defend is a us citizen or
legal alien
violat of thi statut ar punish by a fine under 18 usc 3571 andor 10 year in
prison in addit the illeg transmit fund can be forfeit under 18 usc
981a1a
civil penalti
section 1956b set forth civil penalti for violat of section 1956 and 1957 under thi
section those who violat either monei launder statut ar liabl to the unit state for
the valu of the properti fund or monetari instrument involv in the illeg transact
or 10000 whichev is greater
longarm jurisdict over foreign monei launder
section 1956b also give us district court jurisdict over foreign person or financi
institut when 1 the foreign person commit a monei launder offens under section
1956a that occur in whole or in part in the unit state 2 the foreign person convert
to hi own us properti in which the unit state ha an ownership interest or 3 the
foreign financi institut maintain a bank account in the unit state
under section 1956b3 a us court can issu restrain order to freez the asset of
foreign monei launder describ abov prior to trial to ensur that the defend asset
ar avail to satisfi a judgment the court can also appoint a feder receiv to collect
marshal and take control of the defend asset to satisfi a civil or crimin judgment for
monei launder or a civil or crimin forfeitur judgment
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11635
prohibit of illeg monei transmit businessestitl 18 usc 1960
thi section prohibit the oper of a busi that transfer fund by ani mean
whether by wire check or courier if the busi doe not have the appropri state
licens or fail to compli with the registr requir establish under titl 31 of the
us code section 5330 the offend can be fine under section 3571 of titl 18 andor
imprison not more than five year illeg transmit fund can also be seiz by the
unit state under 18 usc 981a1a
racket influenc and corrupt organ ricotitl 18 usc 1961
1968
violat of the monei launder crime statut 18 usc 1956 and 1957 and
certain violat of the bank secreci act ar predic offens constitut racket
activ these act can be prosecut under the rico statut which includ crimin
penalti of up to 20 year in prison andor fine under section 3571 of titl 18 the statut
also provid for a civil caus of action by ani person injur in hi busi or properti
as a result of a violat of rico remedi includ trebl damag and attornei fee
seizur and forfeiturestitl 18 usc 981 et seq
section 981 provid for the civil seizur and forfeitur of properti involv in certain
crime includ monei launder section 982 deal with crimin forfeitur forfeitur mai
be defin as the take by the govern of properti that is illeg us or acquir
without compens the owner these remedi ar onli avail to the govern and
typic ar us in connect with a crimin investig and prosecut
when a piec of properti is forfeit all right titl and interest in the properti vest in the
govern consequ all the defend ownership right ar extinguish the
transfer of right date back to the moment when the properti becam forfeit ie when
the crime wa commit ani subsequ transfer by the defend is of no effect thi is
known as the relat back doctrin in the ey of the law the subsequ judici proceed
mere confirm that a forfeitur ha in theori alreadi taken place although the govern
cannot claim ani right in the properti until it receiv a forfeitur judgment becaus the
govern right to the properti and relat proce date back to when the crime wa
commit the govern is legal entitl to ani gain accru from the proce of the
illeg activ
monei launder financi transact
11636 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin forfeitur ar conduct in conjunct with a crimin trial the proof necessari
to perfect the forfeitur is the same as requir to convict the individu of the crimin
charg that is proof beyond a reason doubt the crimin forfeitur is an action in
personam against the person in such a proceed the govern ha the same burden of
proof as it doe in a crimin case if the govern sustain a convict the judg will
forfeit the properti at time of sentenc at which time the properti can be seiz
civil forfeitur ar conduct independ from a crimin proceed a civil forfeitur is
an action in rem against the properti in respons to perceiv abus on the part of the
govern congress pass the civil asset forfeitur reform act of 2000 which
drastic amend the law concern civil forfeitur
below ar some of the highlight of the act
set forth notif requir with respect to seiz properti and civil forfeitur
proceed includ a requir that the govern notifi interest parti as
soon as practic but within 60 dai after the date of the seizur
set forth procedur for file claim for seiz properti after a claim is file the
govern ha 90 dai in which to file a complaint for forfeitur if the govern
fail to do thi then it must return the properti in lieu of or in addit to file a
civil forfeitur complaint the govern mai includ a forfeitur alleg in a
crimin indict
provid that the court appoint counsel to repres anyon with an interest in the
properti if the person is financi unabl to afford counsel
place the burden of proof on the govern to establish by a preponder of the
evid that the properti is subject to forfeitur
provid that if the forfeitur action is be prosecut becaus the properti wa us
to commit or facilit the commiss of a crimin offens or wa involv in such
commiss the govern must establish that there wa a substanti connect
between the properti and the offens
provid an innoc owner defens to the forfeitur action the owner must prove
hi innoc by a preponder of the evid
author a claimant to petit the court to determin whether a forfeitur wa
constitution excess direct the court to compar the forfeitur to the graviti of
the offens place upon the claimant the burden of establish by a preponder of
the evid at a hear conduct by the court without a juri that the forfeitur is
grossli disproport to the offens upon the claimant
amend the feder tort claim act to allow claimant to sue the govern for ani
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11637
damag or loss of properti while in possess of the govern
author the us of forfeit properti to pai restitut to ani victim of the offens
give rise to the forfeitur includ in the case of a monei launder offens ani
offens constitut the underli specifi activ
direct that all civil forfeitur of real properti and interest in real properti proce as
judici forfeitur prohibit with except 1 real properti that is the subject of a
civil forfeitur from be seiz befor entri of a forfeitur order and 2 the owner or
occup of the real properti from be evict from or otherwis depriv of the us
and enjoy of real properti that is the subject of a pend forfeitur action
provid for the forfeitur of the proce of specifi unlaw activ under the
monei launder statut
forfeitur of fund in interbank account
section 319 of the patriot act amend 18 usc 981 expand the unit state
abil to seiz the proce of monei launder activ by provid for forfeitur of fund
held in unit state interbank account an interbank account is an account on financi
institut hold at anoth financi institut
if fund involv in a monei launder transact or the proce of ani specifi
unlaw activ as defin by the monei launder statut ar deposit in a foreign bank
and if that foreign bank ha an interbank account in the unit state then the taint fund
will be deem to have been deposit into the us account in other word the fund in
the foreign bank us interbank account can be seiz even if the launder monei wa
not deposit in that account the govern doe not have to trace the monei in the us
interbank account to the monei that wa deposit in the foreign account it is enough that
the us interbank account is held by the same financi institut in which the launder
monei wa deposit oversea
fals statementstitl 18 usc 1001
person who violat the bank secreci act and other report law might also be guilti of
violat of 18 usc 1001 which is the prin cipal feder fals statement statut becaus
most of the oblig impos by the bsa involv recordkeep and report mani
bsa violat might also constitut fals statement section 1001 prohibit knowingli
falsifi conceal cover up or make a fals fictiti or fraudul statement or
represent in ani matter within the jurisdict of ani us depart or agenc
violat of thi section ar often charg when an individu is stop at the border with
monei launder financi transact
11638 2011 fraud examin manual
a larg amount of unreport cash and respond fals to the question of custom offic
or inspector it ha been us to prosecut individu for structur a transact so that it
deceiv a financi institut into file a fals report
conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
although numer feder statut make conspiraci a crime the most commonli us
feder conspiraci statut is the gener conspiraci statut under section 371 of titl 18 us
code
section 371 can be divid into two part 1 conspiraci to commit a crime against the
unit state and 2 conspiraci to defraud the unit state or it agenc sever
court have upheld convict base on the second prong of the statut sole for failur to
file ctr such prosecut ar base on the theori that the person depriv the ir of
accur ctr in the case of unit state v richter 610 fsupp 480 nd ill 1985 the
court held that the divis of larg amount of cash into smaller nonreport transact
by sever individu work as a team wa a conspiraci to obstruct the govern
function of receiv ctr howev other court have reject thi theori on the ground
that there is no duti on the part of the custom to inform the govern or the bank of
the natur of the transact whether report or not
travel act titl 18 usc 1952
the travel act is applic if the offens involv the proce of illeg activ and
interst travel the act provid that it is an offens to travel in interst or foreign
commerc or us the mail with the intent to distribut the proce of ani unlaw activ
commit ani crime of violenc to further unlaw activ or otherwis establish promot
or manag an establish for the purpos of carri on ani unlaw activ unlaw
activ is defin to includ the report requir under 31 usc chapter 53 as well
as the monei launder statut 18 us c 1956 and 1957 the fine establish
under 3571 can be impos andor up to five year imprison if a crime of violenc is
involv the term of imprison increas to a maximum of 20 year or life if someon
wa kill
state law
approxim 30 state have enact statut that crimin monei launder most of
which appli to businesspeopl and profession some of the state statut ar broader than
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11639
the feder statut and thei ar often enforc more aggress than their feder
counterpart
mani state have crimin attempt monei launder with the same penalti as the
complet crime some state contain a sting provis which enabl the prosecut of
activ even though the launder monei is not actual deriv from crimin activ but
rather suppli by govern agent as part of a sting oper sever state have also
enact legisl requir financi institut and busi to file currenc transact
report that mirror the feder report some requir duplic file with the state other
ar satisfi with the feder file
intern antimonei launder effort
in the 1980 the mount global drug crisi led to the birth of intern antimonei
launder aml effort as a result intern organ began take on initi
to fight monei launder while other were creat for that same purpos the princip
organ includ the unit nation un the financi action task forc on monei
launder fatf and the egmont group fo llow the event of septemb 11 2001
howev the intern commun aml focu shift from antidrug to antiterror
and mani intern organ revis the aml framework to not onli examin
fund from illeg sourc but to also examin fund whose purpos were illegitim
the unit nation
in 1988 the un adopt the un convent against illicit traffic in narcot drug and
psychotrop substanc a mandat to bring an end to monei launder in respons the
un establish the global programm against moneylaund gpml which provid
member state with assist in compli with intern aml standard in addit
the gpml in particip with other intern organ maintain the
intern monei launder inform ne twork imolin a websit that provid
the intern commun with inform and tool concern aml
the financi action task forc on monei launder fatf
in 1989 the group of seven g7 lead industri nation establish the financi
action task forc fatf a multilater policymak and standardset bodi design
to combat monei launder the fatf develop a set of forti recommend
regard the proper approach to combat monei launder through law enforc
monei launder financi transact
11640 2011 fraud examin manual
effort financi regul and intern cooper in addit to observ the
current fatf member carri out these recommend the fatf also lobbi for
other nation and territori to adopt them the fatf also issu financi advisori that
warn financi institut against do busi in countri that seem to invit
monei launder
the egmont group
the egmont group is an inform intern network of financi intellig unit
fiu nation center that collect inform on suspici or unusu financi activ
design to fight monei launder by encourag global cooper and mutual exchang
of inform
enforc and prevent strategi
financi institut broker and insur compani should be awar and should make
their employe awar of situat that could indic monei launder activ
bank secreci act complianc program
most financi institut ar now requir to have a bank secreci act complianc program
in place howev everi busi that ha the potenti for transact deal with
signific amount of cash should institut a complianc program and a monei launder
awar program all employe should be made awar of the monei launder statut
and the seriou implic of such law on the institut and the employe employe
should be educ to be awar of transact that might suggest possibl launder
activ procedur should be set out detail what an employe should do if a custom or
transact appear suspici
minimum standard
treasuri regul provid that at a minimum a written complianc program should be
adopt that
establish a system of intern control to ensur ongo bsa complianc
provid for independ test of complianc by intern auditor andor outsid
examin
design a complianc offic to ensur daytodai complianc with bsa
provid train on an ongo basi for all personnel
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11641
complianc offic
a busi should select a person or team respons for the daytodai monitor of the
complianc program the complianc offic should be given broad author to monitor all
aspect of the institut complianc includ the develop and refin of the
program and the monitor of employe train program such individu should also
have the author to conduct regular and ad hoc audit to ensur that the program is
function effect and to hire outsid consult as necessari to investig problem
polici statement
all entiti cover under the report and recordkeep law and regul should have
a written polici against handl the proce of drug traffick or other crimin activ
the statement should provid that the institut requir it employe to oper with the
highest moral and ethic principl it should includ a statement that the compani refus
to do busi with crimin and monei launder a commit to conduct busi onli
with legitim busi organ a statem ent against do busi with organ
that fail to provid proper document of their ident and purpos clear direct for
refer all suspici transact to the appropri depart and a commit to
compli with the provis of the bank secreci act
know your custom program
most financi institut have know your custom program as part of their bsa
complianc program such program should provid for effect custom identif
account monitor and appropri action in suspici circumst both the ctr
report requir and the recordkeep requir of the bank secreci act
mandat the identif of custom us the institut servic
new deposit account
for individu deposit account minimum identif standard should be establish
the inform to be obtain should includ
name
address
date of birth
social secur number or for nonu citizen a passport visa or alien registr
number
current employ
busi and resid telephon number
monei launder financi transact
11642 2011 fraud examin manual
the custom should be requir to submit some form of identif that includ a
photo such as a driver licens or passport and a copi should be made and kept in the
custom file if there ar ani doubt or inconsist about the inform provid
the employe should be instruct to notifi the appropri depart
minimum standard for new busi account should includ
busi name and address
telephon number
taxpay identif number
document establish the format of the busi entiti articl of incorpor
partnership agreement etc
copi of all assum name file or dba do busi as
a full descript of the oper of the busi
credit and bank refer
the ident of the offic director or other princip
the account repres should also consid make a person visit to the custom
place of busi besid promot good custom relat a person visit will help
identifi whether the busi is legitim or simpli a front the repres can also us
thi opportun to get to know the princip of the busi
new loan account
an institut should perform due dilig in establish a new loan account becaus if the
custom is engag in monei launder there is a risk of forfeitur of collater pledg on
the loan real or person properti that is traceabl to drug sale or that is purchas with
launder fund is subject to seizur by the govern if the properti seiz is pledg as
collater the financi institut must prove that it wa an innoc lienhold of the
properti and had no knowledg of the illeg activ
minimum standard regard the inform to be gather should includ
reliabl identifi inform similar to that requir for new deposit account
reliabl financi inform such as financi statement w2 and copi of tax
return
the purpos of the loan
credit histori and prior bank refer
verifi legitim mean of repay
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11643
assur that the loan amount is consist with the purpos of the loan and the natur
of the busi
servic for nonaccounthold
bank often issu cashier check monei order and travel check and perform
currenc exchang wire transfer or check cash servic strict identif
requir should be establish for transact with person who ar not regular bank
custom in fact regul requir that in some instanc bank keep a record of the
ident of person who ar not establish custom such regul usual requir at a
minimum the person name and address driver licens number or other number of
identifi document produc and social secur number or employ identif
number
monitor account
while identif of custom is import it is equal import to monitor the activ
of account the institut should identifi unusu transact that might not be consist
with the normal busi of the custom unusu and dramat chang in wire transfer
monetari instrument and check transact ar import to identifi if unusu
transact or activ ar note the institut should take some action to protect itself
the appropri action in some case might be to discuss the chang with the custom to
find out the reason for said inconsist increas transact might be the result of an
increas in sale or the result of a promot activ howev if the discuss lead to a
reason suspicion that the transact ar illegitim the institut might be requir to
notifi the appropri govern agenc andor file a suspici activ report
special problem for insur compani
although financi institut such as bank ar primarili associ with monei launder
activ insur compani have becom major target of monei launder oper
becaus of the varieti of servic and invest vehicl thei offer that can be us to
conceal the sourc of fund
the most common form of monei launder that insur compani face involv singl
premium contract or polici exampl includ purchas of annuiti lump sum topup
to an exist life insur contract and lump sum contribut to person pension
contract
monei launder financi transact
11644 2011 fraud examin manual
insur compani like other financi institut should educ their employe to look
out for transact that appear to be inconsist with a custom known legitim
busi or person activ or the normal transact for that type of account to that
end insur compani should institut know your custom program such as those
describ abov
red flag
the follow transact might indic monei launder is take place the list should be
us to identifi those transact and custom that might requir further investig
larg purchas of a lump sum contract when the custom typic purchas small
regular payment contract
us of a thirdparti check to make a purchas or invest
lack of concern for the perform of an invest but great concern for the earli
cancel of the contract
us of cash as payment for a transact that is typic handl with check or other
form of payment
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici or account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with the custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period the custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to a thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
request to borrow the maximum cash valu of a singl premium polici soon after
pai for the polici
detect
insur compani must file all appropri report and follow all the requir of the
bank secreci act includ the implement of an effect bsa complianc program
certain other report can help compani identifi suspici transact incom and
outgo wire transfer log can help compani identifi possibl pattern suggest of monei
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11645
launder account activ report gener show weekli andor monthli balanc deposit
and withdraw review of these statement can identifi those account with larg increas
in averag balanc and number of transact polici cancel report should identifi
polici cancel within a specif time period report detail should includ the amount of
the cash surrend valu the ident of the sale agent and the actual term of the polici
the trace illicit transact chapter in the investig section of the fraud examin
manual provid more inform about techniqu for detect illicit incom and
payment includ in that chapter ar detail on analyz financi record financi and
behavior profil and net worth analysi
currenc transact report
omb no 15060004
fincen form 104
formerli form 4789
eff decemb 2003
complet all part that applyse instruct
1 check all box that appli
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
depart of the treasuri
fincen
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
13 occup profess or busi
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section b individu conduct transact if other than abov
if section b is left blank or incomplet check the box below to indic the reason
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
44 titl of approv offici
47 type or print prepar name
45 signatur of approv offici
48 type or print name of person to contact 49 telephon number
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
40 citi
38 address number street and apt or suit no
enter regul or bsa
examin code number
see instruct
37 name of financi institut
42 zip code 43 rout micr number41 state
26 total cash in 00
cat no 37683n fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803
previou edit will not be accept after august 31 2004
pleas type or print
person involv in transactionspart i
b mail deposit or shipment c night deposit or autom teller machin d multipl transactionsa armor car servic
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
b passport c alien registr
d other f number
part ii amount and type of transact check all box that appli
28 date of transact
mm dd yyyi
26a foreign cash in 00
27 total cash out 00
27a foreign cash out 00
30 wire transfer 31 negoti instrument purchas
34 depositswithdraw
35 account number affect if ani 36 other specifi
part iii financi institut where transact take place
39 ein or ssn
for paperwork reduct act notic see page 4
sign
here
mm dd yyyi
46 date of signatur
a amend prior report b multipl person c multipl transact
e issu by
33 currenc exchang
d other
b passport c alien registrationa driver licensest id
f number issu by
e conduct on own behalf
a driver licensest id
see instruct page 3
32 negoti instrument cash
29 foreign countri
see instruct page 3
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section bindividu conduct transact if other than abov
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
f number issu by
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
person involv in transactionspart i
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
d other e issu by f number
multipl person
complet applic part below if box 1b on page 1 is check
fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803 page 2
section aperson on whose behalf transact is conduct
5 do busi as dba
4 middl initial3 first name2 individu last name or entiti name
6 ssn or ein
7 address number street and apt or suit no
9 citi 10 state 11 zip code 12 countri code
if not us
25 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
section bindividu conduct transact if other than abov
14 if an individu describ method us to verifi ident
f number
18 address number street and apt or suit no
17 middl initial16 first name15 individu last name
19 ssn
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri code
if not us
person involv in transactionspart i
8 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
24 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
d other
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr
e issu by
d other
f number issu byd other
13 occup profess or busi
13 occup profess or busi
fincen form 104 formerli form 4789 rev 803 page 3
suspici transact
thi currenc transact report ctr should not be
file for suspici transact involv 10000 or less
in currenc or to note that a transact of more than
10000 is suspici ani suspici or unusu activ
should be report by a financi institut in the
manner prescrib by it appropri feder regul
or bsa examin see the instruct for item 37 if a
transact is suspici and in excess of 10000 in
currenc then both a ctr and the appropri
suspici activ report form must be file
should the suspici activ requir immedi
attent financi institut should telephon
1800800ctr an intern revenu servic ir
employe will direct the call to the local offic of the
ir crimin investig divis ci thi tollfre
number is oper mondai through fridai from
approxim 900 am to 600 pm eastern standard
time if an emerg consult directori assist for
the local ir cid offic
gener instruct
who must file each financi institut other than a
casino which instead must file fincen form 103 and
the us postal servic for which there ar separ rule
must file fincen form 104 formerli 4789 ctr for
each deposit withdraw exchang of currenc or other
payment or transfer by through or to the financi
institut which involv a transact in currenc of
more than 10000 multipl transact must be
treat as a singl transact if the financi institut
ha knowledg that 1 thei ar by or on behalf of the
same person and 2 thei result in either currenc
receiv cash in or currenc disburs cash out by
the financi institut total more than 10000
dure ani on busi dai for a bank a busi dai
is the dai on which transact ar routin post to
custom account as normal commun to
depositori custom for all other financi institut
a busi dai is a calendar dai
gener financi institut ar defin as bank
other type of depositori institut broker or dealer
in secur monei transmitt currenc exchang
check casher and issuer and seller of monei order
and travel check should you have question see
the definit in 31 cfr part 103
when and where to file file thi ctr by the 15th
calendar dai after the dai of the transact with the
ir detroit comput center
attn ctr
po box 33604
detroit mi 482325604
keep a copi of each ctr for five year from the date
file
a financi institut mai appli to file the ctr
magnet to obtain an applic to file magnet
write to the
ir detroit comput center
attn ctr magnet media coordin
po box 33604
detroit mi 482325604
identif requir all individu except
employe of armor car servic conduct a
report transact for themselv or for anoth
person must be identifi by mean of an offici
document accept form of identif includ
a driver licens militari and militarydepend
identif card passport state issu identif
card cedular card foreign nonresid alien
identif card or ani other identif document
or document which contain name and prefer
address and a photograph and ar normal accept
by financi institut as a mean of identif when
cash check for person other than establish
custom
accept identif inform obtain
previous and maintain in the financi institut
record mai be us for exampl if document
verifi an individu ident were examin and
record on a signatur card when an account wa
open the financi institut mai reli on that
inform in complet the ctr the financi
institut must indic on the form the method type
and number of the identif statement such as
known custom or signatur card on file ar not
suffici for form complet
penalti civil and crimin penalti ar provid for
failur to file a ctr or to suppli inform or for file
a fals or fraudul ctr see 31 usc 5321 5322
and 5324
for purpos of thi ctr the term below have the
follow mean
currenc the coin and paper monei of the unit
state or ani other countri which is circul and
customarili us and accept as monei
person an individu corpor partnership trust
or estat joint stock compani associ syndic
joint ventur or other unincorpor organ or
group
organ entiti other than an individu
transact in currenc the physic transfer of
currenc from on person to anoth thi doe not
includ a transfer of fund by mean of bank check bank
draft wire transfer or other written order that doe not
involv the physic transfer of currenc
negoti instrument all check and draft includ
busi person bank cashier and thirdparti
monei order and promissori note for purpos of
thi ctr all travel check shall also be consid
negoti instrument whether or not thei ar in bearer
form
foreign exchang rate if complet item 26a27a
us the exchang rate in effect for the busi dai of
the transact the sourc of the exchang rate that is
us will be determin by the report institut
specif instruct
becaus of the limit space on the front and back of
the ctr it mai be necessari to submit addit
inform on attach sheet submit thi addit
inform on plain paper attach to the ctr be sure
to put the individu or entiti name and identifi
number item 2 3 4 and 6 of the ctr on ani
addit sheet so that if it becom separ it mai
be associ with the ctr
item 1a amend prior report if thi ctr is be
file becaus it amend a report file previous check
item 1a stapl a copi of the origin ctr to the
amend on complet part iii fulli and onli those other
entri which ar be amend
item 1b multipl person if thi transact is be
conduct by more than on person or on behalf of
more than on person check item 1b enter inform
in part i for on of the person and provid inform
on ani other person on the back of the ctr
item 1c multipl transact if the financi
institut ha knowledg that there ar multipl
transact check item 1c
part i person involv in transact
section a must be complet if an individu conduct
a transact on hi own behalf complet section a and
leav section b blank if an individu conduct a
transact on hi own behalf and on behalf of anoth
person complet section a for each person and leav
section b blank if an individu conduct a
transact on behalf of anoth person complet
section b for the individu conduct the transact
and complet section a for each person on whose
behalf the transact is conduct of whom the financi
institut ha knowledg
section a person on whose behalf transact
is conduct see instruct abov
item 2 3 and 4 individualorgan name if
the person on whose behalf the transact is
conduct is an individu put hisher last name in item
2 first name in item 3 and middl initi in item 4 if
there is no middl initi leav item 4 blank if the
transact is conduct on behalf of an entiti put it
name in item 2 and leav item 3 and 4 blank
item 5 do busi as dba if the financi
institut ha knowledg of a separ do busi
as name enter it in item 5 for exampl smith
enterpris dba mj pizza
item 6 ssnitin or ein enter the social secur
number ssn or individu taxpay identif
number itin or employ identif number ein
of the person or entiti identifi in item 2 if none
write none
item 7 9 10 11 and 12 address enter the
perman address includ zip code of the person
identifi in item 2 us the us postal servic two
letter state abbrevi code a p o box should not
be us by itself and mai onli be us if there is no
street address if a p o box is us the name of the
apart or suit number road or rout number where
the person resid must also be provid if the address
is outsid the us provid the street address citi
provinc or state postal code if known and the two
letter countri code for countri code list go to
wwwfincengovregbsaformshtml or telephon
18009492732 and select option number 5 if us
leav item 12 blank
item 8 date of birth enter the date of birth eight
numer must be insert for each date the first two
will reflect the month the second two the dai and the
last four the year a zero 0 should preced ani singl
digit number for exampl if an individu birth date
is april 3 1948 item 8 should read 04 03 1948
item 13 occup profess or busi identifi
the occup profess or busi of the person on
whose behalf the transact wa conduct for
exampl secretari shoe salesman carpent attornei
housewif restaur liquor storeetc do not us non
specif term such as merchant selfemploi
businessman etc
item 14 if an individu describ method us to
verifi ident if an individu conduct the
transact on hisher own behalf hisher ident must
be verifi by examin of an accept document
see gener instruct for exampl check box a if
a driver licens is us to verifi an individu ident
and enter the state that issu the licens and the number
in item e and f if the transact is conduct by an
individu on behalf of anoth individu not present
or on behalf of an entiti enter na in item 14
section b individu conduct transact
if other than abov financi institut should enter
as much inform as is avail
fincen form 104 formerli 4789 rev 803 page 4
howev there mai be instanc in which item 1525
mai be left blank or incomplet if item 1525 ar
left blank or incomplet check on or more of the
box provid to indic the reason
exampl if there ar multipl transact that if onli
when aggreg the financi institut ha knowledg
the transact exce the report threshold and
therefor did not identifi the transactor check box d
for multipl transact
item 15 16 and 17 individu name complet
these item if an individu conduct a transact on
behalf of anoth person for exampl if john doe an
employe of xyz groceri store make a deposit to the
store account xyz groceri store should be identifi
in section a and john doe should be identifi in section
b
item 18 20 21 22 and 23 address enter the
perman street address includ zip code of the
individu see the instruct for item 7 and 9 through
12 enter countri code if not us refer item 12
item 19 ssnitin if the individu ha a social secur
number or individu taxpay indentifc number
enter it in item 19 if the individu doe not have an
ssnitin enter none
item 24 date of birth enter the individu date of
birth see the instruct for item 8
item 25 if an individu describ method us to
verifi ident enter the method us to identifi the
individu ident see gener instruct and the
instruct for item 14
part ii amount and type of transact
complet part ii to identifi the type of transact
and the amount involv
item 26 and 27 total cash intot cash out in the
space provid enter the total amount of currenc
receiv total cash in or total currenc disburs total
cash out by the financi institut if foreign currenc
is exchang us the us dollar equival on the dai
of the transact see foreign exchang rate and
complet item 26a or 27a whichev is appropri
if less than a full dollar amount is involv increas
that figur to the next highest dollar for exampl if the
currenc total 2000005 show the total as
2000100
item 26a and 27a foreign cash inforeign cash out
if foreign currenc is exchang enter the amount of
foreign currenc in item 26a and 27a report countri
of origin in item 29
item 28 date of transact insert eight numer for
each date see instruct for item 8
item 29 foreign countri if item 26a andor 27a ar
complet indic that foreign currenc is involv
check item 29 and identifi the countri if multipl
foreign currenc ar involv check box 36 and
identifi the addit countri andor currenc
involv
determin whether transact meet the
report threshold
onli cash transact that if alon or when
aggreg exce 10000 should be report on the
ctr transact shall not be offset against on anoth
if there ar both cash in and cash out transact
that ar report the amount should be consid
separ and not aggreg howev thei mai be
report on a singl ctr
if there is a currenc exchang it should be aggreg
separ with each of the cash in and cash out total
exampl 1 a person deposit 11000 in currenc to
hi save account and withdraw 3000 in currenc
from hi check account the ctr should be
complet as follow
cash in 11000 and no entri for cash out thi is
becaus the 3000 transact doe not meet the
report threshold
exampl 2 a person deposit 11000 in currenc to
hi save account and withdraw 12000 in currenc
from hi check account the ctr should be
complet as follow
cash in 11000 cash out 12000 thi is becaus
there ar two report transact howev on
ctr mai be file to reflect both
exampl 3 a person deposit 6000 in currenc to hi
save account and withdraw 4000 in currenc from
hi check account further he present 5000 in
currenc to be exchang for the equival in french
franc the ctr should be complet as follow
cash in 11000 and no entri for cash out thi is
becaus in determin whether the transact ar
report the currenc exchang is aggreg with
each of the cash in and cash out amount the result is
a report 11000 cash in transact the total cash
out amount is 9000 which doe not meet the
report threshold therefor it is not enter on the
ctr
exampl 4 a person deposit 6000 in currenc to hi
save account and withdraw 7000 in currenc from
hi check account further he present 5000 in
currenc to be exchang for the equival in french
franc the ctr should be complet as follow
cash in 11000 cash out 12000 thi is becaus
in determin whether the transact ar report
the currenc exchang is aggreg with each of the
cash in and cash out amount in thi exampl each
of the cash in and cash out total exce 10000 and
must be reflect on the ctr
item 3033 check the appropri item to identifi
the follow type of transact
30 wire transfer
31 negoti instrument purchas
32 negoti instrument cash
33 currenc exchang
item 34 depositswithdraw check thi item to
identifi deposit to or withdraw from account eg
demand deposit account save account time
deposit mutual fund account or ani other account
held at the financi institut enter the account
number in item 35
item 35 account number affect if ani enter
the account number of ani account affect by the
transact that ar maintain at the financi
institut conduct the transact if necessari
us addit sheet of paper to indic all of the
affect account
exampl 1 if a person cash a check drawn on an
account held at the financi institut the ctr should
be complet as follow
indic negoti instrument cash and provid
the account number of the check
if the transact doe not affect an account make no
entri
exampl 2 a person cash a check drawn on anoth
financi institut in thi instanc negoti
instrument cash would be indic but no account
at the financi institut ha been affect therefor
item 35 should be left blank
item 36 other specifi if a transact is not identifi
in item 3034 check item 36 and provid an addit
descript for exampl a person present a check to
purchas foreign currenc also list multipl foreign
currenc from item 29
part iii financi institut where transact take
place
item 37 name of financi institut and ident of
regul or bsa examin enter the financi institut
full legal name and identifi the regul or bsa examin
us the follow code
regul or bsa examin code
comptrol of the currenc occ1
feder deposit insur corpor fdic2
feder reserv system frs3
offic of thrift supervis ots4
nation credit union administr ncua5
secur and exchang commiss sec6
intern revenu servic irs7
us postal servic usps8
commod futur trade commiss cftc9
state regulator10
item 38 40 41 and 42 address enter the street address
citi state and zip code of the financi institut where
the transact occur if there ar multipl transact
provid inform of the offic or branch where ani on
of the transact ha occur
item 39 ein or ssn enter the financi institut ein
if the financi institut doe not have an ein enter the
ssn of the financi institut princip owner
item 43 rout micr number if a depositori
institut enter the rout magnet ink charact
recognit micr number
signatur
item 44 and 45 titl and signatur of approv
offici the offici who review and approv the ctr
must indic hisher titl and sign the ctr
item 46 date of signatur the approv offici must
enter the date the ctr is sign see the instruct for
item 8
item 47 prepar name type or print the full name of
the individu prepar the ctr the prepar and the
approv offici mai not necessarili be the same
individu
item 48 and 49 contact persontelephon number
type or print the name and telephon number of an
individu to contact concern question about the ctr
paperwork reduct act notic the request
inform is us in crimin tax and regulatori
investig and proceed financi institut ar
requir to provid the inform under 31 usc
5313 and 31 cfr part 103 commonli refer to as the
bank secreci act bsa the bsa is administ by the
us depart of the treasuri financi crime
enforc network fincen you ar not requir
to provid the request inform unless a form
displai a valid omb control number
the time need to complet thi form will vari
depend on individu circumst the estim
averag time is 19 minut if you have comment
concern the accuraci of thi time estim or
suggest for make thi form simpler you mai write
to the financi crime enforc network p o
box 39 vienna va 22183 do not send thi form to
thi offic instead see when and where to file in the
instruct
report of cash payment over 10000
receiv in a trade or busi
ir
form
8300
omb no 15450892
rev march 2008
see instruct for definit of cash
depart of the treasuri
intern revenu servic
for privaci act and paperwork reduct act notic see page 5
suspici transact
b
amend prior report
a
check appropri box if
1
ident of individu from whom the cash wa receiv
if more than on individu is involv check here and see instruct
2
taxpay identif number
6
mi
5
first name
4
last name
3
occup profess or busi
13
address number street and apt or suit no
7
date of birth
8
countri if not us
12
zip code
11
state
10
citi
9
describ id
a
identifi
document id
14
c
person on whose behalf thi transact wa conduct
if thi transact wa conduct on behalf of more than on person check here and see instruct
15
19
mi
18
first name
17
individu last name or organ name
16
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
22
address number street and apt or suit no
21
countri if not us
26
zip code
25
state
24
citi
23
descript of transact and method of payment
busi servic provid
d
person properti purchas
a
intang properti purchas
e
real properti purchas
b
person servic provid
c
32
date cash receiv
28
00
busi that receiv cash
employ identif number
36
name of busi that receiv cash
35
social secur number
address number street and apt or suit no
37
natur of your busi
41
zip code
40
state
39
citi
38
under penalti of perjuri i declar that to the best of my knowledg the inform i have furnish abov is true correct
and complet
42
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
cat no 62133
part iv
part i
part ii
part iii
us currenc
b
foreign currenc
20
do busi as dba name see instruct
total cash receiv
29
00
if cash wa receiv in
more than on payment
check here
30
total price if differ from
item 29
31
00
amount of cash receiv in us dollar equival must equal item 29 see instruct
a
00
00
00
00
00
c
cashier check
d
monei order
e
bank draft
f
travel check
amount in 100 bill or higher
countri
00
type of transact
33
exchang of cash
g
escrow or trust fund
h
other specifi in item 34
j
debt oblig paid
f
specif descript of properti or servic shown in
33 give serial or registr number address docket
number etc
34
issuer name and serial number of the monetari instrument
see instruct
taxpay identif number
bail receiv by court clerk
signatur
titl
date of
signatur
type or print name of contact person
contact telephon number
us thi form for transact occur after march 31 2008 do not us prior version after thi date
fincen
form
8300
omb no 15060018
rev march 2008
depart of the treasuri
financi crime
enforc network
author offici
ir form 8300 rev 32008
b
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
continu complet if box 2 on page 1 is check
continu complet if box 15 on page 1 is check
part i
part ii
ir form 8300 rev 32008
page 2
multipl parti
complet applic part below if box 2 or 15 on page 1 is check
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
last name
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
date of birth
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
last name
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
date of birth
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
first name
individu last name or organ name
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
do busi as dba name see instruct
taxpay identif number
mi
first name
individu last name or organ name
employ identif number
occup profess or busi
address number street and apt or suit no
countri if not us
zip code
state
citi
do busi as dba name see instruct
taxpay identif number
ir form 8300 rev 32008
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
describ id
identifi
document id
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
describ id
identifi
document id
issu by
number
describ id
alien
identif id
issu by
number
comment pleas us the line provid below to comment on or clarifi ani inform you enter on ani line in part i ii iii and iv
page 3 ir form 8300 rev 32008
import remind
clerk of feder or state court must
file form 8300 if more than 10000 in
cash is receiv as bail for an
individu charg with certain crimin
offens for these purpos a clerk
includ the clerk offic or ani other
offic depart divis branch or
unit of the court that is author to
receiv bail if a person receiv bail on
behalf of a clerk the clerk is treat as
receiv the bail see the instruct
for item 33 on page 5
gener instruct
who must file each person engag in
a trade or busi who in the cours
of that trade or busi receiv more
than 10000 in cash in on transact
or in two or more relat transact
must file form 8300 ani transact
conduct between a payer or it
agent and the recipi in a 24hour
period ar relat transact
transact ar consid relat
even if thei occur over a period of more
than 24 hour if the recipi know or
ha reason to know that each
transact is on of a seri of
connect transact
except cash is not requir to be
report if it is receiv
when to file file form 8300 by the
15th dai after the date the cash wa
receiv if that date fall on a saturdai
sundai or legal holidai file the form on
the next busi dai
statement to be provid you must
give a written or electron statement to
each person name on a requir form
8300 on or befor januari 31 of the
year follow the calendar year in which
the cash is receiv the statement
must show the name telephon number
and address of the inform contact
for the busi the aggreg amount
of report cash receiv and that the
inform wa furnish to the ir
keep a copi of the statement for your
record
multipl payment if you receiv more
than on cash payment for a singl
transact or for relat transact
you must report the multipl payment
ani time you receiv a total amount that
exce 10000 within ani 12month
period submit the report within 15 dai
of the date you receiv the payment that
taxpay identif number tin
you must furnish the correct tin of the
person or person from whom you
receiv the cash and if applic the
person or person on whose behalf the
transact is be conduct you mai
be subject to penalti for an incorrect
or miss tin
penalti you mai be subject to
penalti if you fail to file a correct and
complet form 8300 on time and you
cannot show that the failur wa due to
reason caus you mai also be
subject to penalti if you fail to furnish
time a correct and complet statement
to each person name in a requir
report a minimum penalti of 25000
mai be impos if the failur is due to
an intent or will disregard of the
cash report requir
c by a financi institut requir to file
form 104 currenc transact report
c by a casino requir to file or exempt
from file form 103 currenc
transact report by casino if the
cash is receiv as part of it game
busi
c by an agent who receiv the cash
from a princip if the agent us all of
the cash within 15 dai in a second
transact that is report on form
8300 or on form 104 and disclos all
the inform necessari to complet
part ii of form 8300 or form 104 to the
recipi of the cash in the second
transact
c in a transact occur entir
outsid the unit state see
public 1544 report cash
payment of over 10000 receiv in
a trade or busi regard
transact occur in puerto rico
and territori and possess of the
unit state
c in a transact that is not in the
cours of a person trade or busi
if multipl payment ar made in cash
to satisfi bail and the initi payment
doe not exce 10000 the initi
payment and subsequ payment
must be aggreg and the inform
return must be file by the 15th dai
after receipt of the payment that caus
the aggreg amount to exce
10000 in cash in such case the
report requir can be satisfi
either by send a singl written
statement with an aggreg amount
list or by furnish a copi of each
form 8300 relat to that payer
payment made to satisfi separ bail
requir ar not requir to be
aggreg see treasuri regul
section 16050i2
voluntari us of form 8300 form
8300 mai be file voluntarili for ani
suspici transact see definit
on page 4 for us by fincen and the
ir even if the total amount doe not
exce 10000
if you have request but ar not abl
to get a tin for on or more of the
parti to a transact within 15 dai
follow the transact file the report
and attach a statement explain why
the tin is not includ
except you ar not requir to
provid the tin of a person who is a
nonresid alien individu or a foreign
organ if that person or foreign
organ
keep a copi of each form 8300 for 5
year from the date you file it
where to file file the form with the
intern revenu servic detroit
comput center po box 32621
detroit ml 48232
the tin for an individu includ a
sole proprietorship is the individu
social secur number ssn for certain
resid alien who ar not elig to
get an ssn and nonresid alien who
ar requir to file tax return it is an
ir individu taxpay identif
number itin for other person
includ corpor partnership and
estat it is the employ identif
number ein
casino must file form 8300 for
nongam activ restaur shop
etc
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
section refer ar to the intern
revenu code unless otherwis note
c section 6050i 26 unit state code
usc 6050i and 31 usc 5331
requir that certain inform be
report to the ir and the financi
crime enforc network fincen
thi inform must be report on
irsfincen form 8300
c item 33 box i is to be check onli by
clerk of the court box d is to be
check by bail bondsmen see the
instruct on page 5
c the mean of the word currenc
for purpos of 31 usc 5331 is the
same as for the word cash see cash
on page 4
penalti mai also be impos for
caus or attempt to caus a trade
or busi to fail to file a requir
caus the total amount to exce
10000 if more than on report is
requir within 15 dai you mai file a
combin report file the combin
report no later than the date the earliest
report if file separ would have to
be file
c doe not have incom effect
connect with the conduct of a us
trade or busi
c doe not have an offic or place of
busi or a fiscal or pai agent in
the unit state
c doe not furnish a withhold
certif describ in 114411e2 or
3 or 114415c2iv or 3iii to the
extent requir under 114411e4vii
or
c doe not have to furnish a tin on ani
return statement or other document as
requir by the incom tax regul
under section 897 or 1445
page 4 ir form 8300 rev 32008
part i
item 2 if two or more individu
conduct the transact you ar
report check the box and complet
part i for ani on of the individu
provid the same inform for the
other individu on the back of the
form if more than three individu ar
involv provid the same inform
on addit sheet of paper and attach
them to thi form
item 6 enter the taxpay identif
number tin of the individu name
see taxpay identif number tin
on page 3 for more inform
item 8 enter eight numer for the date
of birth of the individu name for
exampl if the individu birth date is
juli 6 1960 enter 07 06 1960
item 13 fulli describ the natur of the
occup profess or busi for
exampl plumber attornei or
automobil dealer do not us gener
or nondescript term such as
businessman or selfemploi
item 14 you must verifi the name and
address of the name individu
verif must be made by
examin of a document normal
accept as a mean of identif
when cash check for exampl a
driver licens passport alien
registr card or other offici
document in item 14a enter the type of
document examin in item 14b
identifi the issuer of the document in
item 14c enter the document number
for exampl if the individu ha a utah
driver licens enter driver licens
in item 14a utah in item 14b and the
number appear on the licens in item
14c
part ii
item 15 if the transact is be
conduct on behalf of more than on
person includ husband and wife or
parent and child check the box and
complet part ii for ani on of the
person provid the same inform
for the other person on the back of
the form if more than three person ar
involv provid the same inform
on addit sheet of paper and attach
them to thi form
specif instruct
you must complet all part howev
you mai skip part ii if the individu
name in part i is conduct the
transact on hi or her behalf onli for
voluntari report of suspici
transact see item 1 below
item 1 if you ar amend a prior
report check box 1a complet the
appropri item with the correct or
amend inform onli complet all
of part iv stapl a copi of the origin
report to the amend report
to voluntarili report a suspici
transact see suspici transact
abov check box 1b you mai also
telephon your local ir crimin
investig divis or call
18665563974
fincen form 8300 rev 32008
note you must complet all three item
a b and c in thi line to make sure
that form 8300 will be process
correctli
definit
cash the term cash mean the
follow
c us and foreign coin and currenc
receiv in ani transact
c a cashier check monei order bank
draft or travel check have a face
amount of 10000 or less that is
receiv in a design report
transact defin below or that is
receiv in ani transact in which the
recipi know that the instrument is
be us in an attempt to avoid the
report of the transact under either
section 6050i or 31 usc 5331
design report transact a
retail sale or the receipt of fund by a
broker or other intermediari in
connect with a retail sale of a
consum durabl a collect or a
travel or entertain activ
retail sale ani sale whether or not
the sale is for resal or for ani other
purpos made in the cours of a trade
or busi if that trade or busi
princip consist of make sale to
ultim consum
consum durabl an item of tangibl
person properti of a type that under
ordinari usag can reason be
expect to remain us for at least 1
year and that ha a sale price of more
than 10000
collect ani work of art rug
antiqu metal gem stamp coin etc
travel or entertain activ an
item of travel or entertain that
pertain to a singl trip or event if the
combin sale price of the item and all
other item relat to the same trip or
event that ar sold in the same
transact or relat transact
exce 10000
except a cashier check monei
order bank draft or travel check is
not consid receiv in a design
report transact if it constitut the
proce of a bank loan or if it is
receiv as a payment on certain
promissori note instal sale
contract or down payment plan see
public 1544 for more inform
note cash doe not includ a check
drawn on the payer own account such
as a person check regardless of the
amount
person an individu corpor
partnership trust estat associ or
compani
recipi the person receiv the
cash each branch or other unit of a
person trade or busi is consid
a separ recipi unless the branch
receiv the cash or a central offic
link the branch know or ha
reason to know the ident of payer
make cash payment to other
branch
transact includ the purchas of
properti or servic the payment of
debt the exchang of a negoti
instrument for cash and the receipt of
cash to be held in escrow or trust a
singl transact mai not be broken
into multipl transact to avoid
report
suspici transact a suspici
transact is a transact in which it
appear that a person is attempt to
caus form 8300 not to be file or to
file a fals or incomplet form
report for caus or attempt to
caus a trade or busi to file a
requir report contain a materi
omiss or misstat of fact or for
structur or attempt to structur
transact to avoid the report
requir these violat mai also
be subject to crimin prosecut which
upon convict mai result in
imprison of up to 5 year or fine of
up to 250000 for individu and
500000 for corpor or both
item 16 through 19 if the person on
whose behalf the transact is be
conduct is an individu complet
item 16 17 and 18 enter hi or her
tin in item 19 if the individu is a sole
proprietor and ha an employ
identif number ein you must
enter both the ssn and ein in item 19
if the person is an organ put it
name as shown on requir tax file in
item 16 and it ein in item 19
item 20 if a sole proprietor or
organ name in item 16 through
18 is do busi under a name other
than that enter in item 16 for
exampl a trade or do busi
as dba name enter it here
item 27 if the person is not requir to
furnish a tin complet thi item see
taxpay identif number tin on
page 3 enter a descript of the type
of offici document issu to that
person in item 27a for exampl a
passport the countri that issu the
document in item 27b and the
document number in item 27c
page 5 ir form 8300 rev 32008 fincen form 8300 rev 32008
item 31 enter the total price of the
properti servic amount of cash
exchang etc for exampl the total
cost of a vehicl purchas cost of
cater servic exchang of currenc if
differ from the amount shown in item
29
item 32 enter the dollar amount of each
form of cash receiv show foreign
currenc amount in us dollar
equival at a fair market rate of
exchang avail to the public the
sum of the amount must equal item 29
for cashier check monei order bank
draft or travel check provid the
name of the issuer and the serial number
of each instrument name of all issuer
and all serial number involv must be
provid if necessari provid thi
inform on addit sheet of paper
and attach them to thi form
item 33 check the appropri box
that describ the transact if the
transact is not specifi in box ai
check box j and briefli describ the
transact for exampl car leas
boat leas hous leas or aircraft
rental if the transact relat to the
receipt of bail by a court clerk check
box i bail receiv by court clerk
thi box is onli for us by court clerk
if the transact relat to cash
receiv by a bail bondsman check box
d busi servic provid
part iv
item 36 if you ar a sole proprietorship
you must enter your ssn if your
busi also ha an ein you must
provid the ein as well all other
busi entiti must enter an ein
item 41 fulli describ the natur of
your busi for exampl attornei or
jewelri dealer do not us gener or
nondescript term such as busi
or store
privaci act and paperwork reduct
act notic except as otherwis note
the inform solicit on thi form is
requir by the intern revenu servic
ir and the financi crime
enforc network fincen in order
to carri out the law and regul of
the unit state depart of the
treasuri trade or busi except
for clerk of crimin court ar requir
to provid the inform to the ir and
fincen under both section 6050i and 31
usc 5331 clerk of crimin court
ar requir to provid the inform
to the ir under section 6050i section
6109 and 31 usc 5331 requir that
you provid your social secur number
in order to adequ identifi you and
process your return and other paper
the princip purpos for collect the
inform on thi form is to maintain
report or record which have a high
degre of us in crimin tax or
regulatori investig or proceed
or in the conduct of intellig or
counterintellig activ by direct
the feder govern attent to
unusu or question transact
gener tax return and return
inform ar confidenti as state in
section 6103 howev section 6103
allow or requir the ir to disclos or
give the inform request on thi
form to other as describ in the code
for exampl we mai disclos your tax
inform to the depart of justic
to enforc the tax law both civil and
crimin and to citi state the district
of columbia to carri out their tax law
we mai disclos thi inform to
other person as necessari to obtain
inform which we cannot get in ani
other wai we mai disclos thi
inform to feder state and local
child support agenc and to other
feder agenc for the purpos of
determin entitl for benefit or
the elig for and the repay of
loan we mai also provid the record
to appropri state local and foreign
crimin law enforc and regulatori
personnel in the perform of their
offici duti we mai also disclos thi
inform to other countri under a
tax treati or to feder and state
agenc to enforc feder nontax
crimin law and to combat terror in
addit fincen mai provid the
inform to those offici if thei ar
conduct intellig or
counterintellig activ to protect
against intern terror
you ar not requir to provid
inform as to whether the report
transact is deem suspici
failur to provid all other request
inform or provid fraudul
inform mai result in crimin
prosecut and other penalti under
titl 26 and titl 31 of the unit state
code
item 42 thi form must be sign by an
individu who ha been author to
do so for the busi that receiv the
cash
you ar not requir to provid the
inform request on a form that is
subject to the paperwork reduct act
unless the form displai a valid omb
control number book or record
relat to a form or it instruct must
be retain as long as their content
mai becom materi in the
administr of ani law under titl 26
or titl 31
the time need to complet thi
form will vari depend on individu
circumst the estim averag
time is 21 minut if you have
comment concern the accuraci of
thi time estim or suggest for
make thi form simpler you can write
to the intern revenu servic tax
product coordin committe
sewcarmpttsp 1111 constitut
av nw ir6526 washington dc
20224 do not send form 8300 to thi
address instead see where to file on
page 3
comment
us thi section to comment on or
clarifi anyth you mai have enter
on ani line in part i ii iii and iv for
exampl if you check box b
suspici transact in line 1 abov
part i you mai want to explain why you
think that the cash transact you ar
report on form 8300 mai be
suspici
part iii
item 28 enter the date you receiv the
cash if you receiv the cash in more
than on payment enter the date you
receiv the payment that caus the
combin amount to exce 10000
see multipl payment on page 3 for
more inform
item 30 check thi box if the amount
shown in item 29 wa receiv in more
than on payment for exampl as
instal payment or payment on
relat transact
note you must complet all three item
a b and c in thi line to make sure
that form 8300 will be process
correctli
report of intern
transport of currenc
or monetari instrument
omb no 15060014
to be file with the bureau of
custom and border protect
airlineflightvessel inspector name and badg number licens plate
depart of the treasuri
financi crime enforc network
for paperwork reduct act
notic and privaci act notic
see back of form
2 identif no see instruct 3 date of birth modayyr
4 perman address in unit state or abroad 5 your countri or countri of
citizenship
10 immigr alien no
fincen form 105
7 passport no countri
9 place unit state visa wa issu
31 usc 5316 31 cfr 10323 and 10327
formerli custom form 4790
custom and border protect us onli
1 name last or famili first and middl
8 us visa date modayyr
6 address while in the unit state
depart from us portciti in us arriv at citi in us
11 if currenc or monetari instrument is accompani by a person complet 11a or 11b
b import into the unit state
currenc and monetari instrument inform see instruct on reverseto be complet by everyon
a export from the unit state
12a date ship modayyr
12e ship to name and address
15 type of busi activ occup or profess
12f receiv from name and address
17 if other than us currenc
is involv pleas complet
block a and b
signatur of person complet thi report
under penalti of perjuri i declar that i have examin thi report and to the best of my knowledg and belief it is true correct and complet
18 name and titl print 20 date of report modayyr
part iv
part i
16 type and amount of currencymonetari instrument
total
other monetari instrument
specifi type issu entiti and date and serial or other identifi number
currenc and coin
for a person depart or enter the unit state or a person ship mail or receiv currenc or
monetari instrument if act for anyon els also complet part ii below
19 signatur
statecountri number
date
count verifi voluntari
report
ye no ye no
a currenc name
b countri
part iii
part ii
ye no
15a is the busi a bank
inform about person or busi on whose behalf import or export wa conduct
13 name last or famili first and middl or busi name
14 perman address in unit state or abroad
fincen form 105
formerli custom form 4790
rev juli 2003
depart of the treasuri
fincen
depart from foreign citycountryarriv at foreign citycountri
12 if currenc or monetari instrument wa mail or otherwis ship complet 12a through 12f
12d name of carrier12b date receiv modayyr 12c method of shipment eg us mail public carrier etc
pleas type or print
gener instruct
thi report is requir by 31 usc 5316 and treasuri depart regul 31 cfr
103
who must file
1 each person who physic transport mail or ship or caus to be physic
transport mail or ship currenc or other monetari instrument in an aggreg
amount exceed 10000 at on time from the unit state to ani place outsid the
unit state or into the unit state from ani place outsid the unit state and
2 each person who receiv in the unit state currenc or other monetari
instrument in an aggreg amount exceed 10000 at on time which have been
transport mail or ship to the person from ani place outsid the unit state
a transfer of fund through normal bank procedur which
doe not involv the physic transport of currenc or
monetari instrument is not requir to be report
except report ar not requir to be file by
1 a feder reserv bank
2 a bank a foreign bank or a broker or dealer in secur in respect to currenc
or other monetari instrument mail or ship through the postal servic or by common
carrier
3 a commerci bank or trust compani organ under the law of ani state or of
the unit state with respect to overland shipment of currenc or monetari instrument
ship to or receiv from an establish custom maintain a deposit relationship
with the bank in amount which the bank mai reason conclud do not exce
amount commensur with the customari conduct of the busi industri or profess
of the custom concern
4 a person who is not a citizen or resid of the unit state in respect to
currenc or other monetari instrument mail or ship from abroad to a bank or
broker or dealer in secur through the postal servic or by common carrier
5 a common carrier of passeng in respect to currenc or other monetari
instrument in the possess of it passeng
6 a common carrier of good in respect to shipment of currenc or monetari
instrument not declar to be such by the shipper
7 a travel check issuer or it agent in respect to the transport of travel
check prior to their deliveri to sell agent for eventu sale to the public
8 a person with a restrict endors travel check that is in the collect
and reconcili process after the travel check ha been negoti nor by
9 a person engag as a busi in the transport of currenc monetari
instrument and other commerci paper with respect to the transport of currenc
or other monetari instrument overland between establish offic of bank or broker
or dealer in secur and foreign person
when and where to file
a recipi each person who receiv currenc or other monetari instrument in the
unit state shall file fincen form 105 within 15 dai after receipt of the currenc or
monetari instrument with the custom offic in charg at ani port of entri or departur
or by mail with the commission of custom attent currenc transport
report washington dc 20229
b shipper or mailer if the currenc or other monetari instrument doe not accompani
the person enter or depart the unit state fincen form 105 mai be file by
mail on or befor the date of entri departur mail or ship with the commission
of custom attent currenc transport report washington dc 20229
c travel travel carri currenc or other monetari instrument with them shall
file fincen form 105 at the time of entri into the unit state or at the time of departur
from the unit state with the custom offic in charg at ani custom port of entri or
departur
an addit report of a particular transport mail or ship of currenc or
the monetari instrument is not requir if a complet and truth report ha alreadi
been file howev no person otherwis requir to file a report shall be excus from
liabil for failur to do so if in fact a complet and truth report ha not been file
form mai be obtain from ani bureau of custom and border protect offic
penalti civil and crimin penalti includ under certain circumst a
fine of not more than 500000 and imprison of not more than ten year ar
provid for failur to file a report file a report contain a materi omiss or
misstat or file a fals or fraudul report in addit the currenc or
monetari instrument mai be subject to seizur and forfeitur see 31 usc5321
and 31 cfr 10357 31 usc 5322 and 31 cfr 10359 31 usc 5317 and 31 cfr
10358 and usc 5332
definit
bank each agent agenc branch or offic within the unit state of ani person do
busi in on or more of the capac list 1 a commerci bank or trust compani
organ under the law of ani state or of the unit state 2 a privat bank 3
asav associ save and loan associ and build and loan associ
organ under the law of ani state or of the unit state 4 an insur institut as
defin in section 401 of the nation hous act 5 a save bank industri bank or
other thrift institut 6 a credit union organ under the law of ani state or of the
unit state 7 ani other organ charter under the bank law of ani state
and subject to the supervis of the bank supervisori author of a state other than a
monei servic busi 8 a bank organ under foreign law and 9 ani nation
bank associ or corpor act under the provis of section 25a of the
feder reserv act 12 usc section 611632
foreign bank a bank organ under foreign law or an agenc branch or offic locat
outsid the unit state of a bank the term doe not includ an agent agenc branch
or offic within the unit state of a bank organ under foreign law
broker or dealer in securitiesa broker or dealer in secur regist or requir
to be regist with the secur and exchang commiss under the secur
exchang act of 1934
identif number individu must enter their social secur number if ani
howev alien who do not have a social secur number should enter passport or alien
registr number all other should enter their employ identif number
monetari instrument 1 coin or currenc of the unit state or of ani other countri
2 travel check in ani form 3 negoti instrument includ check promissori
note and monei order in bearer form endors without restrict made out to a
fictiti paye or otherwis in such form that titl thereto pass upon deliveri 4
incomplet instrument includ check promissori note and monei order that ar
sign but on which the name of the paye ha been omit and 5 secur or stock
in bearer form or otherwis in such form that titl thereto pass upon deliveri monetari
instrument do not includ i check or monei order made payabl to the order of a
name person which have not been endors or which bear restrict endors
ii warehous receipt or iii bill of lade
person an individu a corpor a partnership a trust or estat a joint stock
compani an associ a syndic joint ventur or other unincorpor organ
or group an indian tribe as that term is defin in the indian game regulatori act
and all entiti cogniz as legal person
special instruct
you should complet each line that appli to you part ii block 13 provid the
complet name of the shipper or recipi on whose behalf the export or import
wa conduct part iii specifi type of instrument issu entiti and date serial or
other identifi number and paye if ani part iv block 22a and 22b enter the
exact date you ship or receiv currenc or monetari instrument block 21 if
currenc or monetari instrument of more than on countri is involv attach a list
show each type countri or origin and amount
privaci act and paperwork reduct act notic
pursuant to the requir of public law 93579 privaci act of 1974 notic is herebi
given that the author to collect inform on form 4790 in accord with 5 usc
552ae3 is public law 91508 31 usc 5316 5 usc 301 reorgan plan
no1 of 1950 treasuri depart order no 165 revis as amend 31 cfr 103
and 44 usc 3501
the princip purpos for collect the inform is to assur mainten of report
or record have a high degre of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig
or proceed the inform collect mai be provid to those offic and
employe of the bureau of custom and border protect and ani other constitu
unit of the depart of the treasuri who have a need for the record in the perform
of their duti the record mai be refer to ani other depart or agenc of the
feder govern upon the request of the head of such depart or agenc the
inform collect mai also be provid to appropri state local and foreign crimin
law enforc and regulatori personnel in the perform of their offici duti
disclosur of thi inform is mandatori pursuant to 31 usc 5316 and 31 cfr part
103 see penal
disclosur of the social secur number is mandatori the author to collect thi number
is 31 usc 5316b and 31 cfr 10327d the social secur number will be us as a
mean to identifi the individu who file the record
an agenc mai not conduct or sponsor and a person is not requir to respond to a
collect of inform unless it displai a current valid omb control number the
collect of thi inform is mandatori pursuant to 31 usc 5316
statement requir by 5 cfr 13208b3iii the estim averag burden associ
with thi collect of inform is 11 minut per respond or record keeper
depend on individu circumst comment concern the accuraci of thi burden
estim and suggest for reduc thi burden should be direct to the depart
of the treasuri financi crime enforc network po box 39 vienna virginia
22183 do not send complet form to thi officese when and where to file
abov
fincen form 105
formerli custom form 4790
1 check box below onli if correct a prior report
correct prior report see instruct 3 under how to make a report
d
31 is the relationship an insid relationship a ye b no
close
ye no
ye no
a
b
1suspici
activ report
juli 2003
previou edit will not be accept after decemb 31 2003
alwai complet entir report
see instruct
frb fr 2230 omb no 71000212
fdic 671006 omb no 30640077
occ 8010980101 omb no 15570180
ot 1601 omb no 15500003
ncua 2362 omb no 31330094
treasuri td f 902247 omb no 15060001
part i report financi institut inform
2 name of financi institut
4 address of financi institut
6 citi
11 state 12 zip code10 citi
9 address of branch offic where activ occur multipl branch includ inform in narr part v
14 account number affect if ani
part ii suspect inform
15 last name or name of entiti 16 first name 17 middl
18 address 19 ssn ein or tin
7 state 8 zip code
20 citi 21 state 22 zip code 23 countri
27 date of birth
24 phone number resid includ area code
25 phone number work includ area code
26 occupationtyp of busi
29 form of identif for suspect
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr d other
number issu author
mm dd yyyi
c still emploi at financi institut e termin
d suspend f resign
32 date of suspens termin resign
mm dd yyyi
c
suspect inform unavail
close
ye no
ye no
mm dd yyyi
3 ein
5 primari feder regul
a feder reserv d occ
b fdic e ot
c ncua
if ye specifi
13 if institut close date close
28 admissionconfess
a ye b no
30 relationship to financi institut
a account d attornei g custom j offic
b agent e borrow h director k sharehold
c apprais f broker i employe l other
37 dollar amount of recoveri if applic
00
f comput intrus
g consum loan fraud
h counterfeit check
i counterfeit creditdebit card
j counterfeit instrument other
k credit card fraud
34 total dollar amount involv in known or suspici activ
00
40 ha ani law enforc agenc alreadi been advis by telephon written commun or otherwis
a dea d postal inspect g other feder
b fbi e secret servic h state
c ir f us custom i local
j agenc name for g h or i
2
35 summari character of suspici activ
a bank secreci actstructur
monei launder
b briberygratu
c check fraud
d check kite
e commerci loan fraud
s other
part iii suspici activ inform
33 date or date rang of suspici activ
from to
36 amount of loss prior to recoveri
00
38 ha the suspici activ had a
materi impact on or otherwis
affect the financi sound
of the institut
a ye b no
51 agenc if not file by financi institut
mm dd yyyi mm dd yyyi
39 ha the institut bond compani been notifi
a ye b no
part iv contact for assist
45 last name 46 first name
50 date prepar
48 titleoccup
mm dd yyyi
49 phone number includ area code
47 middl
type of activ
if applic
41 name of person contact at law enforc agenc 42 phone number includ area code
44 phone number includ area code
43 name of person contact at law enforc agenc
l debit card fraud
m defalcationembezzl
n fals statement
o misus of posit or self deal
p mortgag loan fraud
q mysteri disappear
r wire transfer fraud
t terrorist financ
u ident theft
3part v suspici activ inform explanationdescript
explanationdescript of known or suspect violat
of law or suspici activ
thi section of the report is critic the care with which it is
written mai make the differ in whether or not the describ
conduct and it possibl crimin natur ar clearli understood
provid below a chronolog and complet account of the
possibl violat of law includ what is unusu irregular or
suspici about the transact us the follow checklist as
you prepar your account if necessari continu the
narr on a duplic of thi page
a describ support document and retain for 5 year
b explain who benefit financi or otherwis from the
transact how much and how
c retain ani confess admiss or explan of the
transact provid by the suspect and indic to
whom and when it wa given
d retain ani confess admiss or explan of the
transact provid by ani other person and indic
to whom and when it wa given
e retain ani evid of coverup or evid of an attempt
to deceiv feder or state examin or other
f indic where the possibl violat took place
eg main offic branch other
g indic whether the possibl violat is an isol
incid or relat to other transact
h indic whether there is ani relat litig if so
specifi
i recommend ani further investig that might assist law
enforc author
j indic whether ani inform ha been exclud from
thi report if so why
k if you ar correct a previous file report describ the
chang that ar be made
for bank secreci actstructuringmonei launder report
includ the follow addit inform
l indic whether currenc andor monetari instrument
were involv if so provid the amount andor descript
of the instrument for exampl bank draft letter of
credit domest or intern monei order stock
bond travel check wire transfer sent or receiv
cash etc
m indic ani account number that mai be involv
or affect
paperwork reduct act notic the purpos of thi form is to provid an effect and consist mean for financi institut to notifi appropri law enforc agenc of known
or suspect crimin conduct or suspici activ that take place at or were perpetr against financi institut thi report is requir by law pursuant to author contain in
the follow statut board of governor of the feder reserv system 12 usc 324 334 611a 1844b and c 3105c 2 and 3106a feder deposit insur corpor
12 usc 93a 1818 188184 340122 offic of the comptrol of the currenc 12 usc 93a 1818 188184 340122 offic of thrift supervis 12 usc 1463 and 1464
nation credit union administr 12 usc 1766a 1786q financi crime enforc network 31 usc 5318g inform collect on thi report is confidenti 5
usc 552b7 and 552ak2 and 31 usc 5318g the feder financi institut regulatori agenc and the us depart of justic and treasuri mai us and share the inform
public report and recordkeep burden for thi inform collect is estim to averag 30 minut per respons and includ time to gather and maintain data in the requir report review
the instruct and complet the inform collect send comment regard thi burden estim includ suggest for reduc the burden to the offic of manag and budget
paperwork reduct project washington dc 20503 and depend on your primari feder regulatori agenc to secretari board of governor of the feder reserv system washington dc 20551
or assist execut secretari feder deposit insur corpor washington dc 20429 or legisl and regulatori analysi divis offic of the comptrol of the currenc washington
dc 20219 or offic of thrift supervis enforc offic washington dc 20552 or nation credit union administr 1775 duke street alexandria va 22314 or offic of the director financi
crime enforc network depart of the treasuri 2070 chain bridg road vienna va 22182 the agenc mai not conduct or sponsor and an organ or a person is not requir
to respond to a collect of inform unless it displai a current valid omb control number
tip on sar form prepar and file ar avail in the sar activ review at wwwfincengovpubreportshtml
suspici activ report
instruct
safe harbor feder law 31 usc 5318g3 provid complet protect from civil liabil for all report of suspici
transact made to appropri author includ support document regardless of whether such report ar
file pursuant to thi report instruct or ar file on a voluntari basi specif the law provid that a financi
institut and it director offic employe and agent that make a disclosur of ani possibl violat of law or
regul includ in connect with the prepar of suspici activ report shall not be liabl to ani person
under ani law or regul of the unit state ani constitut law or regul of ani state or polit subdivis of
ani state or under ani contract or other legal enforc agreement includ ani arbitr agreement for such
disclosur or for ani failur to provid notic of such disclosur to the person who is the subject of such disclosur or ani
other person identifi in the disclosur
notif prohibit feder law 31 usc 5318g2 requir that a financi institut and it director offic
employe and agent who voluntarili or by mean of a suspici activ report report suspect or known crimin
violat or suspici activ mai not notifi ani person involv in the transact that the transact ha been report
in situat involv violat requir immedi attent such as when a report violat is ongo the
financi institut shall immedi notifi by telephon appropri law enforc and financi institut
supervisori author in addit to file a time suspici activ report
when to make a report
1 all financi institut oper in the unit state includ insur bank save associ save
associ servic corpor credit union bank hold compani nonbank subsidiari of bank hold
compani edg and agreement corpor and us branch and agenc of foreign bank ar re
quir to make thi report follow the discoveri of
a insid abus involv ani amount whenev the financi institut detect ani known or suspect
feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat commit or attempt against the financi
institut or involv a transact or transact conduct through the financi institut where the
financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri of
crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact and the
financi institut ha a substanti basi for identifi on of it director offic employe agent or
other institutionaffili parti as have commit or aid in the commiss of a crimin act regardless
of the amount involv in the violat
b violat aggreg 5000 or more where a suspect can be identifi whenev the financi
institut detect ani known or suspect feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat com
mit or attempt against the financi institut or involv a transact or transact conduct
through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 5000 or more in fund or other asset where
the financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri
of crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact and the
financi institut ha a substanti basi for identifi a possibl suspect or group of suspect if it is
determin prior to file thi report that the identifi suspect or group of suspect ha us an alia then
inform regard the true ident of the suspect or group of suspect as well as alia identifi such
as driver licens or social secur number address and telephon number must be report
c violat aggreg 25000 or more regardless of a potenti suspect whenev the financi
institut detect ani known or suspect feder crimin violat or pattern of crimin violat com
mit or attempt against the financi institut or involv a transact or transact conduct
through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 25000 or more in fund or other asset where
the financi institut believ that it wa either an actual or potenti victim of a crimin violat or seri
of crimin violat or that the financi institut wa us to facilit a crimin transact even though
there is no substanti basi for identifi a possibl suspect or group of suspect
d transact aggreg 5000 or more that involv potenti monei launder or violat of the
bank secreci act ani transact which for purpos of thi subsect mean a deposit withdraw
transfer between account exchang of currenc loan extens of credit purchas or sale of ani stock
bond certif of deposit or other monetari instrument or invest secur or ani other payment transfer
or deliveri by through or to a financi institut by whatev mean effect conduct or attempt by at
or through the financi institut and involv or aggreg 5000 or more in fund or other asset if the financi
institut know suspect or ha reason to suspect that
i the transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or is intend or conduct in order to hide or
disguis fund or asset deriv from illeg activ includ without limit the ownership natur
sourc locat or control of such fund or asset as part of a plan to violat or evad ani law or regul or
to avoid ani transact report requir under feder law
ii the transact is design to evad ani regul promulg under the bank secreci act or
iii the transact ha no busi or appar law purpos or is not the sort in which the particular custom
would normal be expect to engag and the financi institut know of no reason explan for the
transact after examin the avail fact includ the background and possibl purpos of the transact
the bank secreci act requir all financi institut to file currenc transact report ctr in accord with
the depart of the treasuri implement regul 31 cfr part 103 these regul requir a financi
institut to file a ctr whenev a currenc transact exce 10000 if a currenc transact exce 10000
and is suspici the institut must file both a ctr report the currenc transact and a suspici activ
report report the suspici or crimin aspect of the transact if a currenc transact equal or is below
10000 and is suspici the institut should onli file a suspici activ report
2 comput intrus for purpos of thi report comput intrus is defin as gain access to a
comput system of a financi institut to
a remov steal procur or otherwis affect fund of the institut or the institut custom
b remov steal procur or otherwis affect critic inform of the institut includ custom account
inform or
c damag disabl or otherwis affect critic system of the institut
for purpos of thi report requir comput intrus doe not mean attempt intrus of websit or
other noncrit inform system of the institut that provid no access to institut or custom financi or
other critic inform
3 a financi institut is requir to file a suspici activ report no later than 30 calendar dai after the date of
initi detect of fact that mai constitut a basi for file a suspici activ report if no suspect wa identifi
on the date of detect of the incid requir the file a financi institut mai delai file a suspici activ
report for an addit 30 calendar dai to identifi a suspect in no case shall report be delai more than 60
calendar dai after the date of initi detect of a report transact
4 thi suspici activ report doe not need to be file for those robberi and burglari that ar report to local
author or except for save associ and servic corpor for lost miss counterfeit or stolen
secur that ar report pursuant to the requir of 17 cfr 24017f1
how to make a report
1 send each complet suspici activ report to
detroit comput center po box 33980 detroit ml 482320980
2 for item that do not appli or for which inform is not avail leav blank
3 if you ar correct a previous file report check the box at the top of the report line 1 complet the report in it
entireti and includ the correct inform in the applic box then describ the chang that ar be made
in part v descript of suspici activ line k
4 do not includ ani support document with the suspici activ report identifi and retain a copi
of the suspici activ report and all origin support document or busi record equival for five 5
year from the date of the suspici activ report all support document must be made avail to
appropri author upon request
5 if more space is need to report addit suspect attach copi of page 1 to provid the addit inform if
more space is need to report addit branch address includ thi inform in the narr part v
6 financi institut ar encourag to provid copi of suspici activ report to state and local author
where appropri
17 govern issu identif if avail
a driver licensest id b passport c alien registr d corporatepartnership resolut
e other
f id number g issu state or countri 2 digit code
fincen
form 101
effect mai 2004
suspici activ report by the
secur and futur industri
pleas type or print alwai complet entir report item
mark with an asterisk ar consid critic see instruct omb no 1506 0019
subject inform 2 check box a if multipl subject box b subject inform unavailablepart i
4 first name 5 middl initi
6 also known as aka individu do busi as dba entiti
3 individu last name or entiti full name
7 occup or type of busi
16 date of birth
mm dd yyyi
12
14 ssnitin individu or ein entiti
8 address
15 account number affect if ani indic if close
part iiipart iii
21 date or date rang of suspici activ
18 phone number work
23 instrument type check all that appli
suspici activ inform
from
mm dd yyyi
to
mm dd yyyi
part ii
20 is individualbusi associatedaffili
with the report institut see instruct
a ye b no
13 email address if avail
9 citi
11 zip code
30 type of suspici activ
o signific wire or other transact
without econom purpos
p suspici document or id present
q terrorist financ
r wash or other fictiti trade
s wire fraud
t other describ in part vi
24 cusip number
27 cusip number
25 cusip number
28 cusip number
26 cusip number
29 cusip number
catalog no 35349u
acct
ye acct
ye
acct ye acct ye
countri code if not us
see instruct
a bondsnot
b cash or equiv
c commerci paper
d commod futur contract
e monei market mutual fund
f mutual fund
g otc deriv
h other deriv
q commod type
pleas identifi
r instrument descript
s market where trade
enter approprit three or fourlett code
t other explain in part iv
i commod option
j secur futur product
k stock
l warrant
m other secur
n other nonsecur
o foreign currenc futuresopt
p foreign currenc
a briberygratu
b check fraud
c comput intrus
d creditdebit card fraud
e embezzlementtheft
f commod futuresopt fraud
g forgeri
h ident theft
i insid trade
j mail fraud
k market manipul
l monei launderingstructur
m prearrang or other noncompetit trade
n secur fraud
1 check the box if thi report correct a prior report see instruct
22 total dollar amount involv in suspici activ
rev 052204
19 phone number home
00
10 state
part vipart iv
55 titleposit
54 middl initial52 last name of individu to be contact regard thi report 53 first name
mm dd yyyi
57 date report prepared56 work phone number
contact for assist
report financi institut informationpart iv
part v
2
31 if a law enforc or regulatori author ha been contact exclud submiss of a sar check the appropri box
a dea f secret servic k nyse p state secur regul
d fbi i nasd n other stateloc
e ic j nfa o other srosecurit phlx pcx cboe amex etc
b us attornei 32 g cftc l other rfa q foreign
law enforc or regulatori contact informationpart iii
c ir h sec m other refutur cme cbot nymex nybot r other explain in part vi
mm dd yyyi
32 other author contact for item 31 l through r list us attornei offic here 33 name of individu contact for all of item 31
35 date contact
36 name of financi institut or sole proprietorship
39 citi 41 zip code
37 ein ssn itin
42 addit branch address locat handl account activ or custom 43 multipl locat see instruct
40 state
38 address
j i a
k invest compani mutual fund
l market maker
m municip secur dealer
n nfa
o refutur
p other rfa
q secur broker clear
r secur broker introduc
51 type of institut or individu check box for function that appli to thi report
s secur dealer
t secur floor broker
u secur option brokerdeal
v srosecur
w specialist
x subsidiari of bank
y us govern brokerdeal
z us govern interdeal broker
aa other describ in part vi
a agricultur trade option merchant
b affili of bank hold compani
c cpo
d cta
e direct particip program
f fcm
g futur floor broker
h futur floor trader
i ibc
44 citi
49 nfa id number
47 central registr depositori number
46 zip code45 state
50 ha thi report individualent coordin thi report with anoth report individualent ye provid detail in part vi no
48 sec id number
34 telephon number of individu contact item 33
send complet report to
detroit comput center
attn sarsf
po box 33980
detroit mi 48232
suspici activ inform narr part vi 3
explanationdescript of suspici activityi thi section of the report is critic the care with which it is complet mai determin whether
or not the describ activ and it possibl crimin natur ar clearli understood by investig provid a clear complet and chronolog
descript not exceed thi page and the next page of the activ includ what is unusu irregular or suspici about the transact us
the checklist below as a guid as you prepar your account
a describ conduct that rais suspicion
b explain whether the transact wa complet or onli attempt
c describ support document eg transact record new
account inform tape record email messag correspon
denc etc and retain such document in your file for five year
d explain who benefit financi or otherwis from the
transact how much and how if known
e describ and retain ani admiss or explan of the transact
provid by the subject or other person indic to whom and
when it wa given
f describ and retain ani evid of coverup or evid of an
attempt to deceiv feder or state examin sro or other
g indic where the possibl violat of law took place eg main
offic branch other
h indic whether the suspici activ is an isol incid or
relat to anoth transact
i indic whether there is ani relat litig if so specifi the
name of the litig and the court where the action is pend
j recommend ani further investig that might assist law
enforc author
k indic whether ani inform ha been exclud from thi report
if so state reason
l indic whether us or foreign currenc andor us or foreign
negoti instrument were involv if foreign provid the
amount name of currenc and countri of origin
m indic market where trade and wire transfer identifi
inform when appropri
n indic whether fund or asset were recov and if so enter the
dollar valu of the recoveri in whole dollar onli
o indic ani addit account number and ani foreign bank
account number which mai be involv
p indic for a foreign nation ani avail inform on subject
passport visa andor identif card includ date countri
citi of issu issu author and nation
q describ ani suspici activ that involv transfer of fund to or
from a foreign countri or transact in a foreign currenc identifi
the countri sourc and destin of fund
r describ subject posit if emploi by the financi institut
s indic whether secur futur or option were involv if so
list the type cusip number or isid number and amount
t indic the type of institut file thi report if thi is not clear
from part iv for exampl an ia that is manag partner of a limit
partnership that is act as a hedg fund that detect suspici activ
ti in part to it hedg fund activ should note that it is oper as
a hedg fund
u indic in instanc when the subject or entiti ha a crd or nfa
number what that number is
v if correct a prior report box in item 1 check complet the form
in it entireti and note the correct item here in part vi
inform alreadi provid in earlier part of thi form need not necessarili be repeat if the mean is clear
support document should not be file with thi report maintain the inform for your file
tip on sar form prepar and file ar avail in the sar activ review at wwwfincengovpubreportshtml
enter explanationdescript in the space below continu on the next page if necessari
suspici activ report narr continu 4
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11701
