2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/The Money Laundering Process


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


The Money Laundering Process 
 
Placement 
Placement of funds into a financial institution is the initial step in the process. It is at this 
step that legislation has been developed to prevent launderers from depositing or converting 
large amounts of cash at financial institutions or taking cash out of the country. Money 
laundering schemes are most often detected at this stage.  
 
Placement can take any number of forms. If the money launderer has a large amount of 
cash, he can move the money out of the country in a suitcase and deposit it in an off-shore 
bank. Another choice is to break up the money into smaller amounts and deposit it into 
bank accounts or purchase cashier’s checks, traveler’s checks, or money orders. The process 
of breaking transactions up into smaller amounts to evade the reporting requirements is 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1602                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
known as smurfing. A sophisticated smurfing operation might involve hundreds of bank 
accounts in dozens of cities. 
 
Layering 
If the placement of the initial funds goes undetected, financial transactions can be designed 
in complex patterns in order to prevent detection. This stage of the process is referred to as 
layering  and represents the most difficult area of detection. Once the funds have been 
deposited into a financial institution, a launderer can move the funds around by using layers 
of financial transactions designed to confuse the audit trail. The money can even be 
transported out of the country through wire transfers. 
 
Integration 
The final stage in the laundering process is the integration  of the money back into the 
economy in such a way as to make it appear to be a legitimate business transaction. This 
stage of the process is also difficult to detect; however, if the integration process creates a 
paper trail — such as deeds for real estate, invoices, loan documents, Currency Transaction 
Reports (CTRs), or checks—and if there is cooperation from informants or foreign entities, 
then the chances of detection are improved. 
 
A money laundering scheme cannot be successful until the paper trail is eliminated or made 
so complex that the flow of illegal income cannot be easily traced. The number of steps used 
to launder funds depends on how much distance the money launderer wishes to put between 
the illegally earned cash and the laundered asset into which it is converted. A greater number 
of steps increases the complexity of tracing the funds, but it also increases the length of the 
paper trail and the chance that the transaction will be reported. 
 
The object of money laundering is not only to disguise the source of illegal funds, but also to 
convert large stores of currency into other assets. In some cases, illegal funds are spent on 
personal assets, such as homes, cars, jewelry, and furniture. But the typical money launderer 
will not dispose of all his illegal currency in this manner; he will want to have a certain 
amount of liquid reserves for spending. Keeping large bundles of cash is inefficient because 
they are difficult to hide and transport. Therefore, money launderers will often convert 
substantial portions of their currency into negotiable instruments such as cashier’s checks 
and money orders, which are routinely issued by financial institutions. Criminals prefer these 
negotiable instruments for two reasons. First, cashier’s checks and money orders are bearer 
instruments, and the holder can use them or deposit them without having to prove the 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1603 
source of the funds. Second, they are “liquid” assets because the holder can use  
them immediately. 
 
The following is an example of how a money laundering scheme operates.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Alberto Barrera, dubbed Papa Smurf by the federal agents investigating him, ran a rather 
sophisticated smurfing operation out of Miami involving bank accounts in cities all over the 
country. Barrera and his accomplices would fly to Phoenix, Denver, Omaha, Portland, and 
other cities. When they arrived they would immediately travel to various banks. The scheme 
would begin with the purchase of cashier’s checks and money orders in amounts less than 
$10,000 (to avoid federal report ing requirements). This would be repeated several times at 
different banks. The “smurfs” would then travel to another city where some of the 
previously purchased check and money orders would be deposited in accounts controlled by 
Barrera. Then more purchases of cashier’s checks and money orders would be made before 
the group traveled on to the next city. Once the money was converted or deposited, much of 
it was transferred to off-shore banks.  
 
Using a Legitimate Business to Launder Funds 
One of the most comm on methods of laundering funds is to filter the money through a 
legitimate business, otherwise known as a “front” business. A front business can be a very 
effective way to launder money because it provides a safe place for organizing and managing 
criminal activity, where the comings and goings of large numbers of people will not arouse 
undue suspicion. In addition, a front that does legitimate business provides cover for 
delivery and transportation related to illegal activity. The expenses from illegal activity can be 
attributed to the legitimate enterprise, and illegal revenues can be easily placed into the 
enterprise. 
 
The three methods most commonly used to hide assets or launder money through a front 
business are: overstatement of reported revenues, overstatement of reported expenses, and 
balance sheet laundering. 
 
Overstatement of Reported Revenues 
Overstating revenues, also known as income statement laundering, occurs when the money 
launderer records more income on the books of a business than is actually generated by that 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1604                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
business. The fictitious revenue accounts for the illegal funds that are secretly inserted into 
the company.  
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars encourages customers to pay with cash. If the customer pays in cash, 
he receives a discount that might be as high as 25 percent. The invoice, however, makes 
no mention of this cash discount. The company reports the full sales amount as income. 
Depending on the number of cars sold, the company can launder thousands of dollars 
in illegal income. 
 
Overstatement of Reported Expenses 
The disadvantage of overstating revenues is that taxes will be due on the reported income. 
Therefore, if a company overstates its revenue, it will also want to overstate its expenses to 
offset its tax liability. The fictitious expenses also enable the perpetrator to siphon money 
out of the business in order to make payoffs, buy illegal goods, or invest in other  
criminal ventures. 
 
Overstating expenses can be accomplished very easily by reporting payments for supplies 
never received, professional services never rendered, or wages for fictitious employees. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars reports wages for three mechanics and an assistant manager who do 
not exist. The company also reports payments of over $200,000 a year to several 
lawyers, accountants, and other “consultants” who do little, if any, actual work. 
 
Income statement laundering, which includes both overstated revenues and expenses, can be 
difficult to detect. When artificial price inflation is applied in moderate percentages to goods 
and services whose market value is difficult to establish (e.g., artwork, used cars, consulting 
fees, advertising expenses), detection is exceedingly difficult without inside information. 
Complete fabrication of transactions, on the other hand, or creation of “ghost” employees is 
somewhat easier to spot. 
 
Depositing Cash and Writing Checks in Excess of Reported Revenues and Expenses (Balance Sheet Laundering) 
Rather than attempting to disguise money as normal business revenue, excess funds can 
simply be deposited into the bank account of the business. This technique is known as 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1605 
balance sheet laundering because it is independent of the money that flows in and out of  
the business. 
 
EXAMPLE 
ABC Used Cars deposits an additional $30,000 per month in its account although 
there are no recorded sales for this amount. At the end of the year, the company has an 
extra $360,000 in cash in its account. 
 
This type of scheme can be detected by examining the revenue records of the business. 
Every legitimate asset in a company’s possession had to have come from somewhere — if not 
from revenues then from a limited number of other credible alternatives. The basic 
alternative sources are loans, sale of property or equipment, and capital investments from 
shareholders. All of these transactions require significant documentary evidence, which the 
examiner should seek out to explain any suspicious infusion of cash into a suspect business. 
 
Favorite Businesses for Hiding or Laundering Money 
In general terms, the businesses chosen for money laundering possess one or more of the 
following characteristics:  
• Revenue — A revenue base that is difficult to measure because most revenue comes from 
cash transactions with a highly variable amount per customer. This allows extra money 
to be brought into the business and disguised as revenue. 
• Expense — Expenses that are variable and difficult to measure can enable the launderer 
to extract money from the front business without giving rise to undue suspicion.  
• History — Historical ties either with the ethnic base of a particular criminal group or with 
industries that have traditionally served as a base for criminal activity.  
 
Bars, Restaurants, and Night Clubs 
Businesses that are commonly used to front money laundering operations include bars, 
restaurants, and nightclubs. These businesses charge relatively high prices, and customers 
vary widely in their purchases. Sales are generally in cash, and it is notoriously difficult to 
match the cost of providing food, liquor, and entertainment with the revenues they produce. 
Fast food restaurants are also frequently used to front for money laundering operations. 
Although they tend to charge lower prices than other types of restaurants, most of their sales 
are made in cash, and expenses can be easily inflated.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1606                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Vending Machines 
Vending machine operations also possess many characteristics favorable to a money 
laundering operation. They have a highly variable and difficult to measure volume of cash 
receipts, and in large operations there is a fair amount of flexibility with various 
transportation, installation, and promotion expenses, providing cover for the withdrawal of 
laundered funds.  
 
Wholesale Distribution 
Wholesale distribution businesses have historically been a prominent part of money 
laundering. The revenues in a wholesaling business are not typically as flexible as in food 
service and vending machine operations, but with a diverse product line and falsified 
invoices, it is still possible to inject a good deal of illegal cash into the business. More 
importantly, the industry is ideal for money laundering from the standpoint of expenses. The 
activities required to run this kind of business are so diverse and difficult to measure that 
expenses are easy to inflate. Furthermore, a wholesale business’s buildings, warehouses, 
transportation fleet, and its contact with retail establishments are all attractive factors. Many 
of the classic criminal activities (such as drugs, fencing, and contraband) are themselves 
nothing more than distribution operations and can hide behind this type of business cover.  
 
The Real Estate Industry 
Money launderers often use the real estate industry to launder illicitly obtained money. 
Generally, the real estate industry is attractive to money launderers for various reasons. For 
example, the vast array of financial transactions linked to real estate provides money 
launderers an exceptional range of options for abusing these procedures to launder and use 
illegally obtained funds. In addition, real estate transactions often involve multiple parties 
(such as brokers, agents, and appraisers), which can obscure the source of investment funds 
and the identity of the true owner. Finally, money launderers may earn additional profits 
from introducing illicit funds into the real estate industry, especially in vibrant real  
estate markets.   
 
Although there is a vast number of methods to launder money in the real estate industry, 
there are a few common schemes that warrant identification and discussion, including: 
• Loan-back schemes 
• Back-to-back loan schemes 
• Shell companies 
• Appraisal fraud 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1607 
• Monetary instruments 
• Mortgage schemes 
• Indirect investments in the real estate industry 
 
LOAN-BACK SCHEMES 
Money launderers often use loan-back schemes to finance the purchase of properties directly 
or indirectly through purchasing shares in property investment funds. In a typical loan-back 
scheme, money launderers will deposit illicit funds in an overseas entity that they own and 
then the entity loans the funds back to the launderers. The purpose of the loan is to make 
the money source appear legitimate and to conceal the parties’ identities or the nature of the 
financial transactions associated with the loans.  
 
BACK-TO-BACK LOAN SCHEMES 
As with loan-back schemes, money launderers often use back-to-back loan schemes to 
purchase property. In a back-to-back loan scheme, a money launderer obtains a loan by 
presenting collateral, which originated from illicit funds, to a financial institution. Like the 
loan-back scheme, this technique gives the loaned money the appearance of a genuine loan.  
 
SHELL COMPANIES 
Money launderers often use shell companies, which are discussed in more detail below, to 
purchase real estate. Generally defined, shell companies are business entities, including 
limited liability companies, trusts, business trusts, and corporations, without active business 
or significant assets. Because there is a lack of transparency in the formation of shell 
companies, money launderers often use them to hide the identity of the true owner, the 
source of the money, or the destination of the money. 
 
APPRAISAL FRAUD 
Appraisal fraud is often associated with money laundering schemes. Money launderers may 
purchase properties to launder money or may use illicit funds to service the interest on the 
debts. Such schemes can conceal the true identity of the property owners and the true origin 
of the funds used in the transaction.  
 
Appraisal fraud occurs where appraisers fail to accurately evaluate the property, or when the 
appraiser deliberately becomes party to a scheme to defraud the lender, the borrower, or 
both. A common technique is the over- or under-valuation of property, which consists of 
buying/selling property at a price above/below its market value. In addition to manipulating 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1608                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
appraisals, money launderers also over-value property through a series of subsequent sales, 
each time at a higher price, which tend to conceal the true purposes of the transactions. 
 
MONETARY INSTRUMENTS 
In many instances, money launderers purchase, build, or renovate property with cash, wire 
transfers, or other payable-through accounts. This allows the integration of large sums of 
illicit money into legal financial systems. Later, if sold, it is difficult to relate the transaction 
to any criminal activity and therefore, successfully conceals the true origin of the illicit funds 
and their ownership.   
 
MORTGAGE SCHEMES 
Often, money launderers will use illicit funds to pay the interest or repay the principal on 
mortgage loans, and in so doing, the illicit income is converted into seemingly legitimate 
profits when the property is sold. Mortgage schemes also involve under- and over-valuation 
of property. For example, in a common under-valuation scheme, a money launderer will 
under-value the purchase price of property, obtain a mortgage loan for the under-valued 
amount, use the loan to pay for the under-valued price, and pay the excess amount under the 
table with illicit funds.  
 
INDIRECT INVESTMENTS IN THE REAL ESTATE INDUSTRY 
Indirect investments, which are those in which the investor has no direct control over the 
assets or investment vehicle, in the real estate industry offer opportunities to conceal an 
investor’s identification and monetary sources primarily because multiple parties are involved 
with the process.    
 
ATMs 
Law enforcement officials are also reporting an  increasing use of automatic teller machines 
(ATMs) to launder money. ATMs can be purchased for as little as $3,000. Money launderers 
purchase the machines and place them either in establishments they control or in legitimate 
businesses. The machines work the same as any other ATM machines, and all transactions 
are legitimate. The money launderer simply fills the machine with cash from illegal activities. 
The customer uses the machine and never realizes the source of the cash. 
 
The ATM banking system debits the cardholders account and credits the ATM owner’s bank 
account. At the end of the month, the launderer receives a bank statement showing funds 
being deposited from a legitimate financial institution. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1609 
This option is attractive for money launderers because there are currently no regulations 
governing the use and operation of privately-owned ATMs. There is no requirement to 
check the backgrounds of purchasers of the machines, and there are no mandatory reporting 
procedures and no rules for maintaining ATM sales records. 
 
Gift Cards 
Although gift cards are a convenient way to show someone you care, the ease with which 
they can be purchased and used makes them attractive for money laundering. It is estimated 
that American consumers purchase more than $100 billion each year in stored-value cards. 
Closed-system cards are those that can be used at only one retailer or group of retailers. 
Open-system cards (such as those issued by VISA, MasterCard, and American Express) can 
be used at any merchant who accepts those credit cards.  
 
Although closed-cards can only be used at certain locations, there is no oversight as to their 
purchase. As long as the purchase does not involve a cash transaction greater than $10,000, 
there is no obligation on the part of the retailer to perform any type of due diligence or even 
obtain the identity of the purchaser. 
 
Even for open-system cards purchased at financial institutions, there is no requirement that 
purchaser have an account at the bank or provide identification if the transaction is under 
$10,000. Banks are not required to perform due diligence on individual purchasers. 
 
Money launderers can anonymously purchase stored-value cards at a number of different 
locations and then easily transport them out of the country. A small box containing just 200 
cards could store almost $2,000,000 without the necessity of currency reporting. 
 
Banks and Other Depository Financial Institutions 
Banks and other depository institutions are susceptible to individuals attempting to launder 
illicit funds because they are the primary gateway to the U.S. financial system. Once placed in 
a depository institution, illegal proceeds can be transferred instantly by wire or disguised by 
commingling with legitimate funds. A challenge currently faced by depository institutions 
includes money launderers concealing their identities and sources of income to open 
accounts and launder illegal proceeds. Additionally, the increasing use of the Internet to 
open or access accounts make it difficult for depository institutions to verify customers’ 
identification.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1610                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Money Services Businesses 
Money services businesses (MSBs) refer to non-depository financial service providers 
operating in one or more of the following capacities:  
• Currency exchangers;  
• Check cashers;  
• Issuers, sellers, or redeemers of traveler’s checks, money orders, or stored value;  
• The United States Postal Service; and  
• Money transmitters. 
 
MSBs offer an alternative to depository institutions for both financial services and money 
laundering. For this reason, an individual unable to transfer illegal funds into the U.S. 
banking system may turn to MSBs. In a ddition, most MSBs operate without federal 
regulatory supervision.  
 
Insurance Companies 
Due to the recent growth in the financial products offered by insurance agents and brokers 
(including savings products, investment products, and tax planning services), the insurance 
industry has become increasingly attractive to money launderers. According to the 2007 
National Money Laundering Strategy, this de velopment is occurring primarily because 
insurance “agents and brokers now offer a range of investment services featuring financial 
products that can be purchased and subsequently transferred, redeemed or sold, creating 
new opportunities for money laundering.” Generally, the independent brokers and agents 
who often sell insurance products do not work directly for the insurance companies. As a 
result, these intermediaries may lack the knowledge or incentive to screen clients or to 
question payment methods, and it is this factor that money launderers often exploit.  
 
Casinos 
Casinos operate in a high-volume cash-intensive industry and provide a broad range of 
financial services (such as deposit and credit accounts, funds transfers, check cashing, and 
currency exchange services) outside the traditional financial services system. As a result, 
casinos are susceptible to money laundering.  
 
According to the 2005 U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment, criminals typically 
launder money through casinos by exchanging illicit cash for casino chips and then either: 
• Holding the chips for a period of time and later cashing them in for a casino check or 
having the casino wire the money elsewhere; 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1611 
• Using the chips as currency to purchase narcotics, with the drug dealer later cashing in 
the chips; or, 
• Using the chips to gamble in hopes of generating certifiable winnings. 
 
Shell Companies 
Shell companies refer to non-publicly traded corporations, limited liability companies 
(LLCs), and trusts, which generally do not have any physical presence, other than a mailing 
address, and generate little to no independent economic value. In most situations, individuals 
and businesses form shell companies for legitimate reasons, such as holding the stock or 
intellectual property rights of another business entity, facilitating domestic and cross-border 
currency and asset transfers, or fostering domestic and cross-border currency corporate 
mergers. However, shell companies have become common tools for money laundering 
primarily because they have the ability to hide ownership and mask financial details and 
because money launderers can create them with minimal public disclosure of personal 
information regarding controlling interests and ownership. This lack of transparency 
prevents the discovery of suspicious transactions and impedes investigations and 
prosecutions.   
 
Other Common Methods of Money Laundering 
In the 2005 U.S. Money Laundering Threat Assessment, the U.S. government identified 
other common methods that criminals use to integrate illicit money into the financial system: 
(1) online payment systems; (2) bulk cash smuggling; and (3) trade-based money laundering. 
 
Online Payment Systems 
In response to market demand, online payment services, which accept funds in a variety of 
ways to transfer payment either to an individual or a merchant, are emerging. In addition, the 
increasing demand for new payment methods has led a growing number of online markets 
to embrace online payment systems, which set their own clearing and settlement terms and 
offer no consumer protection or financial regulation. Since most transactions through these 
service providers are considered final and provide no recourse to individuals who believe 
they have been defrauded, federal law enforcement agencies suggest that they have become a 
popular payment system for individuals perpetrating online fraud. 
 
Online payment systems are often vulnerable to money laundering because many of them 
function as international person-to-person payment systems, which cross jurisdictional 
boundaries, creating difficulties for authorities pursuing enforcement or legal actions. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1612                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Furthermore, many service providers do not have effective customer identification or 
recordkeeping practices while others promote anonymous payments. 
 
Bulk Cash Smuggling 
Bulk cash smuggling, which is the smuggling cash out of the U.S. for deposit in foreign 
jurisdictions with lax financial institutions or to fund criminal enterprises, is also on the rise. 
The rise is bulk cash smuggling is due to the increasingly effective anti-money laundering 
policies and procedures at U.S. financial institutions. In typical bulk cash smuggling 
operations, smugglers hide cash in vehicles, luggage, express packages, commercial 
shipments, private aircrafts, or private boats. 
 
Trade-Based Money Laundering 
Trade-based money laundering is generally the most complex of the money laundering 
methods. This method encompasses a variety of schemes, which utilize international trade to 
disguise the transfers of illicit funds. The most common method of trade-based money 
laundering is the Black Market Peso Exchange (BMPE), a scheme where brokers purchase 
narcotics proceeds in the U.S. from the cartels and exchange them for clean pesos in 
Columbia. Other common trade-based money laundering methods include manipulating 
trade documents to over- and under-pay for imports and exports and using criminal 
proceeds to buy gems or precious metals.  
 
Calling in a Specialist 
Converting ill-gotten gains into cashier’s checks or money orders is not particularly difficult 
for even the most unsophisticated criminal. However because many launderers fear 
detection, they turn to more sophisticated specialists. Couriers  arrange for the transportation 
of money to a site where it is converted into another form of currency. For instance, drug 
traffickers will physically transport money to a foreign jurisdiction where it is deposited into 
a bank account or converted directly to checks or money orders. Since the courier has no 
apparent connection with the true owner of the funds, the money launderer retains  
his anonymity.  
 
White-collar professionals, such as attorneys, accountants, and brokers, might also serve to 
launder illegal funds. Through investments, trust accounts, fund transfers, and tax avoidance 
schemes these professionals can manipulate the financial, commercial, and legal systems to 
conceal the origin and ownership of assets. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1613 



:


the monei launder process
placement
placement of fund into a financi institut is the initi step in the process it is at thi
step that legisl ha been develop to prevent launder from deposit or convert
larg amount of cash at financi institut or take cash out of the countri monei
launder scheme ar most often detect at thi stage
placement can take ani number of form if the monei launder ha a larg amount of
cash he can move the monei out of the countri in a suitcas and deposit it in an offshor
bank anoth choic is to break up the monei into smaller amount and deposit it into
bank account or purchas cashier check travel check or monei order the process
of break transact up into smaller amount to evad the report requir is
monei launder financi transact
11602 2011 fraud examin manual
known as smurf a sophist smurf oper might involv hundr of bank
account in dozen of citi
layer
if the placement of the initi fund goe undetect financi transact can be design
in complex pattern in order to prevent detect thi stage of the process is refer to as
layer and repres the most difficult area of detect onc the fund have been
deposit into a financi institut a launder can move the fund around by us layer
of financi transact design to confus the audit trail the monei can even be
transport out of the countri through wire transfer
integr
the final stage in the launder process is the integr of the monei back into the
economi in such a wai as to make it appear to be a legitim busi transact thi
stage of the process is also difficult to detect howev if the integr process creat a
paper trail such as deed for real estat invoic loan document currenc transact
report ctr or checksand if there is cooper from inform or foreign entiti
then the chanc of detect ar improv
a monei launder scheme cannot be success until the paper trail is elimin or made
so complex that the flow of illeg incom cannot be easili trace the number of step us
to launder fund depend on how much distanc the monei launder wish to put between
the illeg earn cash and the launder asset into which it is convert a greater number
of step increas the complex of trace the fund but it also increas the length of the
paper trail and the chanc that the transact will be report
the object of monei launder is not onli to disguis the sourc of illeg fund but also to
convert larg store of currenc into other asset in some case illeg fund ar spent on
person asset such as home car jewelri and furnitur but the typic monei launder
will not dispos of all hi illeg currenc in thi manner he will want to have a certain
amount of liquid reserv for spend keep larg bundl of cash is ineffici becaus
thei ar difficult to hide and transport therefor monei launder will often convert
substanti portion of their currenc into negoti instrument such as cashier check
and monei order which ar routin issu by financi institut crimin prefer these
negoti instrument for two reason first cashier check and monei order ar bearer
instrument and the holder can us them or deposit them without have to prove the
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11603
sourc of the fund second thei ar liquid asset becaus the holder can us
them immedi
the follow is an exampl of how a monei launder scheme oper
exampl
alberto barrera dub papa smurf by the feder agent investig him ran a rather
sophist smurf oper out of miami involv bank account in citi all over the
countri barrera and hi accomplic would fly to phoenix denver omaha portland and
other citi when thei arriv thei would immedi travel to variou bank the scheme
would begin with the purchas of cashier check and monei order in amount less than
10000 to avoid feder report ing requir thi would be repeat sever time at
differ bank the smurf would then travel to anoth citi where some of the
previous purchas check and monei order would be deposit in account control by
barrera then more purchas of cashier check and monei order would be made befor
the group travel on to the next citi onc the monei wa convert or deposit much of
it wa transfer to offshor bank
us a legitim busi to launder fund
on of the most comm on method of launder fund is to filter the monei through a
legitim busi otherwis known as a front busi a front busi can be a veri
effect wai to launder monei becaus it provid a safe place for organ and manag
crimin activ where the come and go of larg number of peopl will not arous
undu suspicion in addit a front that doe legitim busi provid cover for
deliveri and transport relat to illeg activ the expens from illeg activ can be
attribut to the legitim enterpris and illeg revenu can be easili place into the
enterpris
the three method most commonli us to hide asset or launder monei through a front
busi ar overstat of report revenu overstat of report expens and
balanc sheet launder
overstat of report revenu
overst revenu also known as incom statement launder occur when the monei
launder record more incom on the book of a busi than is actual gener by that
monei launder financi transact
11604 2011 fraud examin manual
busi the fictiti revenu account for the illeg fund that ar secretli insert into
the compani
exampl
abc us car encourag custom to pai with cash if the custom pai in cash
he receiv a discount that might be as high as 25 percent the invoic howev make
no mention of thi cash discount the compani report the full sale amount as incom
depend on the number of car sold the compani can launder thousand of dollar
in illeg incom
overstat of report expens
the disadvantag of overst revenu is that tax will be due on the report incom
therefor if a compani overst it revenu it will also want to overst it expens to
offset it tax liabil the fictiti expens also enabl the perpetr to siphon monei
out of the busi in order to make payoff bui illeg good or invest in other
crimin ventur
overst expens can be accomplish veri easili by report payment for suppli
never receiv profession servic never render or wage for fictiti employe
exampl
abc us car report wage for three mechan and an assist manag who do
not exist the compani also report payment of over 200000 a year to sever
lawyer account and other consult who do littl if ani actual work
incom statement launder which includ both overst revenu and expens can be
difficult to detect when artifici price inflat is appli in moder percentag to good
and servic whose market valu is difficult to establish eg artwork us car consult
fee advertis expens detect is exceedingli difficult without insid inform
complet fabric of transact on the other hand or creation of ghost employe is
somewhat easier to spot
deposit cash and write check in excess of report revenu and expens balanc sheet launder
rather than attempt to disguis monei as normal busi revenu excess fund can
simpli be deposit into the bank account of the busi thi techniqu is known as
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11605
balanc sheet launder becaus it is independ of the monei that flow in and out of
the busi
exampl
abc us car deposit an addit 30000 per month in it account although
there ar no record sale for thi amount at the end of the year the compani ha an
extra 360000 in cash in it account
thi type of scheme can be detect by examin the revenu record of the busi
everi legitim asset in a compani possess had to have come from somewher if not
from revenu then from a limit number of other credibl altern the basic
altern sourc ar loan sale of properti or equip and capit invest from
sharehold all of these transact requir signific documentari evid which the
examin should seek out to explain ani suspici infus of cash into a suspect busi
favorit busi for hide or launder monei
in gener term the busi chosen for monei launder possess on or more of the
follow characterist
revenu a revenu base that is difficult to measur becaus most revenu come from
cash transact with a highli variabl amount per custom thi allow extra monei
to be brought into the busi and disguis as revenu
expens expens that ar variabl and difficult to measur can enabl the launder
to extract monei from the front busi without give rise to undu suspicion
histori histor ti either with the ethnic base of a particular crimin group or with
industri that have tradition serv as a base for crimin activ
bar restaur and night club
busi that ar commonli us to front monei launder oper includ bar
restaur and nightclub these busi charg rel high price and custom
vari wide in their purchas sale ar gener in cash and it is notori difficult to
match the cost of provid food liquor and entertain with the revenu thei produc
fast food restaur ar also frequent us to front for monei launder oper
although thei tend to charg lower price than other type of restaur most of their sale
ar made in cash and expens can be easili inflat
monei launder financi transact
11606 2011 fraud examin manual
vend machin
vend machin oper also possess mani characterist favor to a monei
launder oper thei have a highli variabl and difficult to measur volum of cash
receipt and in larg oper there is a fair amount of flexibl with variou
transport instal and promot expens provid cover for the withdraw of
launder fund
wholesal distribut
wholesal distribut busi have histor been a promin part of monei
launder the revenu in a wholes busi ar not typic as flexibl as in food
servic and vend machin oper but with a divers product line and falsifi
invoic it is still possibl to inject a good deal of illeg cash into the busi more
importantli the industri is ideal for monei launder from the standpoint of expens the
activ requir to run thi kind of busi ar so divers and difficult to measur that
expens ar easi to inflat furthermor a wholesal businesss build warehous
transport fleet and it contact with retail establish ar all attract factor mani
of the classic crimin activ such as drug fenc and contraband ar themselv
noth more than distribut oper and can hide behind thi type of busi cover
the real estat industri
monei launder often us the real estat industri to launder illicitli obtain monei
gener the real estat industri is attract to monei launder for variou reason for
exampl the vast arrai of financi transact link to real estat provid monei
launder an except rang of option for abus these procedur to launder and us
illeg obtain fund in addit real estat transact often involv multipl parti
such as broker agent and apprais which can obscur the sourc of invest fund
and the ident of the true owner final monei launder mai earn addit profit
from introduc illicit fund into the real estat industri especi in vibrant real
estat market
although there is a vast number of method to launder monei in the real estat industri
there ar a few common scheme that warrant identif and discuss includ
loanback scheme
backtoback loan scheme
shell compani
apprais fraud
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11607
monetari instrument
mortgag scheme
indirect invest in the real estat industri
loanback scheme
monei launder often us loanback scheme to financ the purchas of properti directli
or indirectli through purchas share in properti invest fund in a typic loanback
scheme monei launder will deposit illicit fund in an oversea entiti that thei own and
then the entiti loan the fund back to the launder the purpos of the loan is to make
the monei sourc appear legitim and to conceal the parti ident or the natur of the
financi transact associ with the loan
backtoback loan scheme
as with loanback scheme monei launder often us backtoback loan scheme to
purchas properti in a backtoback loan scheme a monei launder obtain a loan by
present collater which origin from illicit fund to a financi institut like the
loanback scheme thi techniqu give the loan monei the appear of a genuin loan
shell compani
monei launder often us shell compani which ar discuss in more detail below to
purchas real estat gener defin shell compani ar busi entiti includ
limit liabil compani trust busi trust and corpor without activ busi
or signific asset becaus there is a lack of transpar in the format of shell
compani monei launder often us them to hide the ident of the true owner the
sourc of the monei or the destin of the monei
apprais fraud
apprais fraud is often associ with monei launder scheme monei launder mai
purchas properti to launder monei or mai us illicit fund to servic the interest on the
debt such scheme can conceal the true ident of the properti owner and the true origin
of the fund us in the transact
apprais fraud occur where apprais fail to accur evalu the properti or when the
apprais deliber becom parti to a scheme to defraud the lender the borrow or
both a common techniqu is the over or undervalu of properti which consist of
buyingsel properti at a price abovebelow it market valu in addit to manipul
monei launder financi transact
11608 2011 fraud examin manual
apprais monei launder also overvalu properti through a seri of subsequ sale
each time at a higher price which tend to conceal the true purpos of the transact
monetari instrument
in mani instanc monei launder purchas build or renov properti with cash wire
transfer or other payablethrough account thi allow the integr of larg sum of
illicit monei into legal financi system later if sold it is difficult to relat the transact
to ani crimin activ and therefor successfulli conceal the true origin of the illicit fund
and their ownership
mortgag scheme
often monei launder will us illicit fund to pai the interest or repai the princip on
mortgag loan and in so do the illicit incom is convert into seemingli legitim
profit when the properti is sold mortgag scheme also involv under and overvalu
of properti for exampl in a common undervalu scheme a monei launder will
undervalu the purchas price of properti obtain a mortgag loan for the undervalu
amount us the loan to pai for the undervalu price and pai the excess amount under the
tabl with illicit fund
indirect invest in the real estat industri
indirect invest which ar those in which the investor ha no direct control over the
asset or invest vehicl in the real estat industri offer opportun to conceal an
investor identif and monetari sourc primarili becaus multipl parti ar involv
with the process
atm
law enforc offici ar also report an increas us of automat teller machin
atm to launder monei atm can be purchas for as littl as 3000 monei launder
purchas the machin and place them either in establish thei control or in legitim
busi the machin work the same as ani other atm machin and all transact
ar legitim the monei launder simpli fill the machin with cash from illeg activ
the custom us the machin and never realiz the sourc of the cash
the atm bank system debit the cardhold account and credit the atm owner bank
account at the end of the month the launder receiv a bank statement show fund
be deposit from a legitim financi institut
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11609
thi option is attract for monei launder becaus there ar current no regul
govern the us and oper of privatelyown atm there is no requir to
check the background of purchas of the machin and there ar no mandatori report
procedur and no rule for maintain atm sale record
gift card
although gift card ar a conveni wai to show someon you care the eas with which
thei can be purchas and us make them attract for monei launder it is estim
that american consum purchas more than 100 billion each year in storedvalu card
closedsystem card ar those that can be us at onli on retail or group of retail
opensystem card such as those issu by visa mastercard and american express can
be us at ani merchant who accept those credit card
although closedcard can onli be us at certain locat there is no oversight as to their
purchas as long as the purchas doe not involv a cash transact greater than 10000
there is no oblig on the part of the retail to perform ani type of due dilig or even
obtain the ident of the purchas
even for opensystem card purchas at financi institut there is no requir that
purchas have an account at the bank or provid identif if the transact is under
10000 bank ar not requir to perform due dilig on individu purchas
monei launder can anonym purchas storedvalu card at a number of differ
locat and then easili transport them out of the countri a small box contain just 200
card could store almost 2000000 without the necess of currenc report
bank and other depositori financi institut
bank and other depositori institut ar suscept to individu attempt to launder
illicit fund becaus thei ar the primari gatewai to the us financi system onc place in
a depositori institut illeg proce can be transfer instantli by wire or disguis by
commingl with legitim fund a challeng current face by depositori institut
includ monei launder conceal their ident and sourc of incom to open
account and launder illeg proce addition the increas us of the internet to
open or access account make it difficult for depositori institut to verifi custom
identif
monei launder financi transact
11610 2011 fraud examin manual
monei servic busi
monei servic busi msb refer to nondepositori financi servic provid
oper in on or more of the follow capac
currenc exchang
check casher
issuer seller or redeem of travel check monei order or store valu
the unit state postal servic and
monei transmitt
msb offer an altern to depositori institut for both financi servic and monei
launder for thi reason an individu unabl to transfer illeg fund into the us
bank system mai turn to msb in a ddition most msb oper without feder
regulatori supervis
insur compani
due to the recent growth in the financi product offer by insur agent and broker
includ save product invest product and tax plan servic the insur
industri ha becom increasingli attract to monei launder accord to the 2007
nation monei launder strategi thi de velop is occur primarili becaus
insur agent and broker now offer a rang of invest servic featur financi
product that can be purchas and subsequ transfer redeem or sold creat
new opportun for monei launder gener the independ broker and agent
who often sell insur product do not work directli for the insur compani as a
result these intermediari mai lack the knowledg or incent to screen client or to
question payment method and it is thi factor that monei launder often exploit
casino
casino oper in a highvolum cashintens industri and provid a broad rang of
financi servic such as deposit and credit account fund transfer check cash and
currenc exchang servic outsid the tradit financi servic system as a result
casino ar suscept to monei launder
accord to the 2005 us monei launder threat assess crimin typic
launder monei through casino by exchang illicit cash for casino chip and then either
hold the chip for a period of time and later cash them in for a casino check or
have the casino wire the monei elsewher
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11611
us the chip as currenc to purchas narcot with the drug dealer later cash in
the chip or
us the chip to gambl in hope of gener certifi win
shell compani
shell compani refer to nonpublicli trade corpor limit liabil compani
llc and trust which gener do not have ani physic presenc other than a mail
address and gener littl to no independ econom valu in most situat individu
and busi form shell compani for legitim reason such as hold the stock or
intellectu properti right of anoth busi entiti facilit domest and crossbord
currenc and asset transfer or foster domest and crossbord currenc corpor
merger howev shell compani have becom common tool for monei launder
primarili becaus thei have the abil to hide ownership and mask financi detail and
becaus monei launder can creat them with minim public disclosur of person
inform regard control interest and ownership thi lack of transpar
prevent the discoveri of suspici transact and imped investig and
prosecut
other common method of monei launder
in the 2005 us monei launder threat assess the us govern identifi
other common method that crimin us to integr illicit monei into the financi system
1 onlin payment system 2 bulk cash smuggl and 3 tradebas monei launder
onlin payment system
in respons to market demand onlin payment servic which accept fund in a varieti of
wai to transfer payment either to an individu or a merchant ar emerg in addit the
increas demand for new payment method ha led a grow number of onlin market
to embrac onlin payment system which set their own clear and settlement term and
offer no consum protect or financi regul sinc most transact through these
servic provid ar consid final and provid no recours to individu who believ
thei have been defraud feder law enforc agenc suggest that thei have becom a
popular payment system for individu perpetr onlin fraud
onlin payment system ar often vulner to monei launder becaus mani of them
function as intern persontoperson payment system which cross jurisdict
boundari creat difficulti for author pursu enforc or legal action
monei launder financi transact
11612 2011 fraud examin manual
furthermor mani servic provid do not have effect custom identif or
recordkeep practic while other promot anonym payment
bulk cash smuggl
bulk cash smuggl which is the smuggl cash out of the us for deposit in foreign
jurisdict with lax financi institut or to fund crimin enterpris is also on the rise
the rise is bulk cash smuggl is due to the increasingli effect antimonei launder
polici and procedur at us financi institut in typic bulk cash smuggl
oper smuggler hide cash in vehicl luggag express packag commerci
shipment privat aircraft or privat boat
tradebas monei launder
tradebas monei launder is gener the most complex of the monei launder
method thi method encompass a varieti of scheme which util intern trade to
disguis the transfer of illicit fund the most common method of tradebas monei
launder is the black market peso exchang bmpe a scheme where broker purchas
narcot proce in the us from the cartel and exchang them for clean peso in
columbia other common tradebas monei launder method includ manipul
trade document to over and underpai for import and export and us crimin
proce to bui gem or preciou metal
call in a specialist
convert illgotten gain into cashier check or monei order is not particularli difficult
for even the most unsophist crimin howev becaus mani launder fear
detect thei turn to more sophist specialist courier arrang for the transport
of monei to a site where it is convert into anoth form of currenc for instanc drug
traffick will physic transport monei to a foreign jurisdict where it is deposit into
a bank account or convert directli to check or monei order sinc the courier ha no
appar connect with the true owner of the fund the monei launder retain
hi anonym
whitecollar profession such as attornei account and broker might also serv to
launder illeg fund through invest trust account fund transfer and tax avoid
scheme these profession can manipul the financi commerci and legal system to
conceal the origin and ownership of asset
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11613
