2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/The Money Laundering Process/Gift Cards


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Gift Cards 
Although gift cards are a convenient way to show someone you care, the ease with which 
they can be purchased and used makes them attractive for money laundering. It is estimated 
that American consumers purchase more than $100 billion each year in stored-value cards. 
Closed-system cards are those that can be used at only one retailer or group of retailers. 
Open-system cards (such as those issued by VISA, MasterCard, and American Express) can 
be used at any merchant who accepts those credit cards.  
 
Although closed-cards can only be used at certain locations, there is no oversight as to their 
purchase. As long as the purchase does not involve a cash transaction greater than $10,000, 
there is no obligation on the part of the retailer to perform any type of due diligence or even 
obtain the identity of the purchaser. 
 
Even for open-system cards purchased at financial institutions, there is no requirement that 
purchaser have an account at the bank or provide identification if the transaction is under 
$10,000. Banks are not required to perform due diligence on individual purchasers. 
 
Money launderers can anonymously purchase stored-value cards at a number of different 
locations and then easily transport them out of the country. A small box containing just 200 
cards could store almost $2,000,000 without the necessity of currency reporting. 
 



:


gift card
although gift card ar a conveni wai to show someon you care the eas with which
thei can be purchas and us make them attract for monei launder it is estim
that american consum purchas more than 100 billion each year in storedvalu card
closedsystem card ar those that can be us at onli on retail or group of retail
opensystem card such as those issu by visa mastercard and american express can
be us at ani merchant who accept those credit card
although closedcard can onli be us at certain locat there is no oversight as to their
purchas as long as the purchas doe not involv a cash transact greater than 10000
there is no oblig on the part of the retail to perform ani type of due dilig or even
obtain the ident of the purchas
even for opensystem card purchas at financi institut there is no requir that
purchas have an account at the bank or provid identif if the transact is under
10000 bank ar not requir to perform due dilig on individu purchas
monei launder can anonym purchas storedvalu card at a number of differ
locat and then easili transport them out of the countri a small box contain just 200
card could store almost 2000000 without the necess of currenc report
