2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Hawala Exchanges


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Hawala Exchanges 
Although the theoretical workings of hawala have been around for at least a century, only 
recently has the United States publicly recognized it as a threat to homeland security. 
Hawala, often referred to as hundi, is an informal remittance system primarily exploited in 
Asia and the Middle East. Because the system is unregulated and leaves virtually no paper 
trail, it is ripe for money laundering.  
 
How It Works 
Hawala networks operate with the non-physical transfer of money. Typically, one who wants 
to send money abroad will call on a hawala dealer, known as a hawaladar. Hawala 
transactions are often disguised by legitimate businesses (e.g., travel agencies, cell phone 
companies, movie stores, convenience stores, and car washes). The hawaladar will contact 
another hawaladar in the country where the money is to be distributed, and with whom he 
has a familial relation or is a trustworthy connection. The hawaladars will discuss the 
transaction and arrange for delivery of the money to the recipient. Sometimes the hawaladar 
will give the giver a receipt, but with very little information. Information typically contained 
therein includes a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipient. Once hawaladars have 
exchanged the basic information of the transaction, the hawaladar for the recipient will 
locate and deliver the money to the recipient. The recipient will then use the code to verify 
his identification with the hawaladar who is distributing the money. The only records kept of 
the transaction are the amounts owed one hawaladar to another. Because most hawala 
transactions are disguised by legitimate businesses, records of such transactions are generally 
disguised as well. 
 
EXAMPLE 
1.  Ana in New York contacts and gives $5,000 in cash to Hawaladar A in New 
York to get $4,800 to Andy in Dubai. 
2.  Hawaladar A contacts Hawaladar B in Dubai and arranges the transfer; a code is 
exchanged. 
3.  Hawaladar A gives Ana a code to be communicated to Andy. 
4.  Ana communicates the code to Andy. 
5.  Hawaladar B and Andy make contact in Dubai. 
6.  Andy relates code to Hawaladar B and is then given the money. 
7.  Hawaladar A owes Hawaladar B $4,800 worth of “The Big Apple” t-shirts. 
Hawaladar A sends the merchandise from New York to Hawaladar B in Dubai. 
8.  Transaction is complete.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1614                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Often, hawaladars are business partners who do legitimate business with each other on a 
regular basis. Because it can be difficult to transfer large amounts of money between 
countries, a debt might be paid with merchandise or a favor (e.g., Hawaladar B owes 
Hawaladar A money from a past transaction, and in a new transaction pays the recipient, 
thereby relinquishing his debt to Hawaladar A from the former transaction).  
 
The hawala exchange is a tempting opportunity for many because it: 
• Doesn’t require formal identification;  
• Takes hours rather than days to transfer the money overseas;  
• Is cheaper than paying bank and shipping fees because hawaladars generally take a very 
small commission;  
• No currency conversion is necessary; and  
• Lacks a coherent paper trail. 
 
The Hawala Exchange and Money Laundering 
The very essence of hawala exchange bypasses regulation, such that money can be 
transferred independent of government and financial institution oversight. While many 
hawala exchanges are remittances free of mal-intent and therefore “legitimate” in some 
countries, (known as “white hawalas”), the system  lends itself to abuse. The use of a hawala 
exchange for illegal purposes such as money laundering, drug trafficking, or terrorism is 
referred to as a “black hawala.”   
 
Money laundering, specifically, is the disguising  of the existence, nature, source, ownership, 
location, and disposition of property derived from criminal activity. For hawaladars who 
operate storefront retail or service businesses in addition to their side hawala exchanges, 
bank deposits will rarely trigger investigation by a financial institution unless deposits are 
exceedingly high for the particular business. As always, such money can go undetected by 
using it towards personal and business expenses. (It is important to note that in the U.S. all 
cash transactions over $10,000 must be reported  to the federal government.) Hawala money 
can easily be layered because paper trails are meager at most. Furthermore, because most 
hawala exchanges are hidden behind business veils, money received from such transactions 
can unnoticeably be recouped into business accounts and thus integrated into bank accounts.  
 
Unfortunately, due to the “hidden” nature of the hawala business, much of this money is 
used to fund dangerous activities such as the importation of heroin and the purchase of 
unauthorized weapons. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1615 
Signs of a Hawala Exchange 
Red flags of money laundering could also indicate a hawala exchange. The following 
transactions could indicate money laundering via a hawala exchange. The list should be used 
to identify those transactions and customers, which might require further investigation: 
• Use of cash as payment for a transaction, which is typically handled by checks or other 
forms of payment. 
• Several check deposits from various ethnic communities. 
• Lump sum payments made by wire transfer or with foreign currency. 
• Reluctance to provide normal information when setting up a policy, account, or 
providing minimal information. 
• Purchase of investments in amounts considered beyond the customer’s apparent means. 
• Use of a letter of credit or other methods of trade finance to move money between 
countries where such trade is inconsistent with customer’s usual pattern. 
• Establishment of a large investment policy and within a short time period, customer 
requests cancellation of the policy and cash value paid to third-party. 
• Use of wire transfers to move large amounts of money to or from a financial haven 
country such as the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Monaco, Panama, or Switzerland. 
• Services provided internationally but paid for locally. 
 
 



:


hawala exchang
although the theoret work of hawala have been around for at least a centuri onli
recent ha the unit state publicli recogn it as a threat to homeland secur
hawala often refer to as hundi is an inform remitt system primarili exploit in
asia and the middl east becaus the system is unregul and leav virtual no paper
trail it is ripe for monei launder
how it work
hawala network oper with the nonphys transfer of monei typic on who want
to send monei abroad will call on a hawala dealer known as a hawaladar hawala
transact ar often disguis by legitim busi eg travel agenc cell phone
compani movi store conveni store and car wash the hawaladar will contact
anoth hawaladar in the countri where the monei is to be distribut and with whom he
ha a famili relat or is a trustworthi connect the hawaladar will discuss the
transact and arrang for deliveri of the monei to the recipi sometim the hawaladar
will give the giver a receipt but with veri littl inform inform typic contain
therein includ a code that the giver is to pass along to the recipi onc hawaladar have
exchang the basic inform of the transact the hawaladar for the recipi will
locat and deliv the monei to the recipi the recipi will then us the code to verifi
hi identif with the hawaladar who is distribut the monei the onli record kept of
the transact ar the amount ow on hawaladar to anoth becaus most hawala
transact ar disguis by legitim busi record of such transact ar gener
disguis as well
exampl
1 ana in new york contact and give 5000 in cash to hawaladar a in new
york to get 4800 to andi in dubai
2 hawaladar a contact hawaladar b in dubai and arrang the transfer a code is
exchang
3 hawaladar a give ana a code to be commun to andi
4 ana commun the code to andi
5 hawaladar b and andi make contact in dubai
6 andi relat code to hawaladar b and is then given the monei
7 hawaladar a ow hawaladar b 4800 worth of the big appl tshirt
hawaladar a send the merchandis from new york to hawaladar b in dubai
8 transact is complet
monei launder financi transact
11614 2011 fraud examin manual
often hawaladar ar busi partner who do legitim busi with each other on a
regular basi becaus it can be difficult to transfer larg amount of monei between
countri a debt might be paid with merchandis or a favor eg hawaladar b ow
hawaladar a monei from a past transact and in a new transact pai the recipi
therebi relinquish hi debt to hawaladar a from the former transact
the hawala exchang is a tempt opportun for mani becaus it
doesnt requir formal identif
take hour rather than dai to transfer the monei oversea
is cheaper than pai bank and ship fee becaus hawaladar gener take a veri
small commiss
no currenc convers is necessari and
lack a coher paper trail
the hawala exchang and monei launder
the veri essenc of hawala exchang bypass regul such that monei can be
transfer independ of govern and financi institut oversight while mani
hawala exchang ar remitt free of malint and therefor legitim in some
countri known as white hawala the system lend itself to abus the us of a hawala
exchang for illeg purpos such as monei launder drug traffick or terror is
refer to as a black hawala
monei launder specif is the disguis of the exist natur sourc ownership
locat and disposit of properti deriv from crimin activ for hawaladar who
oper storefront retail or servic busi in addit to their side hawala exchang
bank deposit will rare trigger investig by a financi institut unless deposit ar
exceedingli high for the particular busi as alwai such monei can go undetect by
us it toward person and busi expens it is import to note that in the us all
cash transact over 10000 must be report to the feder govern hawala monei
can easili be layer becaus paper trail ar meager at most furthermor becaus most
hawala exchang ar hidden behind busi veil monei receiv from such transact
can unnotic be recoup into busi account and thu integr into bank account
unfortun due to the hidden natur of the hawala busi much of thi monei is
us to fund danger activ such as the import of heroin and the purchas of
unauthor weapon
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11615
sign of a hawala exchang
red flag of monei launder could also indic a hawala exchang the follow
transact could indic monei launder via a hawala exchang the list should be us
to identifi those transact and custom which might requir further investig
us of cash as payment for a transact which is typic handl by check or other
form of payment
sever check deposit from variou ethnic commun
lump sum payment made by wire transfer or with foreign currenc
reluct to provid normal inform when set up a polici account or
provid minim inform
purchas of invest in amount consid beyond the custom appar mean
us of a letter of credit or other method of trade financ to move monei between
countri where such trade is inconsist with custom usual pattern
establish of a larg invest polici and within a short time period custom
request cancel of the polici and cash valu paid to thirdparti
us of wire transfer to move larg amount of monei to or from a financi haven
countri such as the cayman island colombia hong kong liechtenstein
luxembourg monaco panama or switzerland
servic provid internation but paid for local
