2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Federal and State Law 
 
PATRIOT Act of 2001 
On October 26, 2001, Pre sident George W. Bush signed into law the Uniting and Strengthening 
America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act  (the 
PATRIOT Act). The PATRIOT Act was a response to the tragedies of September 11, 2001, 
and reflected Congressional concern with the money laundering activities of the terrorists 
who committed those attacks.  
 
Title III of the Act is entitled the International Money Laundering Abatement and Anti-
 Terrorist Financing Act of 2001. Title III creates significant requirements for financial 
institutions aimed at curtailing money laundering. The most significant anti-money 
laundering provisions of the law include the following:  
• Financial institutions are required to establish anti-money laundering programs.  
• Financial institutions are required to establish programs for identifying customers.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1616                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• U.S. banks are prohibited from maintaining correspondent accounts with foreign shell 
banks. 
• Securities broker-dealers are required to file suspicious activity reports.  
• Financial institutions are required to adopt special due diligence procedures for foreign 
correspondent accounts and private banking accounts. 
• Non-financial businesses are required to file currency transaction reports 
• Financial institutions have increased authority to share customer information relating to 
money laundering.  
• The government has greater power to obtain information from financial institutions. 
 
Anti-Money Laundering Programs  
Section 352 of the PATRIOT Act requires all financial institutions to establish anti-money 
laundering programs, which must include, at a minimum: 
• The development of internal policies, procedures, and controls to prevent money 
laundering. 
• The designation of a money laundering compliance officer. 
• An ongoing training program for awareness of money laundering. 
• An independent audit function to test the programs. 
 
The Act defines the term “financial institution” broadly to include not only insured and 
commercial banks, but also securities brokers and dealers, investment companies, currency 
exchanges, issuers of cashier’s checks and money orders, credit card companies, insurance 
companies, travel agencies, and a host of other businesses. The complete list can be found at 
31, U.S.C., § 312 (a)(2).  
 
Identification and Verification of Accountholders 
Section 326 of the Act expands the Bank Secrecy Act (discussed below) by requiring 
financial institutions to implement Customer Identification Programs (CIPs). These CIPs are 
to be incorporated into financial institutions’ money laundering programs, and at a 
minimum, they must include reasonable procedures for: 
• Verifying the identity of any person seeking to open an account to the extent reasonable 
and practicable;  
• Maintaining records of the information used to verify a person’s identity, including 
name, address, and other identifying information; and  
• Consulting lists of known or suspected terrorists or terrorist organizations to determine 
if the person seeking to open the account appears on any such list. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1617 
Prohibition Against Foreign Shell Bank Accounts  
Pursuant to sections 313 and 319 of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a 
far-reaching final regulation that applies to over 9,000 foreign financial institutions that have 
correspondent accounts in the United States. The rule prohibits foreign shell banks (those 
without a physical presence in any country) from maintaining correspondent accounts at any 
U.S. financial institution. It also requires U.S. financial intuitions to maintain the name and 
contact information of the owners of the foreign banks for whom they maintain 
correspondent accounts. The rule strongly encourages U.S. intuitions to obtain 
“certifications” from their foreign bank customer s. The certification can be used by the U.S. 
institution to help ensure that the customer is not a shell bank. (Although not required, 
obtaining the certifications and verifying the information can create a safe harbor from civil 
liability.)   
 
U.S. institutions are also required to take “reasonable steps” to ensure that correspondent 
accounts provided to foreign banks are not used to provide services indirectly to foreign 
shell banks. Foreign banks that have accounts in the U.S. are required to appoint someone in 
the U.S. to accept service of legal process. The rule also gives the Secretary of the Treasury 
and the Attorney General the authority to issue a summons or subpoena to any foreign bank 
that maintains a correspondent account here and to request records relating to that account. 
 
Suspicious Activity Reporting by Broker-Dealers 
Pursuant to section 356 of the Act, the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) 
adopted rules requiring brokers and dealers in securities to report suspicious activity. 31, 
C.F.R. § 103.19(a)(2). This reporting requirement  will be discussed in more detail later in this 
section (see “Securities Broker-Dealers” un der “Suspicious Activity Reports” below). 
 
Special Due Diligence for Foreign Accounts 
Section 312 of the PATRIOT Act requires financ ial institutions to establish due diligence 
policies, procedures, and controls that are reasonably designed to detect and report instances 
of money laundering through certain accounts held by non-U.S. citizens or their 
representatives. This provision applies to two types of foreign accounts:  
• Private banking accounts  
• Correspondent accounts  
 
A private banking account is defined by the Act as an account (or combination of accounts) that 
(1) requires a minimum aggregate deposit of funds or other assets of at least $1 million; (2) is 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1618                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
established on behalf of one or more individuals who have a direct or beneficial ownership 
in the account; and (3) is assigned to or admini stered by an officer, employee, or agent of the 
financial institution acting as a liaison between the financial institution and the owner of the 
account. 
 
For private banking accounts held by non-U.S. persons, the Act requires at a minimum that 
financial institutions take reasonable steps to:  
• Ascertain the identity of the nominal and beneficial owners of the account, and the 
source of funds deposited into the account as needed to guard against money laundering 
and report any suspicious transactions; and  
• Conduct enhanced scrutiny of any such account that is requested or maintained by, or 
on behalf of, a senior foreign political figure (or an immediate family member or close 
associate of such) that is reasonably designed to detect and report transactions that may 
involve the proceeds of foreign corruption. 
 
A correspondent account is defined as an account established to receive deposits from or make 
payments on behalf of a foreign financial institution, or handle other financial transactions 
related to such an institution. Enhanced due diligence is required for correspondent accounts 
maintained by or on behalf of foreign banks that operate under off-shore banking licenses or 
for banks that are licensed by foreign countries that have either been designated as 
noncooperative with international anti-money laundering principles or that have been 
designated by the Secretary of the Treasury as warranting special measures due to money 
laundering concerns. Enhanced due diligence for these correspondent accounts consists of, 
at a minimum:  
• Ascertaining the identity of the owners of any foreign bank whose shares are not  
publicly traded; 
• Determining the nature and extent of each owner’s interest; 
• Conducting enhanced scrutiny of the account to guard against money laundering and 
report suspicious transactions; and 
• Ascertaining whether the foreign bank provides correspondent accounts to other  
foreign banks and, if so, the identity of those foreign banks and related due  
diligence information. 
 
Currency Reports by Non-Financial Businesses 
Section 365 of the PATRIOT Act requires persons engaged in any trade or business to file a 
report with FinCEN when, in the course of their business, they receive more than $10,000 in 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1619 
coins or currency. This reporting requirement is discussed in more detail later in this section 
under the reporting and recordkeeping provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act.  
 
Sharing Information Between Financial Institutions 
Pursuant to section 314(b) of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department issued a rule 
allowing financial institutions to share customer information with one another. The term 
“financial institution” includes any entity that is required to have an anti-money laundering 
program under the Bank Secrecy Act (see above). In order to share information with another 
financial institution, the sharing institution must follow these steps: 
• File a prescribed notice form with FinCEN stating that it intends to share customer 
information with other financial institutions (the notice remains effective for one year); 
• The institution may then share the information with another institution provided that it 
has verified that the other institution has also filed a notice with FinCEN (FinCEN will 
periodically release a list of institutions who have submitted notices; if an institution is 
on the list, then the sharing institution will be considered to have fulfilled its 
“verification” duty); 
• The institution must ensure that the shared information is secure and not used for any 
purpose other than to identify and, where appropriate, report on money laundering or 
terrorist activities; determine whether to establish or maintain an account or conduct a 
transaction; or assist the other sharing institution with its compliance of BSA regulations;  
• The institution must also file a Suspicious Activity Report if, based on the shared 
information, the institution suspects that the individual or entity may be involved in 
money laundering or terrorist activity. 
 
Section 355 of the Act also permits insured depository institutions to share information in 
written employment references about known or suspected  unlawful activity of their current or 
former directors, officers, employees, agents, or other persons affiliated with the institution. 
This provision, which is codified at 12, U.S.C., § 1828(w) does not make it mandatory for 
banks to disclose this information, but it does protect them from liability if they voluntarily 
make such disclosures, as long as the disclosures are not made with malicious intent.  
 
Government Access to Financial Information 
On September 18, 2002, the Treasury Department issued regulations that provide federal law 
enforcement agencies with greater power to obtain financial information. The two-part 
regulation is an amendment to the Bank Secrecy Act regulations and was mandated by 
section 314 of the PATRIOT Act. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1620                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If a federal agency provides FinCEN with a “written certification” that a person, entity, or 
organization about whom information is sought “is reasonably suspected based on credible 
information to be engaged in…, terrorist acti vity or money laundering.” FinCEN may then 
require any financial institution to search its records to determine if it “maintains or has 
maintained accounts for, or has engaged in transactions with” the subject. 
 
The information reported is limited to the name or account number of each cited person, 
entity, or organization; the number of the matching account or transaction; and the Social 
Security number, taxpayer ID, passport number, date of birth, or other identifying 
information the subject gave when opening the account or conducting the transaction. 
 
The institution may not disclose the information to anyone other than FinCEN or the 
requesting agency. The institution also cannot disclose that the information has been 
requested or provided. It may, however, use the information in the request to determine 
whether an account will be opened or a transaction conducted, and to comply with  
BSA regulations. 
 
The term “financial institution” is defined as it is under the BSA and includes banks, broker-dealers, 
insurance companies, money services businesses, as well as car and airplane dealers, 
travel agents, and pawnbrokers. 
 
Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Depar tment of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals that sponsor terrorism, and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(“SDNs”), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains over 5,000 variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
On September 24, 2001, President George W. Bush issued an executive order imposing 
enhanced trade sanctions on 27 individuals and entities, including Osama bin Laden and Al 
Qaeda. The immediate effect of the order is to block all assets of these individuals and 
entities under U.S. control and ban all dealings with the listed parties.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1621 
On July 26, 2001, OFAC issued a bulletin specific to the insurance industry, including 
underwriters, brokers, agents, primary insurers, and reinsurers. The bulletin affirms that U.S. 
insurers may not insure SDNs or individuals or entities located in certain prohibited 
countries or make payments to beneficiaries who are designated as prohibited persons or 
entities. Examples of prohibited transactions include: (1) issuing an insurance policy or 
annuity contract to an SDN; (2) issuing a life insurance policy naming an SDN as a 
beneficiary; and (3) receiving premium payments for any such transactions.  
 
The Bank Secrecy Act 
The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which went into effect in 1970, was the first major piece of 
legislation aimed at detecting and preventing money laundering. The purpose of the law as 
stated in section 5311 is “to require certain re ports or records where they have a high degree 
of usefulness in criminal, tax, or regulatory investigations or proceedings.” The BSA sets 
forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements designed to help track large or 
unusual financial transactions. 
 
The BSA consists of two titles. Title I contains provisions requiring that financial institutions 
and securities brokers and dealers keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of 
their customers. It is codified in Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 1829b 
and 1951–1959. Title II of the BSA (originally  entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions 
Reporting Act) requires banks, “financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities 
brokers and dealers, currency exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to 
report to the government certain transactions. Title II is codified at 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–
 5330. 
 
For more information on the examination process and the compliance procedures financial 
institutions are required to follow, please review the Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money 
Laundering Examination Manual published by the Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council. It is available for viewing on their website (www.ffiec.gov). 
 
Title I — Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. Recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. All institutions are required to keep a record of any financial transaction of more 
than $10,000. 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1622                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep for five years an original, microfilm, 
or other copy of certain documents relating to demand deposits and checking and savings 
accounts. The records that must be retained include: 
• Signature cards. 
• Statements, ledger cards, or other records disclosing all transactions; that is, deposits and 
withdrawals. 
• Copies of both sides of customers’ checks, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks of more than $100 drawn on the bank, or issued and payable by it. 
• Identity of each purchaser of a certificate of deposit. 
• Each deposit slip or credit ticket reflecting a transaction in excess of $100. 
 
In addition to these requirements, financial institutions are required to capture, verify, and 
retain information on the identity of purchasers of monetary instruments (such as cashier’s 
checks) in amounts of $3,000 or more, or any transmittal or transfer of funds involving 
$3,000 or more. These records are also required to be kept for five years. 
 
Banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a customer’s 
checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit tickets. They 
must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check deposited to a 
customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply only to checks written or deposits made in 
excess of $100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all such items rather than sorting out 
those less than $100. The Bank Secrecy Act also  requires financial institutions to retain a 
record of any extension of credit more than $1 0,000 as well as each transfer of $10,000 or 
more outside the United States. 
 
The penalties for failure to comply with these recordkeeping requirements are severe. Any 
insured depository institution and any director, officer, or employee who willfully or through 
gross negligence violates any regulation can be subject to a $10,000 civil penalty. The statute 
further provides that a separate violation occurs for each day  the violation continues and at 
each office, branch, or place of business at which the violation occurs. If a violation is 
committed in furtherance of a felony crime, criminal penalties can be imposed of up to five 
years in prison and/or a fine of not more than $10,000. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1623 
Title II — Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Title II of the Bank Secrecy Act is codified as 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5330. The purpose of 
these sections is to require certain reports or records to be filed or kept by “financial 
institutions.” Section 5312(a)(2) defines “financial institution” very broadly to include not 
only banks, but also securities brokers; currency exchange houses; insurance companies; loan 
companies; travel agencies; telegraph companies; issuers or cashiers of checks or money 
orders; auto, boat, and airplane dealers; casinos; and persons involved in real estate closings 
and settlements. Only recently has the Treasury Department begun to reign in much of the 
non-financial institution transaction business in the U.S. by requiring registration of these 
diverse enterprises (see the “Money Services Business” excerpt below). 
 
The regulations promulgated by the U.S. Treasury Department are contained primarily in 
Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal Regulations at Part 103, Subpart B and require the 
following reports: 
 
CURRENCY TRANSACTION REPORT (CTR) — FINCEN FORM 104 
All banks, and certain other financial institutions, are required to fill out currency transaction 
reports (CTR) whenever there is a currency transaction (deposit, withdrawal, exchange, or 
cashing of checks) of $10,000 or more.  The easiest way to summarize the filing requirement is 
to remember: if currency in excess of $10,000 is brought into a financial institution to conduct 
a transaction, or if as the result of a transaction, $10,000 in currency leaves the financial 
institution, a CTR must be filed.  
 
FinCEN Form 104 (formerly named IRS Form 4789) is prepared by the financial institution 
and contains the name(s) of the individual(s) conducting the transaction(s) or the name(s) of 
the person(s) or organization(s) on whose behalf the transaction is being conducted, as well as 
all identifying data of these individuals or entities. It also requires the details of the transaction 
and identifying data of the financial institution preparing the form. For purposes of reporting, 
multiple transactions must be treated as a single transaction if the financial institution has 
knowledge that the transactions are by or on behalf of the same person and the amounts total 
more than $10,000 during any one business day. 
 
Under Title 31, U.S.C., section 5313, the Treasury Department publishes a “mandatory 
exemption” list that specifically identifies entities whose transactions with a financial 
institution are exempt from these reporting requirements. The exempted entities include 
banks, departments or agencies of state or federal government, and other businesses “whose 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1624                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
reports have little or no value for law enforcement purposes.” The exempt list must be 
published periodically in the Federal Register.  
 
The Treasury Department can also provide “discretionary exemptions” for “qualified business 
customers,” which are defined as businesses that  (1) maintain transaction accounts (as defined 
by the Federal Reserve Act) at the particular institution; (2) frequently engage in transactions 
with the institution that are subject to the reporting requirements; and (3) meet the guidelines 
and criteria established by the Treasury Department to ensure that the failure to file reports on 
these entities will not interfere with the purposes of the Act. 
 
A copy of Form 104 is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
CURRENCY REPORTS BY CASINOS — FINCEN FORM 102 
Form 102 (formerly named IRS Form 8362) is required to be filed by casinos licensed by 
state or local government and having an annual gross revenue in excess of $1,000,000. 
Nevada casinos are exempt from filing these forms because of a strict state law that requires 
reporting for currency transactions. The filing requirements and transaction details for this 
form are almost identical to Form 104. 
 
CURRENCY REPORTS BY NON-FINANCIAL BUSINESSES — IRS FORM 8300 
The PATRIOT Act created Title 31, section 5331, of the U.S. Code, which requires persons 
engaged in any trade or business to file a report with FinCEN when, in the course of their 
business, they receive more than $10,000 in coins or currency, either in one transaction or in 
two or more related transactions. For purposes of computing the amount of multiple related 
transactions, the recipient must aggregate all payments made within one year of the first 
payment. Transactions covered by this Section must be reported within 15 days of receipt of 
payments in excess of $10,000. The rules govern ing these reports are codified at 31, CFR, § 
103.30. 
 
This section does not apply to financial institutions, which are already covered by 31, U.S.C., 
§ 5313 as described above. It also does not apply to transactions occurring entirely outside 
the United States. In addition, the rules exempt certain loans, installment sales, and down 
payment plans.  
 
The information required to be reported under section 5331 is very similar to the 
information that was already required by the IRS under section 6050I of the Internal 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1625 
Revenue Code. Because of the similarity between the two statutes, the reports are to be 
made on the same Form 8300, which is filed jointly with FinCEN and the IRS. Essentially, 
the rule imposes no new record-keeping burden (since Form 8300 already had to be filed 
with the IRS). 
 
Under the Internal Revenue Code, there are both civil and criminal penalties for failure to 
file Form 8300 or filing a false form. Criminal sanctions include imprisonment of up to five 
years (for a willful failure to file) and fines of up to $500,000 (for organizations knowingly 
filing a false return). 
 
REPORTS OF INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORTATION OF CURRENCY OR MONETARY INSTRUMENT CUSTOMS (CMIR) — FINCEN FORM 105 
Pursuant to Title 31, U.S.C., § 5316, a person shall file a report if he transports or is about to 
transport monetary instruments of more than $10,000 into or out of the United States at one 
time or if he receives by transport, mail, or shipment monetary instruments in excess of 
$10,000 at one time transported into the United Sates from a place outside the United States. 
FinCEN Form 105 (formerly named Customs Form 4790) is to be filed at the time of 
transportation or within 15 days of receipt. 
 
For the purposes of this statute, the term “monetary instrument” means United States and 
foreign coin and currency; bearer instruments such as business, bank, or personal checks; 
money orders; promissory notes; bearer stocks; and bonds. 
 
There are exemptions from the CMIR filin g requirements that extend to banks for  
transfers of funds through normal banking procedures, the Federal Reserve, and certain 
common carriers. 
 
A copy of this form is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
REPORT OF FOREIGN BANK AND FINANCIAL ACCOUNTS (FBAR)—TREASURY FORM 90-22.1 
Treasury Department regulations require citizens of the United States and resident aliens to 
file a report when they maintain a financial interest or signature authority over a foreign bank 
account with a balance of more than $10,000 during the calendar year. Accounts in different 
foreign countries have to be aggregated. 
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1626                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PENALTIES 
Section 5321 of the BSA sets forth the civil penalties for noncompliance with the Act. A 
covered entity (including its partners, directors, officers, or employees) that willfully violates 
the reporting requirements can be hit with a penalty of up to the amount of the transaction 
(not to exceed $100,000) or $ 25,000, whichever is greater. A separate penalty can be imposed 
for each day the violation continues and at each branch or office. Civil penalties of up to 
$500 are also authorized for a negligent violati on. If there is a pattern of negligent activity, 
the penalty limit increases to $50,000. This section also sets forth other penalties applicable 
to structured transactions and foreign financial agency transactions. 
 
Criminal penalties are set forth in section 5322, which provides that a person willfully 
violating the statute or regulations can be fined up to $250,000 and/or imprisoned for up to 
five years. If the violation occurs while violating another federal law or as a pattern of illegal 
activity involving more than $100,000, the maximum fine increases to $500,000 and the 
maximum prison time increases to 10 years. As with the civil penalties, a separate violation 
occurs each day the conduct continues and at each location. 
 
FORFEITURES 
Section 5317(c) provides criminal and civil forfeiture penalties for violations of the currency 
reporting requirements in § 5313 (reports on domestic transactions), § 5316 (reports on 
exporting and importing monetary instruments), and § 5324 (structuring transactions to 
evade reporting requirements). A person convicted of an offense under any of these statutes, 
or of a conspiracy to violate any of these statutes, can be ordered to forfeit all property that 
was involved in the offense and any property traceable thereto.  
 
Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs)   
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
The BSA also requires financial institutions to monitor suspicious activity and file suspicious 
activity reports (SARs) to disclose known or suspected criminal offenses or transactions that 
involve money laundering or violate the Act. For years, suspicious transactions were 
reported on the Currency Transaction Report (CTR). However, such activity is now reported 
using the Suspicious Activity Report (SAR). 
 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which charters, regulates, and 
supervises more than 2,500 national banks, adopted a requirement mandating that national 
banks file SARs with the appropriate federal law enforcement agencies and the Treasury 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1627 
Department, in accordance with the form’s instructions, by sending the reports to the 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). These reporting requirements are found 
in Title 12, Part 353 of the Code of Federal Regulations. This is an enormous improvement 
on the old reporting systems because it establishes a centralized reporting system that is 
shared throughout government agencies simultaneously. The DEA, for instance, can now 
access the same information as the IRS when working on a suspicious report. The reporting 
procedure has also been simplified for banks, making the information much easier for the 
Department of the Treasury to obtain.  
 
Financial institutions are also required to use SAR forms to report incidents of computer 
intrusion. The term “computer intrusion” is defined as gaining access to the computer 
system to remove, steal, or procure customers’  funds or other account information, or to 
access the institution’s computer system with the intention of damaging or disabling any 
critical computer systems. 
 
SARs are used to report a known or suspected criminal offense or a transaction that involves 
money laundering or violates the BSA. More specifically, a SAR must be filed with FinCEN 
in each of the following instances: 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution when the 
institution has a substantial basis for identifying one of its directors, officers, employees, 
agents, or affiliated parties as having committed the act or aided in its commission. 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution and 
aggregating $5,000 or more when the institution has a substantial basis for identifying a 
possible suspect or group of suspects. 
• Any known or suspected criminal violation involving the financial institution and 
aggregating $25,000 or more regardless of whether the institution has a substantial basis 
for identifying possible suspects. 
• Any transaction conducted or attempted to be conducted through the financial 
institution when the institution has reason to suspect that (1) the funds were derived 
from illegal activities, (2) the transaction is designed to evade any regulations under the 
Bank Secrecy Act, or (3) the transaction appears to have no business purposes or appears 
unusual in normal banking practice. 
 
When a financial institution reports a suspicious transaction to a government agency, the Act 
(18, U.S.C., § 5318(g)(2)) makes it illegal for the financial institution to notify any person 
involved in the suspicious transaction that such a report has been made.  
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1628                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Section 5318(g)(3) of the BSA also contains a safe harbor provision for financial institutions 
that report suspicious transactions or that make voluntary disclosures to a government 
agency of any other possible violation of a law or regulation. The Act provides that these 
financial institutions shall not be liable under any law, regulation, or contract to any person 
for making the report. Note that this safe harbor provision only applies to reports made to 
government agencies, not to self-regulatory organizations.  
 
A copy of the SAR report form is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
MONEY SERVICES BUSINESSES 
Even before the passage of the PATRIOT Act, the Treasury Department was in the process 
of expanding its reporting guidelines to include businesses that did not fall under the 
traditional definition of financial institutions but nevertheless perform a myriad of financial 
services. One of these categories included money services businesses (MSBs), which comprise 
various types of money transmitters, issuers of money orders and traveler’s checks, and 
check cashing businesses. MSBs have long been  required to file CTRs, but otherwise very 
little government regulation has been required.  
 
In August 1999, many of the reporting and registration obligations contained in the Bank 
Secrecy Act were extended to MS Bs. These businesses are now required to register with 
FinCEN under Chapter 31, C.F.R. part 103, subchapter D. Those that fail to register can 
incur substantial penalties.  
 
Under the rules (1) money transmitters, (2) issuers, sellers, and redeemers of money orders, 
(3) issuers, sellers, and redeemers of traveler’s checks, and (4) the U.S. Postal Service (except 
with regard to the sale of postage or philatelic products) are required to report certain classes 
of transactions that meet certain dollar thresholds to the Department of the Treasury after 
January 1, 2002.  
 
The reportable transactions include: 
• Transactions involving funds derived from illegal activity or intended or conducted in 
order to hide or disguise funds or assets derived from illegal activity; 
• Transactions designed, whether through structuring or other means, to evade the 
requirements of the BSA;  
• Transactions that appear to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose; and 
• Transactions that involve the use of a mutual fund to facilitate criminal activity. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1629 
The rule includes two different dollar thresholds depending on the stage and type of 
transaction involved: 
• For transactions conducted or attempted by, at, or through a money service business or 
its agent, a threshold of $2,000 applies; 
• For transactions identified by issuers of money orders or traveler’s checks from a review 
of clearance records or other similar records of instruments that have been sold or 
processed, a threshold of $5,000 applies. 
 
MSBs are given 30 days after becoming aware of a suspicious transaction to complete a 
Suspicious Activity Report by Money Services  Business (SAR-MSB; Form 109) and file it 
with FinCEN; in situations involving violations that require immediate attention, such as 
ongoing money laundering schemes, the MSB or MSBs are to notify the appropriate law 
enforcement authority immediately, by telephone, in addition to filing the required form. 
Supporting documentation relating to each SAR-MSB is to be collected and maintained by 
the reporting MSB for review as needed by law enforcement and regulatory agencies. 
Although the SAR-MSB form is not formatted for joint filing, MSBs may be included as 
joint filers with other reporting financial institutions. 
 
CURRENCY EXCHANGES 
In a rule issued February 10, 2003, U.S. currency exchanges are required to file Suspicious 
Activity Reports under the same rule that applies to money services businesses. 
 
MUTUAL FUNDS 
As part of the PATRIOT Act, mutual funds are also required to establish anti-money 
laundering programs. In May 2003, the Department of Treasury and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) issued a regulation requiring mutual funds to implement 
“reasonable measures” to establish customer identification procedures and to verify whether 
customers appear on lists of any known or suspected terrorists.  
 
In May 2006, the Treasury Department issued fi nal approval to regulations that require 
mutual funds to report suspicious activities to FinCEN. Under these regulations, mutual 
funds are required to report suspicious currency and non-currency transactions (or 
attempted transactions) of $5,000 or more. The report would be filed on the “SAR-SF” 
(Suspicious Activity for Securities and Futures Industries) Form 101.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1630                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Rule states that four categories of transactions will require reporting. These are the same 
four categories that trigger reporting requirements for money service businesses and 
currency exchanges: 
• Transactions involving funds derived from criminal activity, or intended or conducted to 
hide or disguise funds from criminal activity; 
• Transactions designed to evade Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) requirements; 
• Transactions appearing to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose; or 
• Transactions involving the use of the mutual fund to facilitate criminal activity. 
 
SECURITIES BROKER-DEALERS 
In 2002, FinCEN announced a rule requiring brokers and dealers in securities to report 
suspicious activity via a Suspicious Activity Report by Securities and Futures Industries 
(SAR-SF; FinCEN Form 101). These firms are obligated to report suspicious transactions 
conducted or attempted by, at, or through a broker-dealer and involve or aggregate at least 
$5,000 in funds or assets. This requirement took effect December 31, 2002. 
 
Brokers and dealers in securities are required to report to FinCEN transactions that fall into 
one of the four categories below. Again, these categories are substantially similar to those 
that trigger reports by money service businesses and mutual funds (see above). 
• Transactions involving funds derived from illegal activity, or intended or conducted in 
order to hide or disguise funds derived from illegal activity; 
• Transactions designed, whether through structuring or other means, to evade the 
requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act; 
• Transactions that appear to serve no business or apparent lawful purpose or are not the 
sort of transactions in which the particular customer would be expected to engage, and 
for which the broker-dealer knows of no reasonable explanation after examining the 
available facts; or 
• Transactions that involve the use of the broker-dealer to facilitate criminal activity. 
 
Broker-dealers are also required to establish anti-money laundering programs that, among 
other things, are designed to detect suspicious transactions, under recently promulgated self-regulatory 
organization (SRO) rules. The SEC has the authority to examine broker-dealers 
for compliance with the rule, and it is expected that the SROs will also be reviewing 
compliance as part of the enforcement of their rules. 
 
A copy of SAR-SF is included at the end of the chapter. 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1631 
CASINOS AND CARD CLUBS 
Effective March 25, 2003, casinos and card clubs with gross revenue over $1,000,000 must 
file suspicious activity reports on form SAR-C. Under the rule, casinos and card clubs must 
report suspicious activity if a transaction involves or aggregates at least $5,000 in funds and if 
it meets one of the four categories that generally trigger SARs. (See previous sections on 
Financial Institutions, Money Service Businesses, Mutual Funds, etc.) 
 
Some possible examples of suspicious activity, according to FinCEN, include: 
• Using wire transfers and cashier’s checks to deposit funds into casino accounts and using 
the money for little or no gaming activity before cashing out; and 
• Transferring chips to other individuals to cash out, or redeeming chips for casino checks 
that total “significantly more” than the amount deposited with “no apparent winnings to 
account for the excess amount.” 
 
Casinos are also required to file Currency Transaction Reports via FinCEN Form 102 or the 
Nevada state form (see above). 
 
INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Although insurance companies have always fallen under the definition of a “financial 
institution” under the BSA, the Treasury Department had never issued any rules pertaining 
to the industry. The PATRIOT Act, however, requires that all “financial institutions” 
establish anti-money laundering programs, and it gives the Secretary of the Treasury the 
discretion to determine which institutions would be required to file SARs. 
 
In November 2005, FinCEN published rules pertaining to insurance companies that sell 
certain types of insurance products. The rules apply only to companies that sell “covered 
products” that FinCEN deemed to be more at risk for money laundering activities than 
other types of insurance products. Companies that sell these covered products are required 
to file SARs and to implement anti-money laundering programs. The rules define “covered 
products” as any of the following: 
• A permanent life insurance policy (other than a group policy); 
• An annuity contract (other than a group annuity contract); or 
• Any other insurance product with cash value or investment features. 
 
Group insurance products, term life, property, casualty, health, and title insurance policies 
are not considered “covered products.” 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1632                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Also, insurance companies must report suspicious activities to FinCEN. FinCEN Form 
108—Suspicious Activity Report by Insurance Companies—has been proposed; however, 
until the Form is approved, insurance companies should use the Suspicious Activity 
Reporting Form used by the securities and futures industries (FinCEN Form 101) to report 
suspicious activities. 
 
DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, OR JEWELS 
Persons who deal in jewels, precious metals, and precious stones are required to establish 
anti-money laundering programs. “Dealers” are defined as persons who have purchased at 
least $50,000 and  sold more than $50,000 worth of jewels, stones, or metals during the 
preceding year. Additionally, the person must also be in the business of selling significant 
amounts of such items; therefore, the rule wo uld not apply to occasional sellers or hobbyists. 
Dealers, however, are not required to file SARs. FinCEN is developing a set of final rules to 
address in more detail who is covered under the rule and what procedures will be required. 
 
Other Federal Laws Related to Money Laundering 
The fraud examiner should be aware of the federal laws that are typically involved when 
prosecuting a money laundering transaction. Most such schemes will involve one or more of 
the following: 
 
Structuring Transaction to Evade Reporting Requirements, Title 31, U.S.C., § 5324 
If a person causes or attempts to cause a covered institution to fail to file a required report 
with the purpose of evading the reporting requirements, such person can be fined under the 
provisions of 18, U.S.C., § 3571 and/or imprisoned up to five years. If the violation occurs 
in the course of violating another federal law or as part of a pattern of illegal conduct 
involving more than $100,000 in a 12-month period, then the amount of the fine under § 
3571 can be doubled and the prison time increased to up to 10 years.  
 
Section 3571 of Title 18 provides for fines for individuals convicted of a felony of up to 
$250,000 and fines for organizations of up to $500,000. Alternatively, a fine can be imposed 
up to twice the amount of the ill-gotten gain to the criminal or twice the amount of the loss 
to the victim. 
 
Bulk Cash Smuggling Into or Out of the United States, Title 31, U.S.C., § 5332   
Section 5332, which was created by section 371 of the PATRIOT Act, makes it illegal for 
anyone to knowingly conceal more than $10,000 in currency or other monetary instruments 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1633 
and transport or attempt to transport such currency into or out of the United States with the 
intent to evade a currency reporting requirement under 18, U.S.C., § 1956 (see below). 
Violators of these sections may be imprisoned up to five years and may be required to forfeit 
any property involved in the offense, or any property traceable thereto. 
 
Money Laundering Statutes, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1956 and §  1957 
TRANSACTIONAL MONEY LAUNDERING 
Section 1956(a)(1) provides that anyone who knows that property involved in a  
financial transaction represents the proceeds of some form of unlawful activity and conducts a 
financial transaction in any of the following ways:  
• With the intent to promote the carrying on of “specified unlawful activity” 
• With the intent to violate section 7201 (tax evasion) or 7206 (filing false return) of the 
Internal Revenue Code 
• Knowing that the transaction is designed to  conceal or disguise the nature, location, 
source, ownership, or control of the illegal proceeds 
• Knowing that the transaction is designed to avoid a reporting requirement 
 
Such individuals shall be fined up to $500,000 or twice the value of the monetary instrument 
or funds (whichever is greater) and/or imprisoned for not more than 20 years. “Specified 
unlawful activity” is defined in § 1956(c)(7) and includes a long list of federal crimes 
including RICO, fraud, embezzlement, theft, and false statements. Also, funds that are 
illegally transmitted in violation of this statute or any property traceable to those funds are 
subject to civil forfeiture under 18, U.S.C., § 981(a)(1)(A). 
 
INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORTATION AND LAUNDERING OF FUNDS 
Section 1956(a)(2) prohibits the transportation, transmission, or transfer of funds either into 
or out of the United States if the person knows the funds are the proceeds of unlawful 
activity and the transportation, transmission, or transfer is done with the intent to promote 
the carrying on of “specified unlawful conduct”; is done to conceal the nature, location, 
source, ownership, or control of the funds; or  is done to avoid reporting requirements. The 
penalties are the same as those set forth in subsection (a)(1). 
 
STING OPERATIONS 
Section 1956(a)(3) prohibits a person from engaging in financial transactions involving 
property the person believes  to be the proceeds of illegal activity. This is intended to cover 
“sting” operations in which a suspect engages in money laundering activity with funds he 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1634                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
believes to be illegally derived, even though the funds are actually supplied by government 
agents. The person can be imprisoned for up to 20 years and/or fined in accordance with 18, U.S.C., § 3571. 
 
ENGAGING IN MONETARY TRANSACTIONS WITH MONEY DERIVED FROM SPECIFIED UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY 
An offense occurs under section 1957 if a person knowingly engages or attempts to engage 
in a monetary transaction with criminally derived property that is greater than $10,000 and 
that is derived from “specified unlawful activity.” Section 1957 applies in situations where 
the offense takes place in the United States (or within its special maritime or territorial 
jurisdiction) or the offense takes place outside the U.S., but the defendant is a U.S. citizen or 
legal alien. 
 
Violations of this statute are punishable by a fine under 18, U.S.C., § 3571 and/or 10 years in 
prison. In addition, the illegally transmitted funds can be forfeited under 18, U.S.C., § 
981(a)(1)(A). 
 
CIVIL PENALTIES  
Section 1956(b) sets forth civil penalties for violations of sections 1956 and 1957. Under this 
section, those who violate either money laundering statute are liable to the United States for 
the value of the property, funds, or monetary instruments involved in the illegal transaction, 
or $10,000, whichever is greater.  
 
LONG-ARM JURISDICTION OVER FOREIGN MONEY LAUNDERERS 
Section 1956(b) also gives U.S. district courts jurisdiction over foreign persons or financial 
institutions when (1) the foreign person commits a money laundering offense under section 
1956(a) that occurs in whole or in part in the United States; (2) the foreign person converts 
to his own use property in which the United States has an ownership interest; or (3) the 
foreign financial institution maintains a bank account in the United States.  
 
Under section 1956(b)(3), a U.S. court can issue restraining orders to freeze the assets of 
foreign money launderers described above prior to trial to ensure that the defendant’s assets 
are available to satisfy a judgment. The court can also appoint a Federal Receiver to collect, 
marshal, and take control of the defendant’s assets to satisfy a civil or criminal judgment for 
money laundering, or a civil or criminal forfeiture judgment.  
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1635 
Prohibition of Illegal Money Transmitting Businesses—Title 18, U.S.C., § 1960 
This section prohibits the operation of a business that transfers funds by any means 
(whether by wire, check, or courier) if the business does not have the appropriate state 
license or fails to comply with the registration requirements established under Title 31 of the 
U.S. Code, section 5330. The offender can be fined under section 3571 of Title 18 and/or 
imprisoned not more than five years. Illegally transmitted funds can also be seized by the 
United States under 18, U.S.C., § 981(a)(1)(A). 
 
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO)—Title 18, U.S.C., §§ 1961–
 1968 
Violations of the money laundering crimes statutes (18, U.S.C., §§ 1956 and 1957) and 
certain violations of the Bank Secrecy Act are predicate offenses constituting “racketeering 
activity.” These acts can be prosecuted under the RICO statute, which includes criminal 
penalties of up to 20 years in prison and/or fines under section 3571 of Title 18. The statute 
also provides for a civil cause of action by “any person injured in his business or property” 
as a result of a violation of RICO. Remedies  include treble damages and attorney’s fees. 
 
Seizures and Forfeitures—Title 18, U.S.C., § 981, et seq. 
Section 981 provides for the civil seizure and forfeiture of property involved in certain 
crimes including money laundering. Section 982 deals with criminal forfeitures. Forfeiture may 
be defined as “the taking by the government of property that is illegally used or acquired, 
without compensating the owner.” These remedies are only available to the government and 
typically are used in connection with a criminal investigation and prosecution.  
 
When a piece of property is forfeited, all right, title, and interest in the property vests in the 
government; consequently, all the defendant’s ownership rights are extinguished. The 
transfer of rights dates back to the moment when the property became forfeitable; i.e., when 
the crime was committed. Any subsequent transfer by the defendant is of no effect. This is 
known as the relation back doctrine. In the eyes of the law, the subsequent judicial proceedings 
merely confirm that a forfeiture has, in theory, already taken place (although the government 
cannot claim any rights in the property until it receives a forfeiture judgment). Because the 
government’s right to the property and related proceeds dates back to when the crime was 
committed, the government is legally entitled to any gain accruing from the proceeds of the 
illegal activity.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1636                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal forfeitures are conducted in conjunction with a criminal trial. The proof necessary 
to perfect the forfeiture is the same as required to convict the individual of the criminal 
charge, that is, proof beyond a reasonable doubt. The criminal forfeiture is an action in 
personam (against the person). In such a proceeding the government has the same burden of 
proof as it does in a criminal case. If the government sustains a conviction, the judge will 
forfeit the property at time of sentencing, at which time the property can be seized. 
Civil forfeitures are conducted independently from a criminal proceeding. A civil forfeiture is 
an action in rem  (against the property). In response to perceived abuses on the part of the 
government, Congress passed the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act of 2000, which 
drastically amended the laws concerning civil forfeiture.  
 
Below are some of the highlights of the Act: 
• Sets forth notification requirements with respect to seized property and civil forfeiture 
proceedings, including a requirement that the government notify interested parties as 
soon as practicable but within 60 days after the date of the seizure. 
• Sets forth procedures for filing claims for seized property. After a claim is filed, the 
government has 90 days in which to file a complaint for forfeiture. If the government 
fails to do this, then it must return the property. In lieu of or in addition to filing a  
civil forfeiture complaint, the government may include a forfeiture allegation in a 
criminal indictment.  
• Provides that the court appoint counsel to represent anyone with an interest in the 
property if the person is financially unable to afford counsel. 
• Places the burden of proof on the government to establish, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that the property is subject to forfeiture.  
• Provides that if the forfeiture action is being prosecuted because the property was used 
to commit or facilitate the commission of a criminal offense, or was involved in such 
commission, the government must establish that there was a substantial connection 
between the property and the offense.  
• Provides an “innocent owner’s” defense to the forfeiture action. The owner must prove 
his innocence by a preponderance of the evidence. 
• Authorizes a claimant to petition the court to determine whether a forfeiture was 
constitutionally excessive. Directs the court to compare the forfeiture to the gravity of 
the offense. Places upon the claimant the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of 
the evidence at a hearing conducted by the court without a jury, that the forfeiture is 
grossly disproportional to the offense upon the claimant.  
• Amends the Federal Tort Claims Act to allow claimants to sue the government for any 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1637 
damage or loss of property while in possession of the government. 
• Authorizes the use of forfeited property to pay restitution to any victim of the offense 
giving rise to the forfeiture, including, in the case of a money laundering offense, any 
offense constituting the underlying specified activity.  
• Directs that all civil forfeitures of real property and interests in real property proceed as 
judicial forfeitures. Prohibits (with exceptions) (1) real property that is the subject of a 
civil forfeiture from being seized before entry of a forfeiture order; and (2) the owners or 
occupants of the real property from being evicted from, or otherwise deprived of the use 
and enjoyment of, real property that is the subject of a pending forfeiture action.  
• Provides for the forfeiture of the proceeds of “specified unlawful activity” under the 
money laundering statutes.  
 
FORFEITURE OF FUNDS IN INTERBANK ACCOUNTS 
Section 319 of the PATRIOT Act amended 18, U.S.C., § 981, expanding the United States’ 
ability to seize the proceeds of money laundering activity by providing for forfeiture of funds 
held in United States interbank accounts. An interbank account is an account one financial 
institution holds at another financial institution.  
 
If funds involved in a money laundering transaction or the proceeds of any “specified 
unlawful activity” as defined by the money laundering statute are deposited in a foreign bank, 
and if that foreign bank has an interbank account in the United States, then the tainted funds 
will be deemed to have been deposited into the U.S. account. In other words, the funds in 
the foreign bank’s U.S. interbank account can be seized, even if the laundered money was 
not deposited in that account. The government does not have to trace the money in the U.S. 
interbank account to the money that was deposited in the foreign account. It is enough that 
the U.S. interbank account is held by the same financial institution in which the laundered 
money was deposited overseas.  
 
False Statements—Title 18, U.S.C., § 1001 
Persons who violate the Bank Secrecy Act and other reporting laws might also be guilty of 
violating of 18, U.S.C., § 1001, which is the prin cipal federal false statements statute. Because 
most of the obligations imposed by the BSA involve recordkeeping and reporting, many 
BSA violations might also constitute false statements. Section 1001 prohibits knowingly 
falsifying, concealing, covering up, or making a false, fictitious, or fraudulent statement or 
representation in any matter within the jurisdiction of any U.S. department or agency. 
Violations of this section are often charged when  an individual is stopped at the border with 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1638                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
a large amount of unreported cash and responds falsely to the questions of customs officers 
or inspectors. It has been used to prosecute individuals for structuring a transaction so that it 
deceives a financial institution into filing a false report. 
 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States — Title 18, U.S.C., § 371 
Although numerous federal statutes make conspiracy a crime, the most commonly used 
federal conspiracy statute is the general conspiracy statute under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. 
Code.  
 
Section 371 can be divided into two parts: (1) conspiracies to commit a crime against the 
United States, and (2) conspiracies to defraud the United States or its agencies. Several 
courts have upheld convictions based on the second prong of the statute solely for failure to 
file CTRs. Such prosecutions are based on the theory that the person deprived the IRS of 
accurate CTRs. In the case of United States v. Richter, 610 F.Supp. 480 (N.D. Ill. 1985), the 
court held that the division of large amounts of cash into smaller, nonreportable transactions 
by several individuals working as a team was a conspiracy to obstruct the government 
function of receiving CTRs. However, other courts have rejected this theory on the grounds 
that there is no duty on the part of the customer to inform the government or the bank of 
the nature of the transaction whether reportable or not. 
 
Travel Act — Title 18, U.S.C., § 1952 
The Travel Act is applicable if the offense involves the proceeds of illegal activity and 
interstate travel. The Act provides that it is an offense to travel in interstate or foreign 
commerce or use the mail with the intent to distribute the proceeds of any unlawful activity; 
commit any crime of violence to further unlawful activity; or otherwise establish, promote, 
or manage an establishment for the purposes of carrying on any unlawful activity. Unlawful 
activity  is defined to include the reporting requirements under 31, U.S.C., Chapter 53 as well 
as the Money Laundering Statutes (18, U.S. C., §§ 1956 and 1957). The fines established 
under § 3571 can be imposed and/or up to five years imprisonment. If a crime of violence is 
involved, the term of imprisonment increases to a maximum of 20 years or life if someone 
was killed. 
 
State Laws 
Approximately 30 states have enacted statutes that criminalize money laundering, most of 
which apply to businesspeople and professionals. Some of the state statutes are broader than 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1639 
the federal statutes, and they are often enforced more aggressively than their federal 
counterparts.  
 
Many states have criminalized attempted  money laundering with the same penalties as the 
completed crime. Some states contain a “sting provision,” which enables the prosecution of 
activity even though the laundered money is not actually derived from criminal activity, but 
rather supplied by government agents as part of a sting operation. Several states have also 
enacted legislation requiring financial institutions and businesses to file currency transaction 
reports that mirror the federal reports. Some require duplicate filing with the states; others 
are satisfied with the federal filing. 
 
 



:


feder and state law
patriot act of 2001
on octob 26 2001 pre sident georg w bush sign into law the unit and strengthen
america by provid appropri tool requir to intercept and obstruct terror act the
patriot act the patriot act wa a respons to the tragedi of septemb 11 2001
and reflect congression concern with the monei launder activ of the terrorist
who commit those attack
titl iii of the act is entitl the intern monei launder abat and anti
terrorist financ act of 2001 titl iii creat signific requir for financi
institut aim at curtail monei launder the most signific antimonei
launder provis of the law includ the follow
financi institut ar requir to establish antimonei launder program
financi institut ar requir to establish program for identifi custom
monei launder financi transact
11616 2011 fraud examin manual
us bank ar prohibit from maintain correspond account with foreign shell
bank
secur brokerdeal ar requir to file suspici activ report
financi institut ar requir to adopt special due dilig procedur for foreign
correspond account and privat bank account
nonfinanci busi ar requir to file currenc transact report
financi institut have increas author to share custom inform relat to
monei launder
the govern ha greater power to obtain inform from financi institut
antimonei launder program
section 352 of the patriot act requir all financi institut to establish antimonei
launder program which must includ at a minimum
the develop of intern polici procedur and control to prevent monei
launder
the design of a monei launder complianc offic
an ongo train program for awar of monei launder
an independ audit function to test the program
the act defin the term financi institut broadli to includ not onli insur and
commerci bank but also secur broker and dealer invest compani currenc
exchang issuer of cashier check and monei order credit card compani insur
compani travel agenc and a host of other busi the complet list can be found at
31 usc 312 a2
identif and verif of accounthold
section 326 of the act expand the bank secreci act discuss below by requir
financi institut to implement custom identif program cip these cip ar
to be incorpor into financi institut monei launder program and at a
minimum thei must includ reason procedur for
verifi the ident of ani person seek to open an account to the extent reason
and practic
maintain record of the inform us to verifi a person ident includ
name address and other identifi inform and
consult list of known or suspect terrorist or terrorist organ to determin
if the person seek to open the account appear on ani such list
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11617
prohibit against foreign shell bank account
pursuant to section 313 and 319 of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a
farreach final regul that appli to over 9000 foreign financi institut that have
correspond account in the unit state the rule prohibit foreign shell bank those
without a physic presenc in ani countri from maintain correspond account at ani
us financi institut it also requir us financi intuit to maintain the name and
contact inform of the owner of the foreign bank for whom thei maintain
correspond account the rule strongli encourag us intuit to obtain
certif from their foreign bank custom s the certif can be us by the us
institut to help ensur that the custom is not a shell bank although not requir
obtain the certif and verifi the inform can creat a safe harbor from civil
liabil
us institut ar also requir to take reason step to ensur that correspond
account provid to foreign bank ar not us to provid servic indirectli to foreign
shell bank foreign bank that have account in the us ar requir to appoint someon in
the us to accept servic of legal process the rule also give the secretari of the treasuri
and the attornei gener the author to issu a summon or subpoena to ani foreign bank
that maintain a correspond account here and to request record relat to that account
suspici activ report by brokerdeal
pursuant to section 356 of the act the financi crime enforc network fincen
adopt rule requir broker and dealer in secur to report suspici activ 31
cfr 10319a2 thi report requir will be discuss in more detail later in thi
section see secur brokerdeal un der suspici activ report below
special due dilig for foreign account
section 312 of the patriot act requir financ ial institut to establish due dilig
polici procedur and control that ar reason design to detect and report instanc
of monei launder through certain account held by nonu citizen or their
repres thi provis appli to two type of foreign account
privat bank account
correspond account
a privat bank account is defin by the act as an account or combin of account that
1 requir a minimum aggreg deposit of fund or other asset of at least 1 million 2 is
monei launder financi transact
11618 2011 fraud examin manual
establish on behalf of on or more individu who have a direct or benefici ownership
in the account and 3 is assign to or admini stere by an offic employe or agent of the
financi institut act as a liaison between the financi institut and the owner of the
account
for privat bank account held by nonu person the act requir at a minimum that
financi institut take reason step to
ascertain the ident of the nomin and benefici owner of the account and the
sourc of fund deposit into the account as need to guard against monei launder
and report ani suspici transact and
conduct enhanc scrutini of ani such account that is request or maintain by or
on behalf of a senior foreign polit figur or an immedi famili member or close
associ of such that is reason design to detect and report transact that mai
involv the proce of foreign corrupt
a correspond account is defin as an account establish to receiv deposit from or make
payment on behalf of a foreign financi institut or handl other financi transact
relat to such an institut enhanc due dilig is requir for correspond account
maintain by or on behalf of foreign bank that oper under offshor bank licens or
for bank that ar licens by foreign countri that have either been design as
noncoop with intern antimonei launder principl or that have been
design by the secretari of the treasuri as warrant special measur due to monei
launder concern enhanc due dilig for these correspond account consist of
at a minimum
ascertain the ident of the owner of ani foreign bank whose share ar not
publicli trade
determin the natur and extent of each owner interest
conduct enhanc scrutini of the account to guard against monei launder and
report suspici transact and
ascertain whether the foreign bank provid correspond account to other
foreign bank and if so the ident of those foreign bank and relat due
dilig inform
currenc report by nonfinanci busi
section 365 of the patriot act requir person engag in ani trade or busi to file a
report with fincen when in the cours of their busi thei receiv more than 10000 in
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11619
coin or currenc thi report requir is discuss in more detail later in thi section
under the report and recordkeep provis of the bank secreci act
share inform between financi institut
pursuant to section 314b of the patriot act the treasuri depart issu a rule
allow financi institut to share custom inform with on anoth the term
financi institut includ ani entiti that is requir to have an antimonei launder
program under the bank secreci act see abov in order to share inform with anoth
financi institut the share institut must follow these step
file a prescrib notic form with fincen state that it intend to share custom
inform with other financi institut the notic remain effect for on year
the institut mai then share the inform with anoth institut provid that it
ha verifi that the other institut ha also file a notic with fincen fincen will
period releas a list of institut who have submit notic if an institut is
on the list then the share institut will be consid to have fulfil it
verif duti
the institut must ensur that the share inform is secur and not us for ani
purpos other than to identifi and where appropri report on monei launder or
terrorist activ determin whether to establish or maintain an account or conduct a
transact or assist the other share institut with it complianc of bsa regul
the institut must also file a suspici activ report if base on the share
inform the institut suspect that the individu or entiti mai be involv in
monei launder or terrorist activ
section 355 of the act also permit insur depositori institut to share inform in
written employ refer about known or suspect unlaw activ of their current or
former director offic employe agent or other person affili with the institut
thi provis which is codifi at 12 usc 1828w doe not make it mandatori for
bank to disclos thi inform but it doe protect them from liabil if thei voluntarili
make such disclosur as long as the disclosur ar not made with malici intent
govern access to financi inform
on septemb 18 2002 the treasuri depart issu regul that provid feder law
enforc agenc with greater power to obtain financi inform the twopart
regul is an amend to the bank secreci act regul and wa mandat by
section 314 of the patriot act
monei launder financi transact
11620 2011 fraud examin manual
if a feder agenc provid fincen with a written certif that a person entiti or
organ about whom inform is sought is reason suspect base on credibl
inform to be engag in terrorist acti viti or monei launder fincen mai then
requir ani financi institut to search it record to determin if it maintain or ha
maintain account for or ha engag in transact with the subject
the inform report is limit to the name or account number of each cite person
entiti or organ the number of the match account or transact and the social
secur number taxpay id passport number date of birth or other identifi
inform the subject gave when open the account or conduct the transact
the institut mai not disclos the inform to anyon other than fincen or the
request agenc the institut also cannot disclos that the inform ha been
request or provid it mai howev us the inform in the request to determin
whether an account will be open or a transact conduct and to compli with
bsa regul
the term financi institut is defin as it is under the bsa and includ bank brokerdeal
insur compani monei servic busi as well as car and airplan dealer
travel agent and pawnbrok
offic of foreign asset control ofac
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depar tment of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu that sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain over 5000 variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
on septemb 24 2001 presid georg w bush issu an execut order impos
enhanc trade sanction on 27 individu and entiti includ osama bin laden and al
qaeda the immedi effect of the order is to block all asset of these individu and
entiti under us control and ban all deal with the list parti
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11621
on juli 26 2001 ofac issu a bulletin specif to the insur industri includ
underwrit broker agent primari insur and reinsur the bulletin affirm that us
insur mai not insur sdn or individu or entiti locat in certain prohibit
countri or make payment to beneficiari who ar design as prohibit person or
entiti exampl of prohibit transact includ 1 issu an insur polici or
annuiti contract to an sdn 2 issu a life insur polici name an sdn as a
beneficiari and 3 receiv premium payment for ani such transact
the bank secreci act
the bank secreci act bsa which went into effect in 1970 wa the first major piec of
legisl aim at detect and prevent monei launder the purpos of the law as
state in section 5311 is to requir certain re port or record where thei have a high degre
of us in crimin tax or regulatori investig or proceed the bsa set
forth a system of report and recordkeep requir design to help track larg or
unusu financi transact
the bsa consist of two titl titl i contain provis requir that financi institut
and secur broker and dealer keep extens record of the transact and account of
their custom it is codifi in titl 12 of the unit state code usc section 1829b
and 19511959 titl ii of the bsa origin entitl currenc and foreign transact
report act requir bank financi institut which includ casino secur
broker and dealer currenc exchang and other and in some case individu to
report to the govern certain transact titl ii is codifi at 31 usc 5311
5330
for more inform on the examin process and the complianc procedur financi
institut ar requir to follow pleas review the bank secreci actantimonei
launder examin manual publish by the feder financi institut
examin council it is avail for view on their websit wwwffiecgov
titl i recordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani financi transact of more
than 10000
monei launder financi transact
11622 2011 fraud examin manual
these regul provid in part that bank must keep for five year an origin microfilm
or other copi of certain document relat to demand deposit and check and save
account the record that must be retain includ
signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw
copi of both side of custom check bank draft monei order and cashier
check of more than 100 drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
ident of each purchas of a certif of deposit
each deposit slip or credit ticket reflect a transact in excess of 100
in addit to these requir financi institut ar requir to captur verifi and
retain inform on the ident of purchas of monetari instrument such as cashier
check in amount of 3000 or more or ani transmitt or transfer of fund involv
3000 or more these record ar also requir to be kept for five year
bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a custom
check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit ticket thei
must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check deposit to a
custom check account
although some of these requir appli onli to check written or deposit made in
excess of 100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all such item rather than sort out
those less than 100 the bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a
record of ani extens of credit more than 1 0000 as well as each transfer of 10000 or
more outsid the unit state
the penalti for failur to compli with these recordkeep requir ar sever ani
insur depositori institut and ani director offic or employe who willfulli or through
gross neglig violat ani regul can be subject to a 10000 civil penalti the statut
further provid that a separ violat occur for each dai the violat continu and at
each offic branch or place of busi at which the violat occur if a violat is
commit in further of a feloni crime crimin penalti can be impos of up to five
year in prison andor a fine of not more than 10000
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11623
titl ii report and recordkeep
titl ii of the bank secreci act is codifi as 31 usc 53115330 the purpos of
these section is to requir certain report or record to be file or kept by financi
institut section 5312a2 defin financi institut veri broadli to includ not
onli bank but also secur broker currenc exchang hous insur compani loan
compani travel agenc telegraph compani issuer or cashier of check or monei
order auto boat and airplan dealer casino and person involv in real estat close
and settlement onli recent ha the treasuri depart begun to reign in much of the
nonfinanci institut transact busi in the us by requir registr of these
divers enterpris see the monei servic busi excerpt below
the regul promulg by the us treasuri depart ar contain primarili in
chapter 31 of the code of feder regul at part 103 subpart b and requir the
follow report
currenc transact report ctr fincen form 104
all bank and certain other financi institut ar requir to fill out currenc transact
report ctr whenev there is a currenc transact deposit withdraw exchang or
cash of check of 10000 or more the easiest wai to summar the file requir is
to rememb if currenc in excess of 10000 is brought into a financi institut to conduct
a transact or if as the result of a transact 10000 in currenc leav the financi
institut a ctr must be file
fincen form 104 formerli name ir form 4789 is prepar by the financi institut
and contain the name of the individu conduct the transact or the name of
the person or organ on whose behalf the transact is be conduct as well as
all identifi data of these individu or entiti it also requir the detail of the transact
and identifi data of the financi institut prepar the form for purpos of report
multipl transact must be treat as a singl transact if the financi institut ha
knowledg that the transact ar by or on behalf of the same person and the amount total
more than 10000 dure ani on busi dai
under titl 31 usc section 5313 the treasuri depart publish a mandatori
exempt list that specif identifi entiti whose transact with a financi
institut ar exempt from these report requir the exempt entiti includ
bank depart or agenc of state or feder govern and other busi whose
monei launder financi transact
11624 2011 fraud examin manual
report have littl or no valu for law enforc purpos the exempt list must be
publish period in the feder regist
the treasuri depart can also provid discretionari exempt for qualifi busi
custom which ar defin as busi that 1 maintain transact account as defin
by the feder reserv act at the particular institut 2 frequent engag in transact
with the institut that ar subject to the report requir and 3 meet the guidelin
and criteria establish by the treasuri depart to ensur that the failur to file report on
these entiti will not interfer with the purpos of the act
a copi of form 104 is includ at the end of thi chapter
currenc report by casino fincen form 102
form 102 formerli name ir form 8362 is requir to be file by casino licens by
state or local govern and have an annual gross revenu in excess of 1000000
nevada casino ar exempt from file these form becaus of a strict state law that requir
report for currenc transact the file requir and transact detail for thi
form ar almost ident to form 104
currenc report by nonfinanci busi ir form 8300
the patriot act creat titl 31 section 5331 of the us code which requir person
engag in ani trade or busi to file a report with fincen when in the cours of their
busi thei receiv more than 10000 in coin or currenc either in on transact or in
two or more relat transact for purpos of comput the amount of multipl relat
transact the recipi must aggreg all payment made within on year of the first
payment transact cover by thi section must be report within 15 dai of receipt of
payment in excess of 10000 the rule govern ing these report ar codifi at 31 cfr
10330
thi section doe not appli to financi institut which ar alreadi cover by 31 usc
5313 as describ abov it also doe not appli to transact occur entir outsid
the unit state in addit the rule exempt certain loan instal sale and down
payment plan
the inform requir to be report under section 5331 is veri similar to the
inform that wa alreadi requir by the ir under section 6050i of the intern
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11625
revenu code becaus of the similar between the two statut the report ar to be
made on the same form 8300 which is file jointli with fincen and the ir essenti
the rule impos no new recordkeep burden sinc form 8300 alreadi had to be file
with the ir
under the intern revenu code there ar both civil and crimin penalti for failur to
file form 8300 or file a fals form crimin sanction includ imprison of up to five
year for a will failur to file and fine of up to 500000 for organ knowingli
file a fals return
report of intern transport of currenc or monetari instrument custom cmir fincen form 105
pursuant to titl 31 usc 5316 a person shall file a report if he transport or is about to
transport monetari instrument of more than 10000 into or out of the unit state at on
time or if he receiv by transport mail or shipment monetari instrument in excess of
10000 at on time transport into the unit sate from a place outsid the unit state
fincen form 105 formerli name custom form 4790 is to be file at the time of
transport or within 15 dai of receipt
for the purpos of thi statut the term monetari instrument mean unit state and
foreign coin and currenc bearer instrument such as busi bank or person check
monei order promissori note bearer stock and bond
there ar exempt from the cmir filin g requir that extend to bank for
transfer of fund through normal bank procedur the feder reserv and certain
common carrier
a copi of thi form is includ at the end of thi chapter
report of foreign bank and financi account fbartreasuri form 90221
treasuri depart regul requir citizen of the unit state and resid alien to
file a report when thei maintain a financi interest or signatur author over a foreign bank
account with a balanc of more than 10000 dure the calendar year account in differ
foreign countri have to be aggreg
monei launder financi transact
11626 2011 fraud examin manual
penalti
section 5321 of the bsa set forth the civil penalti for noncompli with the act a
cover entiti includ it partner director offic or employe that willfulli violat
the report requir can be hit with a penalti of up to the amount of the transact
not to exce 100000 or 25000 whichev is greater a separ penalti can be impos
for each dai the violat continu and at each branch or offic civil penalti of up to
500 ar also author for a neglig violati on if there is a pattern of neglig activ
the penalti limit increas to 50000 thi section also set forth other penalti applic
to structur transact and foreign financi agenc transact
crimin penalti ar set forth in section 5322 which provid that a person willfulli
violat the statut or regul can be fine up to 250000 andor imprison for up to
five year if the violat occur while violat anoth feder law or as a pattern of illeg
activ involv more than 100000 the maximum fine increas to 500000 and the
maximum prison time increas to 10 year as with the civil penalti a separ violat
occur each dai the conduct continu and at each locat
forfeitur
section 5317c provid crimin and civil forfeitur penalti for violat of the currenc
report requir in 5313 report on domest transact 5316 report on
export and import monetari instrument and 5324 structur transact to
evad report requir a person convict of an offens under ani of these statut
or of a conspiraci to violat ani of these statut can be order to forfeit all properti that
wa involv in the offens and ani properti traceabl thereto
suspici activ report sar
financi institut
the bsa also requir financi institut to monitor suspici activ and file suspici
activ report sar to disclos known or suspect crimin offens or transact that
involv monei launder or violat the act for year suspici transact were
report on the currenc transact report ctr howev such activ is now report
us the suspici activ report sar
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which charter regul and
supervis more than 2500 nation bank adopt a requir mandat that nation
bank file sar with the appropri feder law enforc agenc and the treasuri
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11627
depart in accord with the form instruct by send the report to the
financi crime enforc network fincen these report requir ar found
in titl 12 part 353 of the code of feder regul thi is an enorm improv
on the old report system becaus it establish a central report system that is
share throughout govern agenc simultan the dea for instanc can now
access the same inform as the ir when work on a suspici report the report
procedur ha also been simplifi for bank make the inform much easier for the
depart of the treasuri to obtain
financi institut ar also requir to us sar form to report incid of comput
intrus the term comput intrus is defin as gain access to the comput
system to remov steal or procur custom fund or other account inform or to
access the institut comput system with the intent of damag or disabl ani
critic comput system
sar ar us to report a known or suspect crimin offens or a transact that involv
monei launder or violat the bsa more specif a sar must be file with fincen
in each of the follow instanc
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut when the
institut ha a substanti basi for identifi on of it director offic employe
agent or affili parti as have commit the act or aid in it commiss
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut and
aggreg 5000 or more when the institut ha a substanti basi for identifi a
possibl suspect or group of suspect
ani known or suspect crimin violat involv the financi institut and
aggreg 25000 or more regardless of whether the institut ha a substanti basi
for identifi possibl suspect
ani transact conduct or attempt to be conduct through the financi
institut when the institut ha reason to suspect that 1 the fund were deriv
from illeg activ 2 the transact is design to evad ani regul under the
bank secreci act or 3 the transact appear to have no busi purpos or appear
unusu in normal bank practic
when a financi institut report a suspici transact to a govern agenc the act
18 usc 5318g2 make it illeg for the financi institut to notifi ani person
involv in the suspici transact that such a report ha been made
monei launder financi transact
11628 2011 fraud examin manual
section 5318g3 of the bsa also contain a safe harbor provis for financi institut
that report suspici transact or that make voluntari disclosur to a govern
agenc of ani other possibl violat of a law or regul the act provid that these
financi institut shall not be liabl under ani law regul or contract to ani person
for make the report note that thi safe harbor provis onli appli to report made to
govern agenc not to selfregulatori organ
a copi of the sar report form is includ at the end of thi chapter
monei servic busi
even befor the passag of the patriot act the treasuri depart wa in the process
of expand it report guidelin to includ busi that did not fall under the
tradit definit of financi institut but nevertheless perform a myriad of financi
servic on of these categori includ monei servic busi msb which compris
variou type of monei transmitt issuer of monei order and travel check and
check cash busi msb have long been requir to file ctr but otherwis veri
littl govern regul ha been requir
in august 1999 mani of the report and registr oblig contain in the bank
secreci act were extend to ms bs these busi ar now requir to regist with
fincen under chapter 31 cfr part 103 subchapt d those that fail to regist can
incur substanti penalti
under the rule 1 monei transmitt 2 issuer seller and redeem of monei order
3 issuer seller and redeem of travel check and 4 the us postal servic except
with regard to the sale of postag or philatel product ar requir to report certain class
of transact that meet certain dollar threshold to the depart of the treasuri after
januari 1 2002
the report transact includ
transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or intend or conduct in
order to hide or disguis fund or asset deriv from illeg activ
transact design whether through structur or other mean to evad the
requir of the bsa
transact that appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos and
transact that involv the us of a mutual fund to facilit crimin activ
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11629
the rule includ two differ dollar threshold depend on the stage and type of
transact involv
for transact conduct or attempt by at or through a monei servic busi or
it agent a threshold of 2000 appli
for transact identifi by issuer of monei order or travel check from a review
of clearanc record or other similar record of instrument that have been sold or
process a threshold of 5000 appli
msb ar given 30 dai after becom awar of a suspici transact to complet a
suspici activ report by monei servic busi sarmsb form 109 and file it
with fincen in situat involv violat that requir immedi attent such as
ongo monei launder scheme the msb or msb ar to notifi the appropri law
enforc author immedi by telephon in addit to file the requir form
support document relat to each sarmsb is to be collect and maintain by
the report msb for review as need by law enforc and regulatori agenc
although the sarmsb form is not format for joint file msb mai be includ as
joint filer with other report financi institut
currenc exchang
in a rule issu februari 10 2003 us currenc exchang ar requir to file suspici
activ report under the same rule that appli to monei servic busi
mutual fund
as part of the patriot act mutual fund ar also requir to establish antimonei
launder program in mai 2003 the depart of treasuri and the secur and
exchang commiss sec issu a regul requir mutual fund to implement
reason measur to establish custom identif procedur and to verifi whether
custom appear on list of ani known or suspect terrorist
in mai 2006 the treasuri depart issu fi nal approv to regul that requir
mutual fund to report suspici activ to fincen under these regul mutual
fund ar requir to report suspici currenc and noncurr transact or
attempt transact of 5000 or more the report would be file on the sarsf
suspici activ for secur and futur industri form 101
monei launder financi transact
11630 2011 fraud examin manual
the rule state that four categori of transact will requir report these ar the same
four categori that trigger report requir for monei servic busi and
currenc exchang
transact involv fund deriv from crimin activ or intend or conduct to
hide or disguis fund from crimin activ
transact design to evad bank secreci act bsa requir
transact appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos or
transact involv the us of the mutual fund to facilit crimin activ
secur brokerdeal
in 2002 fincen announc a rule requir broker and dealer in secur to report
suspici activ via a suspici activ report by secur and futur industri
sarsf fincen form 101 these firm ar oblig to report suspici transact
conduct or attempt by at or through a brokerdeal and involv or aggreg at least
5000 in fund or asset thi requir took effect decemb 31 2002
broker and dealer in secur ar requir to report to fincen transact that fall into
on of the four categori below again these categori ar substanti similar to those
that trigger report by monei servic busi and mutual fund see abov
transact involv fund deriv from illeg activ or intend or conduct in
order to hide or disguis fund deriv from illeg activ
transact design whether through structur or other mean to evad the
requir of the bank secreci act
transact that appear to serv no busi or appar law purpos or ar not the
sort of transact in which the particular custom would be expect to engag and
for which the brokerdeal know of no reason explan after examin the
avail fact or
transact that involv the us of the brokerdeal to facilit crimin activ
brokerdeal ar also requir to establish antimonei launder program that among
other thing ar design to detect suspici transact under recent promulg selfregulatori
organ sro rule the sec ha the author to examin brokerdeal
for complianc with the rule and it is expect that the sro will also be review
complianc as part of the enforc of their rule
a copi of sarsf is includ at the end of the chapter
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11631
casino and card club
effect march 25 2003 casino and card club with gross revenu over 1000000 must
file suspici activ report on form sarc under the rule casino and card club must
report suspici activ if a transact involv or aggreg at least 5000 in fund and if
it meet on of the four categori that gener trigger sar see previou section on
financi institut monei servic busi mutual fund etc
some possibl exampl of suspici activ accord to fincen includ
us wire transfer and cashier check to deposit fund into casino account and us
the monei for littl or no game activ befor cash out and
transfer chip to other individu to cash out or redeem chip for casino check
that total significantli more than the amount deposit with no appar win to
account for the excess amount
casino ar also requir to file currenc transact report via fincen form 102 or the
nevada state form see abov
insur compani
although insur compani have alwai fallen under the definit of a financi
institut under the bsa the treasuri depart had never issu ani rule pertain
to the industri the patriot act howev requir that all financi institut
establish antimonei launder program and it give the secretari of the treasuri the
discret to determin which institut would be requir to file sar
in novemb 2005 fincen publish rule pertain to insur compani that sell
certain type of insur product the rule appli onli to compani that sell cover
product that fincen deem to be more at risk for monei launder activ than
other type of insur product compani that sell these cover product ar requir
to file sar and to implement antimonei launder program the rule defin cover
product as ani of the follow
a perman life insur polici other than a group polici
an annuiti contract other than a group annuiti contract or
ani other insur product with cash valu or invest featur
group insur product term life properti casualti health and titl insur polici
ar not consid cover product
monei launder financi transact
11632 2011 fraud examin manual
also insur compani must report suspici activ to fincen fincen form
108suspici activ report by insur companiesha been propos howev
until the form is approv insur compani should us the suspici activ
report form us by the secur and futur industri fincen form 101 to report
suspici activ
dealer in preciou metal stone or jewel
person who deal in jewel preciou metal and preciou stone ar requir to establish
antimonei launder program dealer ar defin as person who have purchas at
least 50000 and sold more than 50000 worth of jewel stone or metal dure the
preced year addition the person must also be in the busi of sell signific
amount of such item therefor the rule wo uld not appli to occasion seller or hobbyist
dealer howev ar not requir to file sar fincen is develop a set of final rule to
address in more detail who is cover under the rule and what procedur will be requir
other feder law relat to monei launder
the fraud examin should be awar of the feder law that ar typic involv when
prosecut a monei launder transact most such scheme will involv on or more of
the follow
structur transact to evad report requir titl 31 usc 5324
if a person caus or attempt to caus a cover institut to fail to file a requir report
with the purpos of evad the report requir such person can be fine under the
provis of 18 usc 3571 andor imprison up to five year if the violat occur
in the cours of violat anoth feder law or as part of a pattern of illeg conduct
involv more than 100000 in a 12month period then the amount of the fine under
3571 can be doubl and the prison time increas to up to 10 year
section 3571 of titl 18 provid for fine for individu convict of a feloni of up to
250000 and fine for organ of up to 500000 altern a fine can be impos
up to twice the amount of the illgotten gain to the crimin or twice the amount of the loss
to the victim
bulk cash smuggl into or out of the unit state titl 31 usc 5332
section 5332 which wa creat by section 371 of the patriot act make it illeg for
anyon to knowingli conceal more than 10000 in currenc or other monetari instrument
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11633
and transport or attempt to transport such currenc into or out of the unit state with the
intent to evad a currenc report requir under 18 usc 1956 see below
violat of these section mai be imprison up to five year and mai be requir to forfeit
ani properti involv in the offens or ani properti traceabl thereto
monei launder statut titl 18 usc 1956 and 1957
transact monei launder
section 1956a1 provid that anyon who know that properti involv in a
financi transact repres the proce of some form of unlaw activ and conduct a
financi transact in ani of the follow wai
with the intent to promot the carri on of specifi unlaw activ
with the intent to violat section 7201 tax evas or 7206 file fals return of the
intern revenu code
know that the transact is design to conceal or disguis the natur locat
sourc ownership or control of the illeg proce
know that the transact is design to avoid a report requir
such individu shall be fine up to 500000 or twice the valu of the monetari instrument
or fund whichev is greater andor imprison for not more than 20 year specifi
unlaw activ is defin in 1956c7 and includ a long list of feder crime
includ rico fraud embezzl theft and fals statement also fund that ar
illeg transmit in violat of thi statut or ani properti traceabl to those fund ar
subject to civil forfeitur under 18 usc 981a1a
intern transport and launder of fund
section 1956a2 prohibit the transport transmiss or transfer of fund either into
or out of the unit state if the person know the fund ar the proce of unlaw
activ and the transport transmiss or transfer is done with the intent to promot
the carri on of specifi unlaw conduct is done to conceal the natur locat
sourc ownership or control of the fund or is done to avoid report requir the
penalti ar the same as those set forth in subsect a1
sting oper
section 1956a3 prohibit a person from engag in financi transact involv
properti the person believ to be the proce of illeg activ thi is intend to cover
sting oper in which a suspect engag in monei launder activ with fund he
monei launder financi transact
11634 2011 fraud examin manual
believ to be illeg deriv even though the fund ar actual suppli by govern
agent the person can be imprison for up to 20 year andor fine in accord with 18 usc 3571
engag in monetari transact with monei deriv from specifi unlaw activ
an offens occur under section 1957 if a person knowingli engag or attempt to engag
in a monetari transact with crimin deriv properti that is greater than 10000 and
that is deriv from specifi unlaw activ section 1957 appli in situat where
the offens take place in the unit state or within it special maritim or territori
jurisdict or the offens take place outsid the us but the defend is a us citizen or
legal alien
violat of thi statut ar punish by a fine under 18 usc 3571 andor 10 year in
prison in addit the illeg transmit fund can be forfeit under 18 usc
981a1a
civil penalti
section 1956b set forth civil penalti for violat of section 1956 and 1957 under thi
section those who violat either monei launder statut ar liabl to the unit state for
the valu of the properti fund or monetari instrument involv in the illeg transact
or 10000 whichev is greater
longarm jurisdict over foreign monei launder
section 1956b also give us district court jurisdict over foreign person or financi
institut when 1 the foreign person commit a monei launder offens under section
1956a that occur in whole or in part in the unit state 2 the foreign person convert
to hi own us properti in which the unit state ha an ownership interest or 3 the
foreign financi institut maintain a bank account in the unit state
under section 1956b3 a us court can issu restrain order to freez the asset of
foreign monei launder describ abov prior to trial to ensur that the defend asset
ar avail to satisfi a judgment the court can also appoint a feder receiv to collect
marshal and take control of the defend asset to satisfi a civil or crimin judgment for
monei launder or a civil or crimin forfeitur judgment
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11635
prohibit of illeg monei transmit businessestitl 18 usc 1960
thi section prohibit the oper of a busi that transfer fund by ani mean
whether by wire check or courier if the busi doe not have the appropri state
licens or fail to compli with the registr requir establish under titl 31 of the
us code section 5330 the offend can be fine under section 3571 of titl 18 andor
imprison not more than five year illeg transmit fund can also be seiz by the
unit state under 18 usc 981a1a
racket influenc and corrupt organ ricotitl 18 usc 1961
1968
violat of the monei launder crime statut 18 usc 1956 and 1957 and
certain violat of the bank secreci act ar predic offens constitut racket
activ these act can be prosecut under the rico statut which includ crimin
penalti of up to 20 year in prison andor fine under section 3571 of titl 18 the statut
also provid for a civil caus of action by ani person injur in hi busi or properti
as a result of a violat of rico remedi includ trebl damag and attornei fee
seizur and forfeiturestitl 18 usc 981 et seq
section 981 provid for the civil seizur and forfeitur of properti involv in certain
crime includ monei launder section 982 deal with crimin forfeitur forfeitur mai
be defin as the take by the govern of properti that is illeg us or acquir
without compens the owner these remedi ar onli avail to the govern and
typic ar us in connect with a crimin investig and prosecut
when a piec of properti is forfeit all right titl and interest in the properti vest in the
govern consequ all the defend ownership right ar extinguish the
transfer of right date back to the moment when the properti becam forfeit ie when
the crime wa commit ani subsequ transfer by the defend is of no effect thi is
known as the relat back doctrin in the ey of the law the subsequ judici proceed
mere confirm that a forfeitur ha in theori alreadi taken place although the govern
cannot claim ani right in the properti until it receiv a forfeitur judgment becaus the
govern right to the properti and relat proce date back to when the crime wa
commit the govern is legal entitl to ani gain accru from the proce of the
illeg activ
monei launder financi transact
11636 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin forfeitur ar conduct in conjunct with a crimin trial the proof necessari
to perfect the forfeitur is the same as requir to convict the individu of the crimin
charg that is proof beyond a reason doubt the crimin forfeitur is an action in
personam against the person in such a proceed the govern ha the same burden of
proof as it doe in a crimin case if the govern sustain a convict the judg will
forfeit the properti at time of sentenc at which time the properti can be seiz
civil forfeitur ar conduct independ from a crimin proceed a civil forfeitur is
an action in rem against the properti in respons to perceiv abus on the part of the
govern congress pass the civil asset forfeitur reform act of 2000 which
drastic amend the law concern civil forfeitur
below ar some of the highlight of the act
set forth notif requir with respect to seiz properti and civil forfeitur
proceed includ a requir that the govern notifi interest parti as
soon as practic but within 60 dai after the date of the seizur
set forth procedur for file claim for seiz properti after a claim is file the
govern ha 90 dai in which to file a complaint for forfeitur if the govern
fail to do thi then it must return the properti in lieu of or in addit to file a
civil forfeitur complaint the govern mai includ a forfeitur alleg in a
crimin indict
provid that the court appoint counsel to repres anyon with an interest in the
properti if the person is financi unabl to afford counsel
place the burden of proof on the govern to establish by a preponder of the
evid that the properti is subject to forfeitur
provid that if the forfeitur action is be prosecut becaus the properti wa us
to commit or facilit the commiss of a crimin offens or wa involv in such
commiss the govern must establish that there wa a substanti connect
between the properti and the offens
provid an innoc owner defens to the forfeitur action the owner must prove
hi innoc by a preponder of the evid
author a claimant to petit the court to determin whether a forfeitur wa
constitution excess direct the court to compar the forfeitur to the graviti of
the offens place upon the claimant the burden of establish by a preponder of
the evid at a hear conduct by the court without a juri that the forfeitur is
grossli disproport to the offens upon the claimant
amend the feder tort claim act to allow claimant to sue the govern for ani
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11637
damag or loss of properti while in possess of the govern
author the us of forfeit properti to pai restitut to ani victim of the offens
give rise to the forfeitur includ in the case of a monei launder offens ani
offens constitut the underli specifi activ
direct that all civil forfeitur of real properti and interest in real properti proce as
judici forfeitur prohibit with except 1 real properti that is the subject of a
civil forfeitur from be seiz befor entri of a forfeitur order and 2 the owner or
occup of the real properti from be evict from or otherwis depriv of the us
and enjoy of real properti that is the subject of a pend forfeitur action
provid for the forfeitur of the proce of specifi unlaw activ under the
monei launder statut
forfeitur of fund in interbank account
section 319 of the patriot act amend 18 usc 981 expand the unit state
abil to seiz the proce of monei launder activ by provid for forfeitur of fund
held in unit state interbank account an interbank account is an account on financi
institut hold at anoth financi institut
if fund involv in a monei launder transact or the proce of ani specifi
unlaw activ as defin by the monei launder statut ar deposit in a foreign bank
and if that foreign bank ha an interbank account in the unit state then the taint fund
will be deem to have been deposit into the us account in other word the fund in
the foreign bank us interbank account can be seiz even if the launder monei wa
not deposit in that account the govern doe not have to trace the monei in the us
interbank account to the monei that wa deposit in the foreign account it is enough that
the us interbank account is held by the same financi institut in which the launder
monei wa deposit oversea
fals statementstitl 18 usc 1001
person who violat the bank secreci act and other report law might also be guilti of
violat of 18 usc 1001 which is the prin cipal feder fals statement statut becaus
most of the oblig impos by the bsa involv recordkeep and report mani
bsa violat might also constitut fals statement section 1001 prohibit knowingli
falsifi conceal cover up or make a fals fictiti or fraudul statement or
represent in ani matter within the jurisdict of ani us depart or agenc
violat of thi section ar often charg when an individu is stop at the border with
monei launder financi transact
11638 2011 fraud examin manual
a larg amount of unreport cash and respond fals to the question of custom offic
or inspector it ha been us to prosecut individu for structur a transact so that it
deceiv a financi institut into file a fals report
conspiraci to defraud the unit state titl 18 usc 371
although numer feder statut make conspiraci a crime the most commonli us
feder conspiraci statut is the gener conspiraci statut under section 371 of titl 18 us
code
section 371 can be divid into two part 1 conspiraci to commit a crime against the
unit state and 2 conspiraci to defraud the unit state or it agenc sever
court have upheld convict base on the second prong of the statut sole for failur to
file ctr such prosecut ar base on the theori that the person depriv the ir of
accur ctr in the case of unit state v richter 610 fsupp 480 nd ill 1985 the
court held that the divis of larg amount of cash into smaller nonreport transact
by sever individu work as a team wa a conspiraci to obstruct the govern
function of receiv ctr howev other court have reject thi theori on the ground
that there is no duti on the part of the custom to inform the govern or the bank of
the natur of the transact whether report or not
travel act titl 18 usc 1952
the travel act is applic if the offens involv the proce of illeg activ and
interst travel the act provid that it is an offens to travel in interst or foreign
commerc or us the mail with the intent to distribut the proce of ani unlaw activ
commit ani crime of violenc to further unlaw activ or otherwis establish promot
or manag an establish for the purpos of carri on ani unlaw activ unlaw
activ is defin to includ the report requir under 31 usc chapter 53 as well
as the monei launder statut 18 us c 1956 and 1957 the fine establish
under 3571 can be impos andor up to five year imprison if a crime of violenc is
involv the term of imprison increas to a maximum of 20 year or life if someon
wa kill
state law
approxim 30 state have enact statut that crimin monei launder most of
which appli to businesspeopl and profession some of the state statut ar broader than
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11639
the feder statut and thei ar often enforc more aggress than their feder
counterpart
mani state have crimin attempt monei launder with the same penalti as the
complet crime some state contain a sting provis which enabl the prosecut of
activ even though the launder monei is not actual deriv from crimin activ but
rather suppli by govern agent as part of a sting oper sever state have also
enact legisl requir financi institut and busi to file currenc transact
report that mirror the feder report some requir duplic file with the state other
ar satisfi with the feder file
