2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Federal and State Law/Seizures and Forfeitures


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Seizures and Forfeitures—Title 18, U.S.C., § 981, et seq. 
Section 981 provides for the civil seizure and forfeiture of property involved in certain 
crimes including money laundering. Section 982 deals with criminal forfeitures. Forfeiture may 
be defined as “the taking by the government of property that is illegally used or acquired, 
without compensating the owner.” These remedies are only available to the government and 
typically are used in connection with a criminal investigation and prosecution.  
 
When a piece of property is forfeited, all right, title, and interest in the property vests in the 
government; consequently, all the defendant’s ownership rights are extinguished. The 
transfer of rights dates back to the moment when the property became forfeitable; i.e., when 
the crime was committed. Any subsequent transfer by the defendant is of no effect. This is 
known as the relation back doctrine. In the eyes of the law, the subsequent judicial proceedings 
merely confirm that a forfeiture has, in theory, already taken place (although the government 
cannot claim any rights in the property until it receives a forfeiture judgment). Because the 
government’s right to the property and related proceeds dates back to when the crime was 
committed, the government is legally entitled to any gain accruing from the proceeds of the 
illegal activity.  
 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1636                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Criminal forfeitures are conducted in conjunction with a criminal trial. The proof necessary 
to perfect the forfeiture is the same as required to convict the individual of the criminal 
charge, that is, proof beyond a reasonable doubt. The criminal forfeiture is an action in 
personam (against the person). In such a proceeding the government has the same burden of 
proof as it does in a criminal case. If the government sustains a conviction, the judge will 
forfeit the property at time of sentencing, at which time the property can be seized. 
Civil forfeitures are conducted independently from a criminal proceeding. A civil forfeiture is 
an action in rem  (against the property). In response to perceived abuses on the part of the 
government, Congress passed the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act of 2000, which 
drastically amended the laws concerning civil forfeiture.  
 
Below are some of the highlights of the Act: 
• Sets forth notification requirements with respect to seized property and civil forfeiture 
proceedings, including a requirement that the government notify interested parties as 
soon as practicable but within 60 days after the date of the seizure. 
• Sets forth procedures for filing claims for seized property. After a claim is filed, the 
government has 90 days in which to file a complaint for forfeiture. If the government 
fails to do this, then it must return the property. In lieu of or in addition to filing a  
civil forfeiture complaint, the government may include a forfeiture allegation in a 
criminal indictment.  
• Provides that the court appoint counsel to represent anyone with an interest in the 
property if the person is financially unable to afford counsel. 
• Places the burden of proof on the government to establish, by a preponderance of the 
evidence, that the property is subject to forfeiture.  
• Provides that if the forfeiture action is being prosecuted because the property was used 
to commit or facilitate the commission of a criminal offense, or was involved in such 
commission, the government must establish that there was a substantial connection 
between the property and the offense.  
• Provides an “innocent owner’s” defense to the forfeiture action. The owner must prove 
his innocence by a preponderance of the evidence. 
• Authorizes a claimant to petition the court to determine whether a forfeiture was 
constitutionally excessive. Directs the court to compare the forfeiture to the gravity of 
the offense. Places upon the claimant the burden of establishing, by a preponderance of 
the evidence at a hearing conducted by the court without a jury, that the forfeiture is 
grossly disproportional to the offense upon the claimant.  
• Amends the Federal Tort Claims Act to allow claimants to sue the government for any 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1637 
damage or loss of property while in possession of the government. 
• Authorizes the use of forfeited property to pay restitution to any victim of the offense 
giving rise to the forfeiture, including, in the case of a money laundering offense, any 
offense constituting the underlying specified activity.  
• Directs that all civil forfeitures of real property and interests in real property proceed as 
judicial forfeitures. Prohibits (with exceptions) (1) real property that is the subject of a 
civil forfeiture from being seized before entry of a forfeiture order; and (2) the owners or 
occupants of the real property from being evicted from, or otherwise deprived of the use 
and enjoyment of, real property that is the subject of a pending forfeiture action.  
• Provides for the forfeiture of the proceeds of “specified unlawful activity” under the 
money laundering statutes.  
 
FORFEITURE OF FUNDS IN INTERBANK ACCOUNTS 
Section 319 of the PATRIOT Act amended 18, U.S.C., § 981, expanding the United States’ 
ability to seize the proceeds of money laundering activity by providing for forfeiture of funds 
held in United States interbank accounts. An interbank account is an account one financial 
institution holds at another financial institution.  
 
If funds involved in a money laundering transaction or the proceeds of any “specified 
unlawful activity” as defined by the money laundering statute are deposited in a foreign bank, 
and if that foreign bank has an interbank account in the United States, then the tainted funds 
will be deemed to have been deposited into the U.S. account. In other words, the funds in 
the foreign bank’s U.S. interbank account can be seized, even if the laundered money was 
not deposited in that account. The government does not have to trace the money in the U.S. 
interbank account to the money that was deposited in the foreign account. It is enough that 
the U.S. interbank account is held by the same financial institution in which the laundered 
money was deposited overseas.  
 



:


seizur and forfeiturestitl 18 usc 981 et seq
section 981 provid for the civil seizur and forfeitur of properti involv in certain
crime includ monei launder section 982 deal with crimin forfeitur forfeitur mai
be defin as the take by the govern of properti that is illeg us or acquir
without compens the owner these remedi ar onli avail to the govern and
typic ar us in connect with a crimin investig and prosecut
when a piec of properti is forfeit all right titl and interest in the properti vest in the
govern consequ all the defend ownership right ar extinguish the
transfer of right date back to the moment when the properti becam forfeit ie when
the crime wa commit ani subsequ transfer by the defend is of no effect thi is
known as the relat back doctrin in the ey of the law the subsequ judici proceed
mere confirm that a forfeitur ha in theori alreadi taken place although the govern
cannot claim ani right in the properti until it receiv a forfeitur judgment becaus the
govern right to the properti and relat proce date back to when the crime wa
commit the govern is legal entitl to ani gain accru from the proce of the
illeg activ
monei launder financi transact
11636 2011 fraud examin manual
crimin forfeitur ar conduct in conjunct with a crimin trial the proof necessari
to perfect the forfeitur is the same as requir to convict the individu of the crimin
charg that is proof beyond a reason doubt the crimin forfeitur is an action in
personam against the person in such a proceed the govern ha the same burden of
proof as it doe in a crimin case if the govern sustain a convict the judg will
forfeit the properti at time of sentenc at which time the properti can be seiz
civil forfeitur ar conduct independ from a crimin proceed a civil forfeitur is
an action in rem against the properti in respons to perceiv abus on the part of the
govern congress pass the civil asset forfeitur reform act of 2000 which
drastic amend the law concern civil forfeitur
below ar some of the highlight of the act
set forth notif requir with respect to seiz properti and civil forfeitur
proceed includ a requir that the govern notifi interest parti as
soon as practic but within 60 dai after the date of the seizur
set forth procedur for file claim for seiz properti after a claim is file the
govern ha 90 dai in which to file a complaint for forfeitur if the govern
fail to do thi then it must return the properti in lieu of or in addit to file a
civil forfeitur complaint the govern mai includ a forfeitur alleg in a
crimin indict
provid that the court appoint counsel to repres anyon with an interest in the
properti if the person is financi unabl to afford counsel
place the burden of proof on the govern to establish by a preponder of the
evid that the properti is subject to forfeitur
provid that if the forfeitur action is be prosecut becaus the properti wa us
to commit or facilit the commiss of a crimin offens or wa involv in such
commiss the govern must establish that there wa a substanti connect
between the properti and the offens
provid an innoc owner defens to the forfeitur action the owner must prove
hi innoc by a preponder of the evid
author a claimant to petit the court to determin whether a forfeitur wa
constitution excess direct the court to compar the forfeitur to the graviti of
the offens place upon the claimant the burden of establish by a preponder of
the evid at a hear conduct by the court without a juri that the forfeitur is
grossli disproport to the offens upon the claimant
amend the feder tort claim act to allow claimant to sue the govern for ani
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11637
damag or loss of properti while in possess of the govern
author the us of forfeit properti to pai restitut to ani victim of the offens
give rise to the forfeitur includ in the case of a monei launder offens ani
offens constitut the underli specifi activ
direct that all civil forfeitur of real properti and interest in real properti proce as
judici forfeitur prohibit with except 1 real properti that is the subject of a
civil forfeitur from be seiz befor entri of a forfeitur order and 2 the owner or
occup of the real properti from be evict from or otherwis depriv of the us
and enjoy of real properti that is the subject of a pend forfeitur action
provid for the forfeitur of the proce of specifi unlaw activ under the
monei launder statut
forfeitur of fund in interbank account
section 319 of the patriot act amend 18 usc 981 expand the unit state
abil to seiz the proce of monei launder activ by provid for forfeitur of fund
held in unit state interbank account an interbank account is an account on financi
institut hold at anoth financi institut
if fund involv in a monei launder transact or the proce of ani specifi
unlaw activ as defin by the monei launder statut ar deposit in a foreign bank
and if that foreign bank ha an interbank account in the unit state then the taint fund
will be deem to have been deposit into the us account in other word the fund in
the foreign bank us interbank account can be seiz even if the launder monei wa
not deposit in that account the govern doe not have to trace the monei in the us
interbank account to the monei that wa deposit in the foreign account it is enough that
the us interbank account is held by the same financi institut in which the launder
monei wa deposit oversea
