2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Enforcement and Prevention Strategies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


Enforcement and Prevention Strategies 
Financial institutions, brokers, and insurance companies should be aware and should make 
their employees aware of situations that could indicate money laundering activity.  
 
Bank Secrecy Act Compliance Programs 
Most financial institutions are now required to have a Bank Secrecy Act compliance program 
in place. However, every business that has the potential for transactions dealing with 
significant amounts of cash should institute a compliance program and a money laundering 
awareness program. All employees should be made aware of the money laundering statutes 
and the serious implications of such laws on the institution and the employees. Employees 
should be educated to be aware of transactions that might suggest possible laundering 
activity. Procedures should be set out detailing what an employee should do if a customer or 
transaction appears suspicious. 
 
Minimum Standards 
Treasury regulations provide that, at a minimum, a written compliance program should be 
adopted that: 
• Establishes a system of internal controls to ensure ongoing BSA compliance. 
• Provides for independent testing of compliance by internal auditors and/or outside 
examiners. 
• Designates a compliance officer(s) to ensure day-to-day compliance with BSA. 
• Provides training on an ongoing basis for all personnel. 
 
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1641 
Compliance Officer 
A business should select a person or team responsible for the day-to-day monitoring of the 
compliance program. The compliance officer should be given broad authority to monitor all 
aspects of the institution’s compliance including the development and refinement of the 
program and the monitoring of employee training programs. Such individual should also 
have the authority to conduct regular and ad hoc audits to ensure that the program is 
functioning effectively and to hire outside consultants as necessary to investigate problems. 
 
Policy Statement 
All entities covered under the reporting and recordkeeping laws and regulations should have 
a written policy against handling the proceeds of drug trafficking or other criminal activity. 
The statement should provide that the institution requires its employees to operate with the 
highest moral and ethical principles. It should include a statement that the company refuses 
to do business with criminals and money launderers; a commitment to conduct business only 
with legitimate business organizations; a statem ent against doing business with organizations 
that fail to provide proper documentation of their identity and purpose; clear directions for 
referring all suspicious transactions to the appropriate department; and a commitment to 
comply with the provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act. 
 
“Know Your Customer” Programs 
Most financial institutions have “Know Your Customer” programs as part of their BSA 
compliance program. Such programs should provide for effective customer identification, 
account monitoring, and appropriate action in suspicious circumstances. Both the CTR 
reporting requirements and the recordkeeping requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act 
mandate the identification of customers using the institution’s services. 
 
NEW DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS 
For individual deposit accounts, minimum identification standards should be established. 
The information to be obtained should include:  
• Name 
• Address 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number (or for non-U.S. citizens, a passport, visa, or alien registration 
number) 
• Current employer 
• Business and residence telephone numbers 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1642                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The customer should be required to submit some form of identification that includes a 
photo such as a driver’s license or passport, and a copy should be made and kept in the 
customer’s file. If there are any doubts or inconsistencies about the information provided, 
the employee should be instructed to notify the appropriate department. 
Minimum standards for new business accounts should include: 
• Business name and address 
• Telephone number 
• Taxpayer identification number 
• Documents establishing the formation of the business entity (articles of incorporation, 
partnership agreement, etc.) 
• Copies of all assumed name filings or DBAs (doing business as) 
• A full description of the operations of the business 
• Credit and banking references 
• The identity of the officers, directors, or other principals 
 
The account representative should also consider making a personal visit to the customer’s 
place of business. Besides promoting good customer relations, a personal visit will help 
identify whether the business is legitimate or simply a front. The representative can also use 
this opportunity to get to know the principals of the business. 
 
NEW LOAN ACCOUNTS 
An institution should perform due diligence in establishing a new loan account because if the 
customer is engaged in money laundering, there is a risk of forfeiture of collateral pledged on 
the loans. Real or personal property that is traceable to drug sales or that is purchased with 
laundered funds is subject to seizure by the government. If the property seized is pledged as 
collateral, the financial institution must prove that it was an innocent lienholder of the 
property and had no knowledge of the illegal activity. 
 
Minimum standards regarding the information to be gathered should include: 
• Reliable identifying information similar to that required for new deposit accounts. 
• Reliable financial information such as financial statements, W-2s, and copies of tax 
returns. 
• The purpose of the loan. 
• Credit history and prior banking references. 
• Verifiable, legitimate means of repayment. 
  
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1643 
• Assurance that the loan amount is consistent with the purpose of the loan and the nature 
of the business. 
 
SERVICES FOR NONACCOUNTHOLDERS 
Banks often issue cashier’s checks, money orders, and traveler’s checks and perform 
currency exchanges, wire transfers, or check cashing services. Strict identification 
requirements should be established for transactions with persons who are not regular bank 
customers. In fact, regulations require that in some instances banks keep a record of the 
identity of persons who are not established customers. Such regulations usually require at a 
minimum the person’s name and address, driver’s license number (or other number of 
identifying document produced), and Social Security number or employer identification 
number. 
 
MONITORING ACCOUNTS 
While identification of customers is important, it is equally important to monitor the activity 
of accounts. The institution should identify unusual transactions that might not be consistent 
with the normal business of the customer. Unusual and dramatic changes in wire transfer, 
monetary instrument, and check transactions are important to identify. If unusual 
transactions or activities are noted, the institution should take some action to protect itself. 
The appropriate action in some cases might be to discuss the changes with the customer to 
find out the reasons for said inconsistencies. Increased transactions might be the result of an 
increase in sales or the result of a promotional activity. However, if the discussion leads to a 
reasonable suspicion that the transactions are illegitimate, the institution might be required to 
notify the appropriate government agency and/or file a Suspicious Activity Report. 
 
 



:


enforc and prevent strategi
financi institut broker and insur compani should be awar and should make
their employe awar of situat that could indic monei launder activ
bank secreci act complianc program
most financi institut ar now requir to have a bank secreci act complianc program
in place howev everi busi that ha the potenti for transact deal with
signific amount of cash should institut a complianc program and a monei launder
awar program all employe should be made awar of the monei launder statut
and the seriou implic of such law on the institut and the employe employe
should be educ to be awar of transact that might suggest possibl launder
activ procedur should be set out detail what an employe should do if a custom or
transact appear suspici
minimum standard
treasuri regul provid that at a minimum a written complianc program should be
adopt that
establish a system of intern control to ensur ongo bsa complianc
provid for independ test of complianc by intern auditor andor outsid
examin
design a complianc offic to ensur daytodai complianc with bsa
provid train on an ongo basi for all personnel
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11641
complianc offic
a busi should select a person or team respons for the daytodai monitor of the
complianc program the complianc offic should be given broad author to monitor all
aspect of the institut complianc includ the develop and refin of the
program and the monitor of employe train program such individu should also
have the author to conduct regular and ad hoc audit to ensur that the program is
function effect and to hire outsid consult as necessari to investig problem
polici statement
all entiti cover under the report and recordkeep law and regul should have
a written polici against handl the proce of drug traffick or other crimin activ
the statement should provid that the institut requir it employe to oper with the
highest moral and ethic principl it should includ a statement that the compani refus
to do busi with crimin and monei launder a commit to conduct busi onli
with legitim busi organ a statem ent against do busi with organ
that fail to provid proper document of their ident and purpos clear direct for
refer all suspici transact to the appropri depart and a commit to
compli with the provis of the bank secreci act
know your custom program
most financi institut have know your custom program as part of their bsa
complianc program such program should provid for effect custom identif
account monitor and appropri action in suspici circumst both the ctr
report requir and the recordkeep requir of the bank secreci act
mandat the identif of custom us the institut servic
new deposit account
for individu deposit account minimum identif standard should be establish
the inform to be obtain should includ
name
address
date of birth
social secur number or for nonu citizen a passport visa or alien registr
number
current employ
busi and resid telephon number
monei launder financi transact
11642 2011 fraud examin manual
the custom should be requir to submit some form of identif that includ a
photo such as a driver licens or passport and a copi should be made and kept in the
custom file if there ar ani doubt or inconsist about the inform provid
the employe should be instruct to notifi the appropri depart
minimum standard for new busi account should includ
busi name and address
telephon number
taxpay identif number
document establish the format of the busi entiti articl of incorpor
partnership agreement etc
copi of all assum name file or dba do busi as
a full descript of the oper of the busi
credit and bank refer
the ident of the offic director or other princip
the account repres should also consid make a person visit to the custom
place of busi besid promot good custom relat a person visit will help
identifi whether the busi is legitim or simpli a front the repres can also us
thi opportun to get to know the princip of the busi
new loan account
an institut should perform due dilig in establish a new loan account becaus if the
custom is engag in monei launder there is a risk of forfeitur of collater pledg on
the loan real or person properti that is traceabl to drug sale or that is purchas with
launder fund is subject to seizur by the govern if the properti seiz is pledg as
collater the financi institut must prove that it wa an innoc lienhold of the
properti and had no knowledg of the illeg activ
minimum standard regard the inform to be gather should includ
reliabl identifi inform similar to that requir for new deposit account
reliabl financi inform such as financi statement w2 and copi of tax
return
the purpos of the loan
credit histori and prior bank refer
verifi legitim mean of repay
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11643
assur that the loan amount is consist with the purpos of the loan and the natur
of the busi
servic for nonaccounthold
bank often issu cashier check monei order and travel check and perform
currenc exchang wire transfer or check cash servic strict identif
requir should be establish for transact with person who ar not regular bank
custom in fact regul requir that in some instanc bank keep a record of the
ident of person who ar not establish custom such regul usual requir at a
minimum the person name and address driver licens number or other number of
identifi document produc and social secur number or employ identif
number
monitor account
while identif of custom is import it is equal import to monitor the activ
of account the institut should identifi unusu transact that might not be consist
with the normal busi of the custom unusu and dramat chang in wire transfer
monetari instrument and check transact ar import to identifi if unusu
transact or activ ar note the institut should take some action to protect itself
the appropri action in some case might be to discuss the chang with the custom to
find out the reason for said inconsist increas transact might be the result of an
increas in sale or the result of a promot activ howev if the discuss lead to a
reason suspicion that the transact ar illegitim the institut might be requir to
notifi the appropri govern agenc andor file a suspici activ report
