2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MONEY LAUNDERING/Enforcement and Prevention Strategies/“Know Your Customer” Programs


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Money Laundering


:


“Know Your Customer” Programs 
Most financial institutions have “Know Your Customer” programs as part of their BSA 
compliance program. Such programs should provide for effective customer identification, 
account monitoring, and appropriate action in suspicious circumstances. Both the CTR 
reporting requirements and the recordkeeping requirements of the Bank Secrecy Act 
mandate the identification of customers using the institution’s services. 
 
NEW DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS 
For individual deposit accounts, minimum identification standards should be established. 
The information to be obtained should include:  
• Name 
• Address 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number (or for non-U.S. citizens, a passport, visa, or alien registration 
number) 
• Current employer 
• Business and residence telephone numbers 
Money Laundering  Financial Transactions   
1.1642                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The customer should be required to submit some form of identification that includes a 
photo such as a driver’s license or passport, and a copy should be made and kept in the 
customer’s file. If there are any doubts or inconsistencies about the information provided, 
the employee should be instructed to notify the appropriate department. 
Minimum standards for new business accounts should include: 
• Business name and address 
• Telephone number 
• Taxpayer identification number 
• Documents establishing the formation of the business entity (articles of incorporation, 
partnership agreement, etc.) 
• Copies of all assumed name filings or DBAs (doing business as) 
• A full description of the operations of the business 
• Credit and banking references 
• The identity of the officers, directors, or other principals 
 
The account representative should also consider making a personal visit to the customer’s 
place of business. Besides promoting good customer relations, a personal visit will help 
identify whether the business is legitimate or simply a front. The representative can also use 
this opportunity to get to know the principals of the business. 
 
NEW LOAN ACCOUNTS 
An institution should perform due diligence in establishing a new loan account because if the 
customer is engaged in money laundering, there is a risk of forfeiture of collateral pledged on 
the loans. Real or personal property that is traceable to drug sales or that is purchased with 
laundered funds is subject to seizure by the government. If the property seized is pledged as 
collateral, the financial institution must prove that it was an innocent lienholder of the 
property and had no knowledge of the illegal activity. 
 
Minimum standards regarding the information to be gathered should include: 
• Reliable identifying information similar to that required for new deposit accounts. 
• Reliable financial information such as financial statements, W-2s, and copies of tax 
returns. 
• The purpose of the loan. 
• Credit history and prior banking references. 
• Verifiable, legitimate means of repayment. 
  
Financial Transactions  Money Laundering 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1643 
• Assurance that the loan amount is consistent with the purpose of the loan and the nature 
of the business. 
 
SERVICES FOR NONACCOUNTHOLDERS 
Banks often issue cashier’s checks, money orders, and traveler’s checks and perform 
currency exchanges, wire transfers, or check cashing services. Strict identification 
requirements should be established for transactions with persons who are not regular bank 
customers. In fact, regulations require that in some instances banks keep a record of the 
identity of persons who are not established customers. Such regulations usually require at a 
minimum the person’s name and address, driver’s license number (or other number of 
identifying document produced), and Social Security number or employer identification 
number. 
 
MONITORING ACCOUNTS 
While identification of customers is important, it is equally important to monitor the activity 
of accounts. The institution should identify unusual transactions that might not be consistent 
with the normal business of the customer. Unusual and dramatic changes in wire transfer, 
monetary instrument, and check transactions are important to identify. If unusual 
transactions or activities are noted, the institution should take some action to protect itself. 
The appropriate action in some cases might be to discuss the changes with the customer to 
find out the reasons for said inconsistencies. Increased transactions might be the result of an 
increase in sales or the result of a promotional activity. However, if the discussion leads to a 
reasonable suspicion that the transactions are illegitimate, the institution might be required to 
notify the appropriate government agency and/or file a Suspicious Activity Report. 
 
 



:


know your custom program
most financi institut have know your custom program as part of their bsa
complianc program such program should provid for effect custom identif
account monitor and appropri action in suspici circumst both the ctr
report requir and the recordkeep requir of the bank secreci act
mandat the identif of custom us the institut servic
new deposit account
for individu deposit account minimum identif standard should be establish
the inform to be obtain should includ
name
address
date of birth
social secur number or for nonu citizen a passport visa or alien registr
number
current employ
busi and resid telephon number
monei launder financi transact
11642 2011 fraud examin manual
the custom should be requir to submit some form of identif that includ a
photo such as a driver licens or passport and a copi should be made and kept in the
custom file if there ar ani doubt or inconsist about the inform provid
the employe should be instruct to notifi the appropri depart
minimum standard for new busi account should includ
busi name and address
telephon number
taxpay identif number
document establish the format of the busi entiti articl of incorpor
partnership agreement etc
copi of all assum name file or dba do busi as
a full descript of the oper of the busi
credit and bank refer
the ident of the offic director or other princip
the account repres should also consid make a person visit to the custom
place of busi besid promot good custom relat a person visit will help
identifi whether the busi is legitim or simpli a front the repres can also us
thi opportun to get to know the princip of the busi
new loan account
an institut should perform due dilig in establish a new loan account becaus if the
custom is engag in monei launder there is a risk of forfeitur of collater pledg on
the loan real or person properti that is traceabl to drug sale or that is purchas with
launder fund is subject to seizur by the govern if the properti seiz is pledg as
collater the financi institut must prove that it wa an innoc lienhold of the
properti and had no knowledg of the illeg activ
minimum standard regard the inform to be gather should includ
reliabl identifi inform similar to that requir for new deposit account
reliabl financi inform such as financi statement w2 and copi of tax
return
the purpos of the loan
credit histori and prior bank refer
verifi legitim mean of repay
financi transact monei launder
2011 fraud examin manual 11643
assur that the loan amount is consist with the purpos of the loan and the natur
of the busi
servic for nonaccounthold
bank often issu cashier check monei order and travel check and perform
currenc exchang wire transfer or check cash servic strict identif
requir should be establish for transact with person who ar not regular bank
custom in fact regul requir that in some instanc bank keep a record of the
ident of person who ar not establish custom such regul usual requir at a
minimum the person name and address driver licens number or other number of
identifi document produc and social secur number or employ identif
number
monitor account
while identif of custom is import it is equal import to monitor the activ
of account the institut should identifi unusu transact that might not be consist
with the normal busi of the custom unusu and dramat chang in wire transfer
monetari instrument and check transact ar import to identifi if unusu
transact or activ ar note the institut should take some action to protect itself
the appropri action in some case might be to discuss the chang with the custom to
find out the reason for said inconsist increas transact might be the result of an
increas in sale or the result of a promot activ howev if the discuss lead to a
reason suspicion that the transact ar illegitim the institut might be requir to
notifi the appropri govern agenc andor file a suspici activ report
