2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/PUBLIC SECTOR FRAUD/Government Initiatives to Reduce Fraud/Divisions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Public Sector Fraud


:


Divisions 
The DOJ is comprised of several divisions, including the Criminal Division and the Civil 
Division.  
 
The Criminal Division, which is headed by an Assistant Attorney General, is responsible for 
enforcing federal criminal laws.  
Public Sector Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1922                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Within the Justice Department’s Criminal Division, two offices are primarily occupied with 
white-collar crime: the Public Integrity Secti on and the Fraud Section. The Public Integrity 
Section reviews anti-fraud programs involving white-collar crimes by public officials. The 
Fraud Section’s duties include: 
• Investigating and prosecuting complex, sensitive, or multi-district cases involving major 
white-collar crimes either developed by the section or as requested by U.S. Attorney’s 
offices. 
• Providing training to federal, state, and local investigators and prosecutors. 
• Developing and implementing national white-collar crime enforcement policies. 
 
The Civil Division of the DOJ represents the federal government in civil cases. According to 
its website, the Civil Division’s “litigation reflects the diversity of government activities, 
involving, for example, the defense of challenges to Presidential actions; national security 
issues; benefit programs; energy policies; commercial issues such as contract disputes, 
banking insurance, patents, fraud, and debt collection; all manner of accident and liability 
claims; enforcement of immigration laws; and civil and criminal violations of consumer 
protection laws.” 
 



:


divis
the doj is compris of sever divis includ the crimin divis and the civil
divis
the crimin divis which is head by an assist attornei gener is respons for
enforc feder crimin law
public sector fraud financi transact
11922 2011 fraud examin manual
within the justic depart crimin divis two offic ar primarili occupi with
whitecollar crime the public integr secti on and the fraud section the public integr
section review antifraud program involv whitecollar crime by public offici the
fraud section duti includ
investig and prosecut complex sensit or multidistrict case involv major
whitecollar crime either develop by the section or as request by us attornei
offic
provid train to feder state and local investig and prosecutor
develop and implement nation whitecollar crime enforc polici
the civil divis of the doj repres the feder govern in civil case accord to
it websit the civil divis litig reflect the divers of govern activ
involv for exampl the defens of challeng to presidenti action nation secur
issu benefit program energi polici commerci issu such as contract disput
bank insur patent fraud and debt collect all manner of accid and liabil
claim enforc of immigr law and civil and crimin violat of consum
protect law
