2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Cressey’s Hypothesis


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Cressey’s Hypothesis 
Cressey was intrigued by embezzlers, whom he called “trust violators.” He was especially 
interested in the circumstances that led them to be overcome by temptation. For that reason, 
he excluded from his research those employees who took their jobs for the purpose of 
stealing — a relatively minor number of offenders at that time. Upon completion of his 
interviews, he developed what still remains the classic model for the occupational offender. 
His research was published in Other People’s Money: A Study in the Social Psychology of 
Embezzlement. 
 
Cressey’s final hypothesis was:  
 
Trusted persons become trust violators when they conceive of themselves as having a 
financial problem which is non-shareable, are aware this problem can be secretly resolved by 
violation of the position of financial trust, and are able to apply to their own conduct in 
that situation verbalizations which enable them to adjust their conceptions of themselves as 
trusted persons with their conceptions of themselves as users of the entrusted funds or 
property. 1  
 
                                                 
1 Donald R. Cressey, Other People’s Money  (Montclair: Patterson Smith, 1973) p. 30. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.603  
Over the years, the hypothesis has become better known as the fraud triangle.  One leg of the 
triangle represents a perceived non-shareable financial need. The second leg represents perceived 
opportunity, and the final leg stands for rationalization. The role of the non-shareable  problem is 
important. According to Cressey, “When the trust violators were asked to explain why they 
refrained from violation of other positions of trust they might have held at previous times, 
or why they had not violated the subject position at an earlier time, those who had an 
opinion expressed the equivalent of one or more of the following quotations: (a) ‘There was 
no need for it like there was this time.’ (b) ‘The idea never entered my head.’ (c) ‘I thought it 
was dishonest then, but this time it did not seem dishonest at first.’” 2 
 
 
 
 
“In all cases of trust violation encountered, the violator considered that a financial problem 
which confronted him could not be shared with persons who, from a more objective point 
of view, probably could have aided in the solution of the problem.” 3 
 



:


cressei hypothesi
cressei wa intrigu by embezzl whom he call trust violat he wa especi
interest in the circumst that led them to be overcom by temptat for that reason
he exclud from hi research those employe who took their job for the purpos of
steal a rel minor number of offend at that time upon complet of hi
interview he develop what still remain the classic model for the occup offend
hi research wa publish in other peopl monei a studi in the social psycholog of
embezzl
cressei final hypothesi wa
trust person becom trust violat when thei conceiv of themselv as have a
financi problem which is nonshar ar awar thi problem can be secretli resolv by
violat of the posit of financi trust and ar abl to appli to their own conduct in
that situat verbal which enabl them to adjust their concept of themselv as
trust person with their concept of themselv as user of the entrust fund or
properti 1
1 donald r cressei other peopl monei montclair patterson smith 1973 p 30
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4603
over the year the hypothesi ha becom better known as the fraud triangl on leg of the
triangl repres a perceiv nonshar financi need the second leg repres perceiv
opportun and the final leg stand for ration the role of the nonshar problem is
import accord to cressei when the trust violat were ask to explain why thei
refrain from violat of other posit of trust thei might have held at previou time
or why thei had not violat the subject posit at an earlier time those who had an
opinion express the equival of on or more of the follow quotat a there wa
no need for it like there wa thi time b the idea never enter my head c i thought it
wa dishonest then but thi time it did not seem dishonest at first 2
in all case of trust violat encount the violat consid that a financi problem
which confront him could not be share with person who from a more object point
of view probabl could have aid in the solut of the problem 3
