2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Rationalizations


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Rationalizations 
The third and final factor in the fraud triangle is the rationalization. Cressey pointed out that 
the rationalization is not an ex post facto means of justifying a theft that has already occurred. 
Significantly, the rationalization is a necessary component of the crime before  it takes place; in 
fact, it is a part of the motivation for the crime. Because the embezzler does not view 
himself as a criminal, he must justify his misdeeds before he ever commits them. The 
rationalization is necessary so that the perpetrator can make his illegal behavior intelligible to 
himself and maintain his concept of himself as a trusted person.9 
 
After the criminal act has taken place, the rationalization will often be abandoned. That is, of 
course, because of the nature of us all; the first time we do something contrary to our 
morals, it bothers us. As we repeat the act, it becomes easier. One hallmark of occupational 
fraud and abuse offenders is that once the line is crossed, the illegal acts become more or 
less continuous. So an occupational fraudster might begin stealing with the thought that “I’ll 
                                                 
6 Cressey, p. 84. 
7 Cressey, p. 84. 
8 Cressey, p. 85. 
9 Cressey, pp. 94–95. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.607  
pay the money back,” but after the initial theft is successful, he will usually continue to steal 
past the point at which there is any realistic possibility of repaying the stolen funds. 
 
Cressey found that the embezzlers he studied generally rationalized their crimes by viewing 
them as (1) essentially non-criminal, (2) justified, or (3) part of a general irresponsibility for 
which they were not completely accountable. He also found that the rationalizations used 
by trust violators tended to be linked to their positions and to the manner in which they 
committed their violations. He examined this by dividing the subjects of his study into three 
categories: independent businessmen, long-term violators, and absconders. He discovered 
that each group had its own types of rationalizations. 
 



:


ration
the third and final factor in the fraud triangl is the ration cressei point out that
the ration is not an ex post facto mean of justifi a theft that ha alreadi occur
significantli the ration is a necessari compon of the crime befor it take place in
fact it is a part of the motiv for the crime becaus the embezzl doe not view
himself as a crimin he must justifi hi misde befor he ever commit them the
ration is necessari so that the perpetr can make hi illeg behavior intellig to
himself and maintain hi concept of himself as a trust person9
after the crimin act ha taken place the ration will often be abandon that is of
cours becaus of the natur of us all the first time we do someth contrari to our
moral it bother us as we repeat the act it becom easier on hallmark of occup
fraud and abus offend is that onc the line is cross the illeg act becom more or
less continu so an occup fraudster might begin steal with the thought that ill
6 cressei p 84
7 cressei p 84
8 cressei p 85
9 cressei pp 9495
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4607
pai the monei back but after the initi theft is success he will usual continu to steal
past the point at which there is ani realist possibl of repai the stolen fund
cressei found that the embezzl he studi gener ration their crime by view
them as 1 essenti noncrimin 2 justifi or 3 part of a gener irrespons for
which thei were not complet account he also found that the ration us
by trust violat tend to be link to their posit and to the manner in which thei
commit their violat he examin thi by divid the subject of hi studi into three
categori independ businessmen longterm violat and abscond he discov
that each group had it own type of ration
