2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/The Fraud Scale


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


The Fraud Scale 28  
To illustrate the concept, Albrecht developed the Fraud Scale, which included the 
components of situational pressures, perceived opportunities, and personal integrity. When 
situational pressures and perceived opportunities are high and personal integrity is low, 
occupational fraud is much more likely to occur than when the opposite is true.29 
 
 
                                                 
26 Albrecht, p. 39 
27 Albrecht, p. 5. 
28 Albrecht, et.al., p. 5. 
29 Albrecht, et.al., p. 6. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.613  
Albrecht describes situational pressures as “t he immediate problems individuals experience 
within their environments, the most overwhelming of which are probably high personal 
debts or financial losses.” 30 Opportunities to commit fraud, Albrecht says, may be created 
by individuals, or by deficient or missing internal controls. Personal integrity “refers to the 
personal code of ethical behavior each person adopts. While this factor appears to be a 
straightforward determination of whether the person is honest or dishonest, moral 
development research indicates that the issue is more complex.” 31 
 
In addition to its findings on motivating factors of occupational fraud, the Albrecht study 
also disclosed several interesting relationships between the perpetrators and the frauds they 
committed. For example, perpetrators of large frauds used the proceeds to purchase new 
homes and expensive automobiles, recreation property, expensive vacations, support 
extramarital relationships, and make speculative investments. Those committing small 
frauds did not.32 Perpetrators who were interested primarily in “beating the system” 
committed larger frauds. However, perpetrators who believed their pay was not adequate 
committed primarily small frauds. Lack of segregation of responsibilities, placing 
undeserved trust in key employees, imposing unrealistic goals, and operating on a crisis 
basis were all pressures or weaknesses associated with large frauds. College graduates were 
less likely to spend the proceeds of their loot to take extravagant vacations, purchase 
recreational property, support extramarital relationships, and buy expensive automobiles. 
Finally, those with lower salaries were more likely to have a prior criminal record.33 
 



:


the fraud scale 28
to illustr the concept albrecht develop the fraud scale which includ the
compon of situat pressur perceiv opportun and person integr when
situat pressur and perceiv opportun ar high and person integr is low
occup fraud is much more like to occur than when the opposit is true29
26 albrecht p 39
27 albrecht p 5
28 albrecht etal p 5
29 albrecht etal p 6
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4613
albrecht describ situat pressur as t he immedi problem individu experi
within their environ the most overwhelm of which ar probabl high person
debt or financi loss 30 opportun to commit fraud albrecht sai mai be creat
by individu or by defici or miss intern control person integr refer to the
person code of ethic behavior each person adopt while thi factor appear to be a
straightforward determin of whether the person is honest or dishonest moral
develop research indic that the issu is more complex 31
in addit to it find on motiv factor of occup fraud the albrecht studi
also disclos sever interest relationship between the perpetr and the fraud thei
commit for exampl perpetr of larg fraud us the proce to purchas new
home and expens automobil recreat properti expens vacat support
extramarit relationship and make specul invest those commit small
fraud did not32 perpetr who were interest primarili in beat the system
commit larger fraud howev perpetr who believ their pai wa not adequ
commit primarili small fraud lack of segreg of respons place
undeserv trust in kei employe impos unrealist goal and oper on a crisi
basi were all pressur or weak associ with larg fraud colleg graduat were
less like to spend the proce of their loot to take extravag vacat purchas
recreat properti support extramarit relationship and bui expens automobil
final those with lower salari were more like to have a prior crimin record33
