2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Procedures to Prevent Fraud/Fraud Assessment Questioning


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


Fraud Assessment Questioning 
Fraud assessment questioning  is a non-accusatory interview technique used as a part of a normal 
audit. See the Investigation section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for further details. It 
operates on the theory that employees’ attitudes are a good indicator of potential problems, 
and that one of the most effective ways to deal with fraud is to ask about it. 
 
Below are some suggested questions that can be asked as a part of the normal audit. Note 
that the questions here begin with the general and proceed to the specific.  
• Part of my duty as an auditor is to find fraud, waste, and abuse. Do you understand that? 
• Do you think fraud is a problem for business in general? 
• Do you think this company has any particular problem with fraud? 
• Has anyone ever asked you to do anything that you felt was illegal or unethical? 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.719  
• If you felt that there was a problem in the company with respect to fraud, what would 
you do? 
• Do you have any indication that there is fraud occurring in the company now? 
 



:


fraud assess question
fraud assess question is a nonaccusatori interview techniqu us as a part of a normal
audit see the investig section of the fraud examin manual for further detail it
oper on the theori that employe attitud ar a good indic of potenti problem
and that on of the most effect wai to deal with fraud is to ask about it
below ar some suggest question that can be ask as a part of the normal audit note
that the question here begin with the gener and proce to the specif
part of my duti as an auditor is to find fraud wast and abus do you understand that
do you think fraud is a problem for busi in gener
do you think thi compani ha ani particular problem with fraud
ha anyon ever ask you to do anyth that you felt wa illeg or uneth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4719
if you felt that there wa a problem in the compani with respect to fraud what would
you do
do you have ani indic that there is fraud occur in the compani now
