2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/VII. DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


VII. DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the Corporation shall not knowingly employ or retain 
as a consultant, with or without pay, any individual who is publicly listed by a federal 
agency as debarred, suspended, or otherwise ineligible for federal programs. 
 
B. To carry out its policy, the Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry into the status 
of any potential employee or consultant. Such reasonable inquiry shall include review 
of the General Services Administration’s List of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and information on debarments imposed by any other relevant 
 federal agency. 
 
C. The Corporation’s policy does not require the Corporation to terminate the 
employment or consultancy of individuals who become suspended, or are proposed 
for debarment during their employment or consultancy with the Corporation. The 
Corporation shall, however, remove such employees or consultants from 
responsibility for, or involvement with, governmental business until the resolution of 
such suspension or proposed debarment. 
 
D. If such employee or consultant is debarred, his employment or consultancy with the 
Corporation shall be terminated. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Prevention Programs 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.743  



:


vii debar individu
a it is the polici of compani that the corpor shall not knowingli emploi or retain
as a consult with or without pai ani individu who is publicli list by a feder
agenc as debar suspend or otherwis inelig for feder program
b to carri out it polici the corpor shall make reason inquiri into the statu
of ani potenti employe or consult such reason inquiri shall includ review
of the gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and inform on debar impos by ani other relev
feder agenc
c the corpor polici doe not requir the corpor to termin the
employ or consult of individu who becom suspend or ar propos
for debar dure their employ or consult with the corpor the
corpor shall howev remov such employe or consult from
respons for or involv with government busi until the resolut of
such suspens or propos debar
d if such employe or consult is debar hi employ or consult with the
corpor shall be termin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud prevent program
2011 fraud examin manual 4743
