2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/VIII. BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES, AND EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS CHARGED WITH OR CONVICTED OF CRIMES


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


VIII. BUSINESS DEALINGS WITH DEBARRED INDIVIDUALS AND ENTITIES, AND EMPLOYEES AND CONSULTANTS CHARGED WITH OR CONVICTED OF CRIMES 
 
A. Debarred individuals and entities 
 
1. It is the policy of (company)  that it shall not knowingly form a contract with, 
purchase from, or enter into any business relationship with, any individual or 
business entity that is publicly listed by a federal agency as debarred, suspended, 
or proposed for debarment, other than (1) sales by the Corporation in the 
ordinary course of business and (2) purchases by the Corporation in the ordinary 
course of business of goods or services that are not specific to the Corporation뭩 
medical device operations regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 
unless there is a compelling reason to do so.  
 
2. The Corporation shall make reasonable inquiry as to the status of any potential 
business partner whose relationship to the Corporation would not be within the 
scope of  A(1) or  A(2). Such reasonable inquiry shall include review of the 
General Services Administration뭩 List  of Parties Excluded from Federal 
Procurement Programs and review of information on debarments imposed by 
any other relevant federal agency. 
 
3. In the case of any decision to proceed with a business relationship not within the 
scope of  A(1) or  A(2) and permissible under  A solely due to a compelling 
reason, the decision and the compelling reason shall be documented by the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
B. Individuals charged with or convicted of offenses relating to  
governmental business 
 
1. If any employee or consultant of the Corporation is charged by Indictment or 
Information with criminal offense, the Corporation shall remove that employee 
or consultant immediately from responsibility for, or involvement with, matters 
relating to the Corporation뭩 business. 
 
2. If the employee or consultant is convicted of an offense relating to the 
Company뭩 business, his employment or consultancy with the Corporation shall 
be terminated. 
 
3. With respect to any person convicted of a federal offense relating to the  
business or operations of (company), the Corporation shall have and enforce the 
following policies: 
 
a. All business relations under the Corporation뭩 control with such person shall 
be terminated, and such person shall not be re-employed or further retained 
Fraud Prevention Programs  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.744   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
by the Corporation in any capacity. This provision does not apply to any 
relationship involving the holding of any type of securities. 
 
b. No such person, nor any other person affiliated with such person, shall share 
any office space or storage space, or any building or computer system, with 
the Corporation. 
 
c. No such person shall be permitted to enter the premises of the Corporation, 
except as required by law. 
 



:


viii busi deal with debar individu and entiti and employe and consult charg with or convict of crime
a debar individu and entiti
1 it is the polici of compani that it shall not knowingli form a contract with
purchas from or enter into ani busi relationship with ani individu or
busi entiti that is publicli list by a feder agenc as debar suspend
or propos for debar other than 1 sale by the corpor in the
ordinari cours of busi and 2 purchas by the corpor in the ordinari
cours of busi of good or servic that ar not specif to the corpor
medic devic oper regul by the us food and drug administr
unless there is a compel reason to do so
2 the corpor shall make reason inquiri as to the statu of ani potenti
busi partner whose relationship to the corpor would not be within the
scope of a1 or a2 such reason inquiri shall includ review of the
gener servic administr list of parti exclud from feder
procur program and review of inform on debar impos by
ani other relev feder agenc
3 in the case of ani decis to proce with a busi relationship not within the
scope of a1 or a2 and permiss under a sole due to a compel
reason the decis and the compel reason shall be document by the
complianc coordin
b individu charg with or convict of offens relat to
government busi
1 if ani employe or consult of the corpor is charg by indict or
inform with crimin offens the corpor shall remov that employe
or consult immedi from respons for or involv with matter
relat to the corpor busi
2 if the employe or consult is convict of an offens relat to the
compani busi hi employ or consult with the corpor shall
be termin
3 with respect to ani person convict of a feder offens relat to the
busi or oper of compani the corpor shall have and enforc the
follow polici
a all busi relat under the corpor control with such person shall
be termin and such person shall not be reemploi or further retain
fraud prevent program fraud prevent and deterr
4744 2011 fraud examin manual
by the corpor in ani capac thi provis doe not appli to ani
relationship involv the hold of ani type of secur
b no such person nor ani other person affili with such person shall share
ani offic space or storag space or ani build or comput system with
the corpor
c no such person shall be permit to enter the premis of the corpor
except as requir by law
