2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD PREVENTION PROGRAMS/Sample Corporate Compliance Program/IX. DISCIPLINE


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Prevention Programs


:


IX. DISCIPLINE 
 
A. It is the policy of (company)  that the standards of conduct set forth in the Business 
Ethics Policy and in the Employee handbook shall be consistently enforced through 
appropriate disciplinary mechanisms. Disciplinary actions may be up to and including 
dismissal, and may extend, as appropriate, to individuals responsible for the failure to 
prevent, detect, or report an offense. 
 
B. The Compliance Coordinator shall, in consultation with Management and 
supervisors as appropriate, establish and administer a company-wide disciplinary 
system, including written disciplinary cases. The system shall provide for the making 
of disciplinary decisions by appropriate company officials in consultation with the 
Compliance Coordinator. 
 
C. The Compliance Coordinator shall maintain records of all disciplinary actions taken 
for violation of the standards of conduct set forth in the Business Ethics Policy and 
in the Employee Handbook. 
 
D. The Compliance Coordinator shall, at least annually, report to Management in 
writing on the disciplinary system. 
 



:


ix disciplin
a it is the polici of compani that the standard of conduct set forth in the busi
ethic polici and in the employe handbook shall be consist enforc through
appropri disciplinari mechan disciplinari action mai be up to and includ
dismiss and mai extend as appropri to individu respons for the failur to
prevent detect or report an offens
b the complianc coordin shall in consult with manag and
supervisor as appropri establish and administ a companywid disciplinari
system includ written disciplinari case the system shall provid for the make
of disciplinari decis by appropri compani offici in consult with the
complianc coordin
c the complianc coordin shall maintain record of all disciplinari action taken
for violat of the standard of conduct set forth in the busi ethic polici and
in the employe handbook
d the complianc coordin shall at least annual report to manag in
write on the disciplinari system
