2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Introduction/INTRODUCTION/Characteristics of a Fraud Examiner


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Introduction to Fraud Examination


:


Characteristics of a Fraud Examiner 
Fraud examiners should have unique abilities. In addition to technical skills, the successful 
examiner has the ability to elicit facts from numerous witnesses in a fair, impartial, lawful, 
and accurate manner, and to report the examination results accurately and completely. The 
ability to ascertain the facts and to report them accurately are of equal importance. The fraud 
examiner is part lawyer, part accountant, part criminologist, and part detective or 
investigator. 
 
Allan Pinkerton, one of the first successful private investigators, stated what qualities a 
detective should possess: 
 
The detective must possess certain qualifications of prudence, secrecy, inventiveness, persistency, 
personal courage, and above all other things, honesty; while he must add to these the same 
quality of reaching out and be coming possessed of that almost boundless information which will 
permit of the immediate and effective application of his detective talent in whatever degree that 
might be possessed. 
 
The ability to deal effectively with people is paramount for fraud examiners. The examiner 
typically meets people for a short period of time and with a specific purpose: to obtain 
information. Ideally, the examiner has the personality to attract and motivate people to be 
helpful. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   I-5  
INTRODUCTION 
The examiner’s attitude toward others affects their attitude toward him. A hostile attitude 
will create anxiety in the respondents, thereby causing them to become withdrawn and 
protective, even if there is no reason to do so. Contrary to lore, the successful investigator is 
rarely “tough,” except when the need arises and toughness has been carefully planned and 
evaluated. 
 
Art Buckwalter says, “The secret is for each private investigator to be the kind of person 
others will want to deal with.”  Examiners who mislead others will often themselves be 
misled. For each guilty person an examiner  encounters, he will deal with many innocent 
witnesses. Those innocent witnesses, and the examiner’s ability to draw them out, are 
indispensable to fraud examination methodology. Because an examiner deals with people 
from all walks of life, being able to establish rapport with strangers is vital.       
 
Because no two people are alike, the fraud examiner must be able to communicate in the 
respondent’s language. A college graduate will not be questioned exactly the same way as a 
ninth-grade dropout; someone with a technical  vocabulary won’t respond in the same 
manner as a person with an artistic background. As each case differs, so will the examiner’s 
approach. 
 
The fraud examiner must have the technical ability to understand financial concepts, and the 
ability to draw inferences from them. A unique feature of fraud cases is that, unlike 
traditional property crimes, the perpetrator’s identity usually is known. In a bank robbery, for 
example, the issue is not whether a crime was committed, but rather who committed the 
crime. In fraud cases, the issue usually is not the identity of the culprit, but whether or not 
the conduct constitutes fraud.  
 
It is important that the examiner be able to simplify financial concepts so that others 
comprehend them. Fraud cases often involve issues that appear complicated, but in reality 
most fraud is rather simple; the concealment methods make it appear complex.  
 
 



:


characterist of a fraud examin
fraud examin should have uniqu abil in addit to technic skill the success
examin ha the abil to elicit fact from numer wit in a fair imparti law
and accur manner and to report the examin result accur and complet the
abil to ascertain the fact and to report them accur ar of equal import the fraud
examin is part lawyer part account part criminologist and part detect or
investig
allan pinkerton on of the first success privat investig state what qualiti a
detect should possess
the detect must possess certain qualif of prudenc secreci invent persist
person courag and abov all other thing honesti while he must add to these the same
qualiti of reach out and be come possess of that almost boundless inform which will
permit of the immedi and effect applic of hi detect talent in whatev degre that
might be possess
the abil to deal effect with peopl is paramount for fraud examin the examin
typic meet peopl for a short period of time and with a specif purpos to obtain
inform ideal the examin ha the person to attract and motiv peopl to be
help
2011 fraud examin manual i5
introduct
the examin attitud toward other affect their attitud toward him a hostil attitud
will creat anxieti in the respond therebi caus them to becom withdrawn and
protect even if there is no reason to do so contrari to lore the success investig is
rare tough except when the need aris and tough ha been carefulli plan and
evalu
art buckwalt sai the secret is for each privat investig to be the kind of person
other will want to deal with examin who mislead other will often themselv be
misl for each guilti person an examin encount he will deal with mani innoc
wit those innoc wit and the examin abil to draw them out ar
indispens to fraud examin methodolog becaus an examin deal with peopl
from all walk of life be abl to establish rapport with stranger is vital
becaus no two peopl ar alik the fraud examin must be abl to commun in the
respond languag a colleg graduat will not be question exactli the same wai as a
ninthgrad dropout someon with a technic vocabulari wont respond in the same
manner as a person with an artist background as each case differ so will the examin
approach
the fraud examin must have the technic abil to understand financi concept and the
abil to draw infer from them a uniqu featur of fraud case is that unlik
tradit properti crime the perpetr ident usual is known in a bank robberi for
exampl the issu is not whether a crime wa commit but rather who commit the
crime in fraud case the issu usual is not the ident of the culprit but whether or not
the conduct constitut fraud
it is import that the examin be abl to simplifi financi concept so that other
comprehend them fraud case often involv issu that appear complic but in realiti
most fraud is rather simpl the conceal method make it appear complex
