2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Civil Litigation/Oral Depositions


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Oral Depositions 
Depositions are probably the most popular and useful form of discovery. A deposition is 
sworn testimony given by a party or witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the 
parties before trial and outside of court, usually in a lawyer’s office. Opposing counsel and a 
stenographer, who administers the oath and transcribes the testimony, also are present. 
Deposition testimony may be used to obtain evidence about the party’s own case or the 
opponent’s, or to preserve testimony for trial. In the federal system, a witness outside the 
subpoena power of the court can be deposed in the area he resides and the transcript read to 
the jury at trial. If the deposing attorney wishes to inspect or refer during the proceedings to 
certain documents in the witness’s possession, these can be demanded by a subpoena duces 
tecum, a legal order for the witness to produce the documents for reference during the 
deposition. 
 
Unless otherwise specified, statements made during a deposition can be produced as 
evidence during the trial. According to federal guidelines, “examination and cross-examination
of witnesses may proceed as permitted at the trial ….” The deponent or counsel 
can object to particular questions, as in a trial. At a deposition, the person must answer the 
question, even when counsel enters an official objection; the evidence is “taken subject to 
the objections” (Federal Rule of  Civil Procedure 30). This means the objection is duly noted, 
and if the depositional evidence is presented at trial, the judge will be asked to rule on the 
objection before that part of the deposition is read to the jury.  
 



:


oral deposit
deposit ar probabl the most popular and us form of discoveri a deposit is
sworn testimoni given by a parti or wit upon question by counsel for on of the
parti befor trial and outsid of court usual in a lawyer offic oppos counsel and a
stenograph who administ the oath and transcrib the testimoni also ar present
deposit testimoni mai be us to obtain evid about the parti own case or the
oppon or to preserv testimoni for trial in the feder system a wit outsid the
subpoena power of the court can be depos in the area he resid and the transcript read to
the juri at trial if the depos attornei wish to inspect or refer dure the proceed to
certain document in the witnesss possess these can be demand by a subpoena duce
tecum a legal order for the wit to produc the document for refer dure the
deposit
unless otherwis specifi statement made dure a deposit can be produc as
evid dure the trial accord to feder guidelin examin and crossexamin
of wit mai proce as permit at the trial the depon or counsel
can object to particular question as in a trial at a deposit the person must answer the
question even when counsel enter an offici object the evid is taken subject to
the object feder rule of civil procedur 30 thi mean the object is duli note
and if the deposit evid is present at trial the judg will be ask to rule on the
object befor that part of the deposit is read to the juri
