2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Civil Litigation/Interrogatories


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Interrogatories 
Interrogatories are questions that are submitted to an opposing party in a suit; they are 
something like a written deposition. Interrogatories cannot be given to anyone other than a 
party to a suit. Interrogatories are submitted to the witness in writing. If the receiving party 
thinks that a question is improper, then he may object to the question. If no objection is 
given, then the party must answer the question in writing. All answers must be sworn to 
under oath. Interrogatories are less expensive to perform than depositions. Some parties will 
try to provide as little information as possible but still give a “truthful” answer. However, 
that tactic can backfire — if the answering party does not provide the information requested, 
that party cannot introduce evidence on those issues at trial and can be sanctioned by the 
court.  
 
A typical interrogatory in a fraud case might inquire: 
• State your name, address, telephone number and title of the person answering these 
interrogatories. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.605 
• Describe in detail your educational background, and include the names and addresses of 
all institutions that you have attended, the dates of attendance, and a description of the 
degrees or certificates that you have obtained.  
• Identify all persons having knowledge, either directly or indirectly, of the allegations 
contained in Defendant’s Original Answer. 
• Please list the name, address, and telephone number and the employers name, address, 
and telephone number or each expert witness you expect to call as a witness at trial. 
• Describe in detail your duties at [the Company]? 
 
Interrogatories are covered under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 33. In addition to allowing 
parties to serve interrogatories on other parties, Rule 33 allows a party to produce business 
records in lieu of written responses. But this applies only when the burden for acquiring 
such records is nearly equal on both sides. As amended, Rule 33 adds ESI to the type of 
business records that the responding party may specify and produce in response to an 
interrogatory.  
 
A typical interrogatory in a fraud case regarding ESI might inquire: 
• Identify and describe all e-mail systems presently and previously in use by [PARTY] at 
any time within [TIME PERIOD], including but not limited to the names of the e-mail 
server and the client software, the version numbers of the software in use during [TIME 
PERIOD], and describe the dates of use for each 
• Identify all past and present individuals, including dates, responsible for the ongoing 
operations, expansion, maintenance, and upkeep of [PARTY’s] computer networks 
• For all past and present data backups performed on all computer systems in use during 
[TIME PERIOD], identify the individual(s) responsible for making backups and the 
individual(s) who supervises this process 
 



:


interrogatori
interrogatori ar question that ar submit to an oppos parti in a suit thei ar
someth like a written deposit interrogatori cannot be given to anyon other than a
parti to a suit interrogatori ar submit to the wit in write if the receiv parti
think that a question is improp then he mai object to the question if no object is
given then the parti must answer the question in write all answer must be sworn to
under oath interrogatori ar less expens to perform than deposit some parti will
try to provid as littl inform as possibl but still give a truth answer howev
that tactic can backfir if the answer parti doe not provid the inform request
that parti cannot introduc evid on those issu at trial and can be sanction by the
court
a typic interrogatori in a fraud case might inquir
state your name address telephon number and titl of the person answer these
interrogatori
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2605
describ in detail your educ background and includ the name and address of
all institut that you have attend the date of attend and a descript of the
degre or certif that you have obtain
identifi all person have knowledg either directli or indirectli of the alleg
contain in defend origin answer
pleas list the name address and telephon number and the employ name address
and telephon number or each expert wit you expect to call as a wit at trial
describ in detail your duti at the compani
interrogatori ar cover under feder rule of civil procedur 33 in addit to allow
parti to serv interrogatori on other parti rule 33 allow a parti to produc busi
record in lieu of written respons but thi appli onli when the burden for acquir
such record is nearli equal on both side as amend rule 33 add esi to the type of
busi record that the respond parti mai specifi and produc in respons to an
interrogatori
a typic interrogatori in a fraud case regard esi might inquir
identifi and describ all email system present and previous in us by parti at
ani time within time period includ but not limit to the name of the email
server and the client softwar the version number of the softwar in us dure time
period and describ the date of us for each
identifi all past and present individu includ date respons for the ongo
oper expans mainten and upkeep of parti comput network
for all past and present data backup perform on all comput system in us dure
time period identifi the individu respons for make backup and the
individu who supervis thi process
