2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Civil Litigation/Requests to Produce Documents


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Requests to Produce Documents 
A written request to produce documents (or other tangible items) demands that specific materials 
be made available for inspection. The request must specify the documents or the type of 
information being sought (e.g., e.g., “All documents identified in your answers to 
interrogatories,” rather than, “Please turn over all documents related to this case”). These 
requests may be served on opposing parties. Records from third-party witnesses or 
institutions may be obtained by subpoenas that often must be accompanied by deposition 
notices as well to take testimony to authenticate the documents.  
 
The Civil Justice System Law 
2.606  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Requests for production are covered under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 34. In 2006, Rule 
34 was amended to specifically entitle any party to serve any other party with a request to 
produce ESI and to establish a procedure that gives parties a means for resolving any form 
of production issues.  
 
Concerning requests to produce ESI, the amended rule provides that a requesting party 
“shall set forth, either by individual item or by category, the items to be inspected, and 
describe each with reasonable particularity.” It further provides that the request shall specify 
a reasonable time, place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related 
acts. In addition, the request may specify the form or forms in which electronically stored 
information is to be produced.  
 
Written requests for production of documents regarding ESI might inquire: 
• Please produce any and all documents relating to [PARTY’s] backup tapes and/or 
archive media containing e-mail and other electronic data from [TIME PERIOD]. 
• All e-mail or computer system logs. 
• Please provide exact copies of any and all disks, CDs, DVDs, and any other storage 
media used to store data related to this action from [TIME PERIOD]. 
 



:


request to produc document
a written request to produc document or other tangibl item demand that specif materi
be made avail for inspect the request must specifi the document or the type of
inform be sought eg eg all document identifi in your answer to
interrogatori rather than pleas turn over all document relat to thi case these
request mai be serv on oppos parti record from thirdparti wit or
institut mai be obtain by subpoena that often must be accompani by deposit
notic as well to take testimoni to authent the document
the civil justic system law
2606 2011 fraud examin manual
request for product ar cover under feder rule of civil procedur 34 in 2006 rule
34 wa amend to specif entitl ani parti to serv ani other parti with a request to
produc esi and to establish a procedur that give parti a mean for resolv ani form
of product issu
concern request to produc esi the amend rule provid that a request parti
shall set forth either by individu item or by categori the item to be inspect and
describ each with reason particular it further provid that the request shall specifi
a reason time place and manner of make the inspect and perform the relat
act in addit the request mai specifi the form or form in which electron store
inform is to be produc
written request for product of document regard esi might inquir
pleas produc ani and all document relat to parti backup tape andor
archiv media contain email and other electron data from time period
all email or comput system log
pleas provid exact copi of ani and all disk cd dvd and ani other storag
media us to store data relat to thi action from time period
