2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Trial of a Civil Case


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Trial of a Civil Case 
Trial procedures in civil actions are similar to criminal cases, although there are several 
notable differences. In civil trials, juries need not consist of 12 people; many civil cases are 
heard by six jurors. Also, the parties to a civil action may stipulate that the verdict need not 
be unanimous. The burden of proof for the civil plaintiff is lower than for the criminal 
prosecutor. In most cases, the civil plaintiff must prove his case only by the preponderance of 
the evidence, meaning that there must only be slightly more evidence in favor than against. 
Additionally, the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination is more limited in 
civil proceedings; a party still may refuse to answer questions or produce evidence, but if he 
does, inferences might be drawn and the refusal may be disclosed to the jury. The judge also 
may enter sanctions against the party refusing to produce evidence up to and including the 
entry of a judgment against such party. 
 
Furthermore, various privileges are recognized in civil proceedings, such as the marital 
privilege,  preventing one spouse from being compelled to testify against another; the attorney-client 
privilege, prohibiting the disclosure of communications between an attorney and his 
client for the purpose of rendering legal advice; and the work product doctrine, protecting an 
attorney’s notes and certain other materials the attorney prepares in anticipation of litigation. 
Work undertaken by an accountant, investigator, or fraud examiner at the direction of an 
attorney also may be protected by the attorney-client privilege and the work product 
doctrine. See the chapter on “Evidence” for more information. 
 
Like criminal trials, civil trials begin with the opening statements, starting with the party that 
bears the burden of proof. Thus, civil trials begin with the plaintiff’s counsel speaking first. 
As in criminal trials, the opening is devoted to introducing the parties, stating the nature of 
the dispute, and outlining the evidence the party expects to produce. 
 
Following the opening statements, the parties present their case. Because the plaintiff bears 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.615 
the burden of proof, he offers evidence first. In many civil trials, the proof consists of the 
witnesses and counsel reading portions of depositions taken in discovery from witnesses 
outside the subpoena power of the court. This tends to be particularly uninteresting for the 
jury, and may be very prejudicial for a party forced to rely on a great deal of such testimony. 
Answers to written interrogatories by the opposing party also may be read to the jury, which, 
if extensive, can be even more boring. 
 
Civil parties also may call expert witnesses to give their opinion on matters thought to be too 
technical for the average juror to understand. Fraud examiners and accountants may be used 
as experts in commercial cases to compute and testify to damages. As with expert testimony 
in criminal trials, each side usually produces a qualified expert who disagrees categorically 
with everything the expert for the other side says. Because the jury usually learns through 
cross-examination that each expert has been paid for preparation and trial time — and 
because jurors generally have a difficult time understanding and evaluating expert 
testimony — such testimony may have little effect on the outcome of the trial. 
 
The same rules of evidence apply in civil and criminal trials with certain exceptions, such as 
the application of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination noted above. 
Witnesses, except experts, must relate only facts — not opinions — and irrelevant and 
prejudicial evidence is excluded, as is most hearsay. Both parties may cross-examine and 
attempt to impeach the other side’s witnesses in essentially the same manner as at a criminal 
trial.  
 
The defendant may make a motion for judgment as a matter of law (also referred to as a motion for a 
directed verdict) at the close of the plaintiff’s case, on the grounds that even if the plaintiff’s 
evidence is believed, the defendant still is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Both 
sides may make such a motion at the close of all the evidence. If such motions are denied, 
both sides argue to the jury, with the plaintiff going first. The plaintiff usually is afforded an 
opportunity for final rebuttal. The jury is instructed on the law, regarding elements of liability 
and damages, and then retires for deliberations. Within 10 days of the verdict, the losing 
party may renew his motion for judgment as a matter of law and move for a new trial. In state 
court practice, the motion for judgment as a matter of law also may be referred to as a motion 
for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or motion for judgment n.o.v. (non obstante veredicto). 
 
Both sides may appeal from an adverse verdict, either as to liability or as damages. As in the 
criminal system, the appellate court is largely limited to reviewing the legal decision of the 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.616  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
trial court rather than the factual determination of the jury. The appeals court may reverse 
and remand for a new trial on some or all of the issues, may order that a certain portion of 
the awarded damages be remitted, or may enter final judgment, if legal grounds are clear, in 
favor of either party. 
 
A plaintiff who obtains a money judgment often must take additional steps to collect it. This 
might include garnishing the wages of the defendant or levying against his nonexempt assets. 
In many instances, particularly in fraud litigation, a judgment might go uncollected because 
the defendant has already squandered or secreted the assets. In the latter circumstances, a 
plaintiff may conduct post-judgment discovery, including a deposition of the defendant, in an 
attempt to locate assets to satisfy a judgment. 
 
 



:


trial of a civil case
trial procedur in civil action ar similar to crimin case although there ar sever
notabl differ in civil trial juri need not consist of 12 peopl mani civil case ar
heard by six juror also the parti to a civil action mai stipul that the verdict need not
be unanim the burden of proof for the civil plaintiff is lower than for the crimin
prosecutor in most case the civil plaintiff must prove hi case onli by the preponder of
the evid mean that there must onli be slightli more evid in favor than against
addition the fifth amend privileg against selfincrimin is more limit in
civil proceed a parti still mai refus to answer question or produc evid but if he
doe infer might be drawn and the refus mai be disclos to the juri the judg also
mai enter sanction against the parti refus to produc evid up to and includ the
entri of a judgment against such parti
furthermor variou privileg ar recogn in civil proceed such as the marit
privileg prevent on spous from be compel to testifi against anoth the attorneycli
privileg prohibit the disclosur of commun between an attornei and hi
client for the purpos of render legal advic and the work product doctrin protect an
attornei note and certain other materi the attornei prepar in anticip of litig
work undertaken by an account investig or fraud examin at the direct of an
attornei also mai be protect by the attorneycli privileg and the work product
doctrin see the chapter on evid for more inform
like crimin trial civil trial begin with the open statement start with the parti that
bear the burden of proof thu civil trial begin with the plaintiff counsel speak first
as in crimin trial the open is devot to introduc the parti state the natur of
the disput and outlin the evid the parti expect to produc
follow the open statement the parti present their case becaus the plaintiff bear
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2615
the burden of proof he offer evid first in mani civil trial the proof consist of the
wit and counsel read portion of deposit taken in discoveri from wit
outsid the subpoena power of the court thi tend to be particularli uninterest for the
juri and mai be veri prejudici for a parti forc to reli on a great deal of such testimoni
answer to written interrogatori by the oppos parti also mai be read to the juri which
if extens can be even more bore
civil parti also mai call expert wit to give their opinion on matter thought to be too
technic for the averag juror to understand fraud examin and account mai be us
as expert in commerci case to comput and testifi to damag as with expert testimoni
in crimin trial each side usual produc a qualifi expert who disagre categor
with everyth the expert for the other side sai becaus the juri usual learn through
crossexamin that each expert ha been paid for prepar and trial time and
becaus juror gener have a difficult time understand and evalu expert
testimoni such testimoni mai have littl effect on the outcom of the trial
the same rule of evid appli in civil and crimin trial with certain except such as
the applic of the fifth amend privileg against selfincrimin note abov
wit except expert must relat onli fact not opinion and irrelev and
prejudici evid is exclud as is most hearsai both parti mai crossexamin and
attempt to impeach the other side wit in essenti the same manner as at a crimin
trial
the defend mai make a motion for judgment as a matter of law also refer to as a motion for a
direct verdict at the close of the plaintiff case on the ground that even if the plaintiff
evid is believ the defend still is entitl to a judgment as a matter of law both
side mai make such a motion at the close of all the evid if such motion ar deni
both side argu to the juri with the plaintiff go first the plaintiff usual is afford an
opportun for final rebutt the juri is instruct on the law regard element of liabil
and damag and then retir for deliber within 10 dai of the verdict the lose
parti mai renew hi motion for judgment as a matter of law and move for a new trial in state
court practic the motion for judgment as a matter of law also mai be refer to as a motion
for judgment notwithstand the verdict or motion for judgment nov non obstant veredicto
both side mai appeal from an advers verdict either as to liabil or as damag as in the
crimin system the appel court is larg limit to review the legal decis of the
the civil justic system law
2616 2011 fraud examin manual
trial court rather than the factual determin of the juri the appeal court mai revers
and remand for a new trial on some or all of the issu mai order that a certain portion of
the award damag be remit or mai enter final judgment if legal ground ar clear in
favor of either parti
a plaintiff who obtain a monei judgment often must take addit step to collect it thi
might includ garnish the wage of the defend or levi against hi nonexempt asset
in mani instanc particularli in fraud litig a judgment might go uncollect becaus
the defend ha alreadi squander or secret the asset in the latter circumst a
plaintiff mai conduct postjudg discoveri includ a deposit of the defend in an
attempt to locat asset to satisfi a judgment
