2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Informational Questions/Physical Symptoms


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Physical Symptoms 
In volatile interviews, the individual typically reacts, rather than thinks; and frequently the 
individual is openly hostile to the interviewer. Individuals experiencing heightened emotions 
frequently have a dry mouth and tend to lick their lips and swallow more frequently than 
normal. Throat clearing is also an audible sign of emotion. Restlessness can be indicated by 
fidgeting, shifting in a chair, and foot-tapping. People under emotional stress frequently 
perspire more than normal. 
 
Under stress, a person’s complexion frequently changes. People might look red or flushed, 
or might appear to be pale. During stress, the heart beats more frequently, and a keen 
observer can see the carotid artery actually pulsate. The carotid artery is the large artery on 
each side of the neck. 
 
If an individual in a normal situation maintains eye contact, an avoidance of eye contact 
could indicate that he is under stress. It is important to realize that symptoms are not present 
in all emotional situations.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.233 



:


physic symptom
in volatil interview the individu typic react rather than think and frequent the
individu is openli hostil to the interview individu experienc heighten emot
frequent have a dry mouth and tend to lick their lip and swallow more frequent than
normal throat clear is also an audibl sign of emot restless can be indic by
fidget shift in a chair and foottap peopl under emot stress frequent
perspir more than normal
under stress a person complexion frequent chang peopl might look red or flush
or might appear to be pale dure stress the heart beat more frequent and a keen
observ can see the carotid arteri actual pulsat the carotid arteri is the larg arteri on
each side of the neck
if an individu in a normal situat maintain ey contact an avoid of ey contact
could indic that he is under stress it is import to realiz that symptom ar not present
in all emot situat
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3233
