2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Direct Accusation


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Direct Accusation  
The accusation should not be made in the form of a question, but as a statement. Emotive 
words such as steal, fraud, and crime  should be avoided during the accusatory process. The 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.252   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
accusation should be phrased as though the accused’s guilt has already been established so 
that the accused is psychologically trapped with no way out.  
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG: 
“We have reason to believe that you ...” 
OR 
“We think (suspect) you might have ...” 
 
RIGHT: 
“Our investigation has clearly established that you: 
? made a false entry (avoid fraud) 
? took company assets without permission (avoid using theft, embezzlement, or stealing) 
? accepted money from a vendor (avoid bribe or kickback) 
? have not told the complete truth (avoid lie or fraud )” 
OR 
“ We have been conducting an  investigation into ________ _ _, and you are the only person we 
have not been able to eliminate as being responsible.” 
 



:


direct accus
the accus should not be made in the form of a question but as a statement emot
word such as steal fraud and crime should be avoid dure the accusatori process the
interview theori and applic investig
3252 2011 fraud examin manual
accus should be phrase as though the accus guilt ha alreadi been establish so
that the accus is psycholog trap with no wai out
exampl
wrong
we have reason to believ that you
or
we think suspect you might have
right
our investig ha clearli establish that you
made a fals entri avoid fraud
took compani asset without permiss avoid us theft embezzl or steal
accept monei from a vendor avoid bribe or kickback
have not told the complet truth avoid lie or fraud
or
we have been conduct an investig into and you ar the onli person we
have not been abl to elimin as be respons
