2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Interrupt Denials


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Interrupt Denials 
Both the truthful and untruthful person will normally object to and deny the accusations. 
But when compared to an innocent person, a culpable person is more likely to stop short of 
an outright denial ( “I didn’t do it. ”) and is more apt to furnish the interviewer with 
explanations as to why he is not the responsible party. An innocent person is unlikely to 
allow the interviewer to prevail in stopping the denial.  
 
 EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I wasn’t even there the day  that entry was made.” 
OR 
“It could have been anybody.” 
OR 
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.” 
 
Both the innocent and the guilty person will make an outright denial if forced to do so. 
Accordingly, the interviewer should not solicit a denial at this stage of the admission-seeking 
interview. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer:  
“Did you do this?” 
OR 
“Are you the responsible person?” 
RIGHT 
Interviewer:  
“Why did you do this?” 
 
Additionally, the interviewer must prevent the subject from making an outright denial 
because it becomes extremely difficult to change a denial once it is uttered. If the person 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.254   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
denies the accusation and later admits it, he is admitting to lying, and this type of admission 
is hard to make. Therefore, the interviewer’s job is to prevent the subject from making an 
outright denial, thereby making it easier for the subject to confess to the act.  
 
Examiners can use several techniques to stop or interrupt denials.  
 



:


interrupt denial
both the truth and untruth person will normal object to and deni the accus
but when compar to an innoc person a culpabl person is more like to stop short of
an outright denial i didnt do it and is more apt to furnish the interview with
explan as to why he is not the respons parti an innoc person is unlik to
allow the interview to prevail in stop the denial
exampl
respond
i wasnt even there the dai that entri wa made
or
it could have been anybodi
or
i dont know what your talk about
both the innoc and the guilti person will make an outright denial if forc to do so
accordingli the interview should not solicit a denial at thi stage of the admissionseek
interview
exampl
wrong
interview
did you do thi
or
ar you the respons person
right
interview
why did you do thi
addition the interview must prevent the subject from make an outright denial
becaus it becom extrem difficult to chang a denial onc it is utter if the person
interview theori and applic investig
3254 2011 fraud examin manual
deni the accus and later admit it he is admit to ly and thi type of admiss
is hard to make therefor the interview job is to prevent the subject from make an
outright denial therebi make it easier for the subject to confess to the act
examin can us sever techniqu to stop or interrupt denial
