2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Interrupt Denials/REASONING


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


REASONING 
If the above techniques are unsuccessful, the interviewer might attempt to reason with the 
accused, and employ some of the tactics normally used for diffusing alibis (see below). 
Under these tactics, the accused is presented with evidence implicating him. The interviewer, 
however, normally should not disclose all the facts of the case, but rather small portions here 
and there. 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.255 
 EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I know what you say, Linda, but that doesn’t square with these invoices here in front of me. 
Look at the invoice in the amount of $102,1 36. The facts clearly show you are responsible.” 
(Do not ask the accused to explain the evidence at this point.)  
OR 
“Linda, I have talked to many pe ople before I sat down here with  you. I am not asking you if 
you’re responsible; I know you are. This is your opportunity to tell your side to someone who can 
understand.” (Do not disclose the identity or number of the witnesses who have 
been interviewed.) 
 



:


reason
if the abov techniqu ar unsuccess the interview might attempt to reason with the
accus and emploi some of the tactic normal us for diffus alibi see below
under these tactic the accus is present with evid implic him the interview
howev normal should not disclos all the fact of the case but rather small portion here
and there
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3255
exampl
interview
i know what you sai linda but that doesnt squar with these invoic here in front of me
look at the invoic in the amount of 1021 36 the fact clearli show you ar respons
do not ask the accus to explain the evid at thi point
or
linda i have talk to mani pe opl befor i sat down here with you i am not ask you if
your respons i know you ar thi is your opportun to tell your side to someon who can
understand do not disclos the ident or number of the wit who have
been interview
