2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Obtain a Benchmark Admission


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Obtain a Benchmark Admission 
Either way the accused answers the alternative question — either yes or no — he has made a 
culpable statement, or a benchmark  admission. Once the benchmark admission is made, the 
miscreant has made a subconscious decision to confess.  
 
The questions for the benchmark admission should be constructed as leading questions so 
they can be answered “yes” or “no;” they should not be constructed so that the answer 
requires some type of explanation. That will come later. The accused might also answer in 
the negative.  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.264   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I didn’t do it deliberately.” 
OR 
“I didn’t do it just beca use I wanted extra money.” 
OR 
“No, I’m not just greedy.” 
 
In the cases where the accused answers the alternative question in the negative, the 
interviewer should press further for a positive admission. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Then it just happened on the spur of the moment?” 
OR 
“Then you did it to take care of your financial problems?” 
OR 
“Then you did it because of the way you’ve been treated here?” 
 
Should the accused still not respond to the alternative question with the benchmark 
admission, the interviewer should repeat the questions or variations thereof until the 
benchmark admission is made. It is important for the interviewer to get a response that is 
tantamount to a commitment to confess.  
 



:


obtain a benchmark admiss
either wai the accus answer the altern question either ye or no he ha made a
culpabl statement or a benchmark admiss onc the benchmark admiss is made the
miscreant ha made a subconsci decis to confess
the question for the benchmark admiss should be construct as lead question so
thei can be answer ye or no thei should not be construct so that the answer
requir some type of explan that will come later the accus might also answer in
the neg
interview theori and applic investig
3264 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
respond
i didnt do it deliber
or
i didnt do it just beca us i want extra monei
or
no im not just greedi
in the case where the accus answer the altern question in the neg the
interview should press further for a posit admiss
exampl
interview
then it just happen on the spur of the moment
or
then you did it to take care of your financi problem
or
then you did it becaus of the wai youv been treat here
should the accus still not respond to the altern question with the benchmark
admiss the interview should repeat the question or variat thereof until the
benchmark admiss is made it is import for the interview to get a respons that is
tantamount to a commit to confess
