2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Verbal Confession/OBTAIN PHYSICAL EVIDENCE


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


OBTAIN PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
Physical evidence — regardless of how limited it might be — should be obtained from the 
confessor. In many instances, illicit income from fraud is deposited directly in the bank 
accounts of the perpetrator. The interviewer will typically want to ask the confessor to 
surrender his banking records voluntarily for review. It is recommended that either (1) a 
separate written authorization be created, or (2) specific language be added to the  
confession noting the voluntary surrender of banking information. The first method is 
generally preferable. 
 
If there are other relevant records that can be obtained only with the confessor’s consent, 
permission to review those should be sought during the oral confession. In some instances, 
it might be advisable to delay this step until the written confession is obtained. The request 
for physical evidence from the confessor can be set up like this: 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, as a part of wrapping up the details, I will need your banking records (or other 
physical evidence). You understand that, don’t you?” 
 
Respondent : 
“No, I don’t.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, I just need to document the facts and clear up any remaining questions. You have 
decided to tell the complete story, including your side of it. I just want to make sure the facts are 
accurate and fair to you. We want to make sure you’re not blamed for something someone else 
did. And I want to report that you cooperated fully and wanted to do the right thing, 
okay? ”(Avoid the use of the word evidence or references to higher tribunals, such 
as courts or prosecutors.) 
 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.270   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Respondent : 
“Okay.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Where do you keep your bank accounts?” (If the interviewer knows of at least one 
bank where the confessor does business, the question should be phrased:  “Linda, 
where do you do business besides Florida Marine National Bank?”) 
 
Respondent : 
“Just Florida Marine.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I’ll need to get your okay to get them from the bank if we need them. Where do you keep the 
original records?” (Do not ask the accused’s permission to look at the records; 
rather, tell her the records are needed. Let the accused object if she has a 
problem with it.) 
 



:


obtain physic evid
physic evid regardless of how limit it might be should be obtain from the
confessor in mani instanc illicit incom from fraud is deposit directli in the bank
account of the perpetr the interview will typic want to ask the confessor to
surrend hi bank record voluntarili for review it is recommend that either 1 a
separ written author be creat or 2 specif languag be ad to the
confess note the voluntari surrend of bank inform the first method is
gener prefer
if there ar other relev record that can be obtain onli with the confessor consent
permiss to review those should be sought dure the oral confess in some instanc
it might be advis to delai thi step until the written confess is obtain the request
for physic evid from the confessor can be set up like thi
exampl
interview
linda as a part of wrap up the detail i will need your bank record or other
physic evid you understand that dont you
respond
no i dont
interview
well i just need to document the fact and clear up ani remain question you have
decid to tell the complet stori includ your side of it i just want to make sure the fact ar
accur and fair to you we want to make sure your not blame for someth someon els
did and i want to report that you cooper fulli and want to do the right thing
okai avoid the us of the word evid or refer to higher tribun such
as court or prosecutor
interview theori and applic investig
3270 2011 fraud examin manual
respond
okai
interview
where do you keep your bank account if the interview know of at least on
bank where the confessor doe busi the question should be phrase linda
where do you do busi besid florida marin nation bank
respond
just florida marin
interview
ill need to get your okai to get them from the bank if we need them where do you keep the
origin record do not ask the accus permiss to look at the record
rather tell her the record ar need let the accus object if she ha a
problem with it
