2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Kinesic Interview and Interrogation/Structured Questions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Structured Questions 
The fraud examiner has several types of loaded question to use in the kinesic interview to 
shed light on the guilt or innocence of the interviewee.  
• Punishment question: The interviewer will casually discuss the punishment of the crime’s 
perpetrator with the subject, asking, for example, “What do you think should happen to the 
criminal?” When posed with this sort of question, generally the innocent person, having 
nothing invested in the crime, will answer that the criminal should be severely punished, 
saying something like, “Lock him up and throw away the key.” However, the interview 
subject, if guilty of the crime, will generally answer that the criminal should be treated 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.274   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
fairly, saying for example, “The person who stole that money is very sick and probably needs mental 
help.” In essence, the guilty person is more likely to answer “Don’t hurt me.”  
• Physical evidence question: This type of quest ion is meant to jar the suspect into making 
a mistake. The interviewer will suggest that there is a piece of evidence that might link 
the interviewee to a crime, asking, “Is there any reason that your fingerprints might have been 
found near the crime scene?” This question does not assert that there is any evidence. The 
innocent person, knowing that he had nothing to do with the crime, will simply answer 
“No,” unconcerned about the possible evid ence. The guilty party will often become 
concerned with this possible evidence and attempt to cover for it with another lie. 
• Crime existence question: A variation on this question would be “Do you think that this 
crime was even committed?” The guilty party will see this as a possible way out, and answer 
“no,” while the innocent person will likely answer “yes.” 
 



:


structur question
the fraud examin ha sever type of load question to us in the kines interview to
shed light on the guilt or innoc of the interviewe
punish question the interview will casual discuss the punish of the crime
perpetr with the subject ask for exampl what do you think should happen to the
crimin when pose with thi sort of question gener the innoc person have
noth invest in the crime will answer that the crimin should be sever punish
sai someth like lock him up and throw awai the kei howev the interview
subject if guilti of the crime will gener answer that the crimin should be treat
interview theori and applic investig
3274 2011 fraud examin manual
fairli sai for exampl the person who stole that monei is veri sick and probabl need mental
help in essenc the guilti person is more like to answer dont hurt me
physic evid question thi type of quest ion is meant to jar the suspect into make
a mistak the interview will suggest that there is a piec of evid that might link
the interviewe to a crime ask is there ani reason that your fingerprint might have been
found near the crime scene thi question doe not assert that there is ani evid the
innoc person know that he had noth to do with the crime will simpli answer
no unconcern about the possibl evid enc the guilti parti will often becom
concern with thi possibl evid and attempt to cover for it with anoth lie
crime exist question a variat on thi question would be do you think that thi
crime wa even commit the guilti parti will see thi as a possibl wai out and answer
no while the innoc person will like answer ye
