2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Employee’s Rights During the Investigation/Contractual Rights


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Contractual Rights 
An employee may have contractual rights that limit the ability of the employer to compel full 
cooperation in a fraud examination. For example, if the employee is a member of a union, 
the union contract or collective bargaining agreement might contain certain restrictions on 
the company’s investigatory procedures. For instance, the company might be required to 
notify the union before the interview, and the employee may have the right to have a union 
representative present. (See NLRB v. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251 [1975]). Other employees 
might have a written employment agreement, which might contain provisions concerning 
the employee’s rights during an investigation. 
 
Other employees might have a written employment agreement, which may contain 
provisions concerning the employee’s rights during an investigation. In addition, many 
courts have held that company policies, employee manuals, and past practices can create 
“implied” contractual relationships between the employer and the employee. Therefore, if 
the company deviates from these historical practices, the target of the investigation may 
claim that they were singled out and investigated differently than others in similar 
circumstances.  
 



:


contractu right
an employe mai have contractu right that limit the abil of the employ to compel full
cooper in a fraud examin for exampl if the employe is a member of a union
the union contract or collect bargain agreement might contain certain restrict on
the compani investigatori procedur for instanc the compani might be requir to
notifi the union befor the interview and the employe mai have the right to have a union
repres present see nlrb v weingarten inc 420 us 251 1975 other employe
might have a written employ agreement which might contain provis concern
the employe right dure an investig
other employe might have a written employ agreement which mai contain
provis concern the employe right dure an investig in addit mani
court have held that compani polici employe manual and past practic can creat
impli contractu relationship between the employ and the employe therefor if
the compani deviat from these histor practic the target of the investig mai
claim that thei were singl out and investig differ than other in similar
circumst
