2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/The Warrant Requirement/WORKPLACE SEARCHES BY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYERS


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


WORKPLACE SEARCHES BY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYERS 
Public employers are not generally required to obtain a warrant when they conduct searches 
for investigations of workplace misconduct. In O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709 (1987), the 
Supreme Court held that requiring warrants for all forms of public workplace searches 
would be unworkable and would impose intolerable burdens on public employers. 
Therefore, the Court ruled that workplace searches should be held to a lower standard.  
 
In reaching this decision, the Court stated that when public employers conduct a workplace 
investigation, their interest is substantially different from the normal interests of law 
enforcement. The goal of public employers is to ensure that their offices run efficiently, not 
to enforce the law. Requiring these employers to obtain a warrant for every workplace search 
would impede the effective administration of the government’s work.  
 
The Court also found that while public employees have some legitimate privacy interests in 
the workplace, these interests are less than in other places, such as their homes. Government 
offices are provided to public employees for the purpose of doing government work, and 
employees can avoid exposing truly personal belongings at work by simply leaving them at 
home. Thus, by balancing the strong government interest in maintaining an efficient 
workplace against the diminished privacy interests of government employees, the court 
justified the use of a lower standard for workplace searches by government employers. 
Instead of a warrant requirement based on probable cause, government employers are 
generally held to a standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances.  
 



:


workplac search by govern employ
public employ ar not gener requir to obtain a warrant when thei conduct search
for investig of workplac misconduct in oconnor v ortega 480 us 709 1987 the
suprem court held that requir warrant for all form of public workplac search
would be unwork and would impos intoler burden on public employ
therefor the court rule that workplac search should be held to a lower standard
in reach thi decis the court state that when public employ conduct a workplac
investig their interest is substanti differ from the normal interest of law
enforc the goal of public employ is to ensur that their offic run effici not
to enforc the law requir these employ to obtain a warrant for everi workplac search
would imped the effect administr of the govern work
the court also found that while public employe have some legitim privaci interest in
the workplac these interest ar less than in other place such as their home govern
offic ar provid to public employe for the purpos of do govern work and
employe can avoid expos truli person belong at work by simpli leav them at
home thu by balanc the strong govern interest in maintain an effici
workplac against the diminish privaci interest of govern employe the court
justifi the us of a lower standard for workplac search by govern employ
instead of a warrant requir base on probabl caus govern employ ar
gener held to a standard of reason under all the circumst
