2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS/Searches and Surveillance/Surreptitious Recording


:


Law


:


Legal Rights of Employees


:


Surreptitious Recording 
All but 12 states allow you to record a conversation to which you are a party without 
informing the other parties to the conversation that you are recording it. Federal wiretap 
statutes also permit one-party consent of telephone conversations in most circumstances 
(employees being the most notable exception; see the material on the Electronic 
Communication Privacy Act discussed previously in this chapter). 
 
The 38 states that allow such recordings are generally referred to as “one-party” states. The 
District of Columbia is also a “one-party” jurisdiction. The other 12 states are incorrectly 
referred to as “two-party” states. Be aware, however, that this is a misnomer because consent 
of all parties to the conversation is required. Currently, the following states require the 
consent of all parties to a conversation in most circumstances: 
• California 
• Connecticut 
• Delaware 
• Florida 
• Illinois 
• Maryland 
• Massachusetts 
• Michigan 
• Montana 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.434  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• New Hampshire 
• Pennsylvania 
• Washington 
 
There are, however, variations among states regarding the details of such recordings and 
their admissibility in court. Before you record a conversation, make sure you consult an 
attorney or check the laws for your jurisdiction. 
 
Additionally, there are a number of different laws regarding videotaping. At least fifteen 
states have outlawed the use of hidden cameras in private places. In some states, however, 
there is no prohibition on videotaping anyone as long as there is no audio recording. Due to 
privacy concerns, a number of states have proposed legislation to outlaw surreptitious 
videotaping in certain circumstances. Since this area of the law is changing constantly, make 
sure you check the law in your jurisdiction. 
 



:


surreptiti record
all but 12 state allow you to record a convers to which you ar a parti without
inform the other parti to the convers that you ar record it feder wiretap
statut also permit oneparti consent of telephon convers in most circumst
employe be the most notabl except see the materi on the electron
commun privaci act discuss previous in thi chapter
the 38 state that allow such record ar gener refer to as oneparti state the
district of columbia is also a oneparti jurisdict the other 12 state ar incorrectli
refer to as twoparti state be awar howev that thi is a misnom becaus consent
of all parti to the convers is requir current the follow state requir the
consent of all parti to a convers in most circumst
california
connecticut
delawar
florida
illinoi
maryland
massachusett
michigan
montana
individu right dure examin law
2434 2011 fraud examin manual
new hampshir
pennsylvania
washington
there ar howev variat among state regard the detail of such record and
their admiss in court befor you record a convers make sure you consult an
attornei or check the law for your jurisdict
addition there ar a number of differ law regard videotap at least fifteen
state have outlaw the us of hidden camera in privat place in some state howev
there is no prohibit on videotap anyon as long as there is no audio record due to
privaci concern a number of state have propos legisl to outlaw surreptiti
videotap in certain circumst sinc thi area of the law is chang constantli make
sure you check the law in your jurisdict
