2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Civil Litigation/Beginning the Civil Action


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Beginning the Civil Action 
A civil action begins with the filing of a complaint in the appropriate court, usually in the 
jurisdiction in which the defendant or the plaintiff resides, or where the claim arose. 
 
The federal rules provide that the complaint should be a “short and plain statement” 
showing the court’s jurisdiction to hear the case (e .g., in federal court, that there is diversity 
of citizenship and more than $75,000 in issue), the grounds for relief, and a demand for 
judgment. Rule 9(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure requires that the facts entitling 
the plaintiff to relief be stated with “particularity.” Thus, whereas a plaintiff in a negligence 
case might get into court by merely alleging—without any details or supporting evidence —
that the defendant operated his automobile in a negligent manner at such and such place and 
time, a fraud plaintiff must plead the alleged fraud in detail — the actual misrepresentations 
that were made, to whom, how they were false, and so on, depending on the type of fraud 
claim. 
 
The 9(b) requirement often creates a “Catch-22” for fraud plaintiffs. A company, for 
example, might have good grounds to believe that it is the victim of a kickback fraud, but it 
might need access to the discovery system (subpoenas for documents and witnesses, etc.) to 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.602  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
prove the illegal payments. In such circumstances, particularly where the specific information 
needed is within the sole control of the defendant, the court might relax the 9(b) 
requirement somewhat. 
 
The complaint, together with a summons, must be served on the defendant. The summons 
advises the defendant that a civil action has been commenced against him in court and that 
he has a certain time to answer (usually 20 days) or suffer a default judgment. This procedure 
is called service of process. A corporation may be served through any officer, managing agent, or 
other agent authorized by law to received process. Process may be served on a defendant 
outside the state where the court sits if the defendant has significant contacts within the 
state, such as a corporation conducting business there. 
 
Once served, the defendant must then file an answer within the specified period. A 
defendant’s answer may deny liability, add counterclaims against the plaintiff, or raise 
motions to dismiss the action based on grounds such as failure to state a claim, expiration of 
the statute of limitations, and improper service. In major litigation, these procedural 
challenges might consume a year or more and result in enormous legal fees before the case 
reaches the merits of the issue. If the defendant does not file the answer before the deadline, 
the defendant forfeits the case and is held liable for damages as the court deems fit. This 
type of judgment is called a default judgment. 
 



:


begin the civil action
a civil action begin with the file of a complaint in the appropri court usual in the
jurisdict in which the defend or the plaintiff resid or where the claim aros
the feder rule provid that the complaint should be a short and plain statement
show the court jurisdict to hear the case e g in feder court that there is divers
of citizenship and more than 75000 in issu the ground for relief and a demand for
judgment rule 9b of the feder rule of civil procedur requir that the fact entitl
the plaintiff to relief be state with particular thu wherea a plaintiff in a neglig
case might get into court by mere allegingwithout ani detail or support evid
that the defend oper hi automobil in a neglig manner at such and such place and
time a fraud plaintiff must plead the alleg fraud in detail the actual misrepresent
that were made to whom how thei were fals and so on depend on the type of fraud
claim
the 9b requir often creat a catch22 for fraud plaintiff a compani for
exampl might have good ground to believ that it is the victim of a kickback fraud but it
might need access to the discoveri system subpoena for document and wit etc to
the civil justic system law
2602 2011 fraud examin manual
prove the illeg payment in such circumst particularli where the specif inform
need is within the sole control of the defend the court might relax the 9b
requir somewhat
the complaint togeth with a summon must be serv on the defend the summon
advis the defend that a civil action ha been commenc against him in court and that
he ha a certain time to answer usual 20 dai or suffer a default judgment thi procedur
is call servic of process a corpor mai be serv through ani offic manag agent or
other agent author by law to receiv process process mai be serv on a defend
outsid the state where the court sit if the defend ha signific contact within the
state such as a corpor conduct busi there
onc serv the defend must then file an answer within the specifi period a
defend answer mai deni liabil add counterclaim against the plaintiff or rais
motion to dismiss the action base on ground such as failur to state a claim expir of
the statut of limit and improp servic in major litig these procedur
challeng might consum a year or more and result in enorm legal fee befor the case
reach the merit of the issu if the defend doe not file the answer befor the deadlin
the defend forfeit the case and is held liabl for damag as the court deem fit thi
type of judgment is call a default judgment
