2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM 
 
In this part, we will review the legal aspects of actions by private parties — including fraud 
examiners, auditors, accountants, security personnel, private investigators, and attorneys to 
investigate and recover losses due to fraud. Many of these cases will end up in the civil 
justice system. 
 
 
Civil Litigation 
Civil actions to recover damages for fraud or to enjoin further fraudulent activity can be filed 
by private plaintiffs in state or federal courts. Most common-law fraud actions, usually styled 
misrepresentation claims, are filed in state courts. Suits involving parties from different states 
and involving more than $75,000 in controversy (known as diversity cases), or actions brought 
on the basis of federal statutes, such as the civil RICO provisions, can be brought in federal 
court. Federal court generally is preferred by plaintiffs in larger cases because federal courts 
provide better access to witnesses and documents located in different states. The procedures 
described below are largely drawn from the federal rules. 
 
Beginning the Civil Action 
A civil action begins with the filing of a complaint in the appropriate court, usually in the 
jurisdiction in which the defendant or the plaintiff resides, or where the claim arose. 
 
The federal rules provide that the complaint should be a “short and plain statement” 
showing the court’s jurisdiction to hear the case (e .g., in federal court, that there is diversity 
of citizenship and more than $75,000 in issue), the grounds for relief, and a demand for 
judgment. Rule 9(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure requires that the facts entitling 
the plaintiff to relief be stated with “particularity.” Thus, whereas a plaintiff in a negligence 
case might get into court by merely alleging—without any details or supporting evidence —
that the defendant operated his automobile in a negligent manner at such and such place and 
time, a fraud plaintiff must plead the alleged fraud in detail — the actual misrepresentations 
that were made, to whom, how they were false, and so on, depending on the type of fraud 
claim. 
 
The 9(b) requirement often creates a “Catch-22” for fraud plaintiffs. A company, for 
example, might have good grounds to believe that it is the victim of a kickback fraud, but it 
might need access to the discovery system (subpoenas for documents and witnesses, etc.) to 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.602  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
prove the illegal payments. In such circumstances, particularly where the specific information 
needed is within the sole control of the defendant, the court might relax the 9(b) 
requirement somewhat. 
 
The complaint, together with a summons, must be served on the defendant. The summons 
advises the defendant that a civil action has been commenced against him in court and that 
he has a certain time to answer (usually 20 days) or suffer a default judgment. This procedure 
is called service of process. A corporation may be served through any officer, managing agent, or 
other agent authorized by law to received process. Process may be served on a defendant 
outside the state where the court sits if the defendant has significant contacts within the 
state, such as a corporation conducting business there. 
 
Once served, the defendant must then file an answer within the specified period. A 
defendant’s answer may deny liability, add counterclaims against the plaintiff, or raise 
motions to dismiss the action based on grounds such as failure to state a claim, expiration of 
the statute of limitations, and improper service. In major litigation, these procedural 
challenges might consume a year or more and result in enormous legal fees before the case 
reaches the merits of the issue. If the defendant does not file the answer before the deadline, 
the defendant forfeits the case and is held liable for damages as the court deems fit. This 
type of judgment is called a default judgment. 
 
The Discovery Stage 
If the legal hurdles required to begin a civil action are overcome, the case enters the 
discovery stage. To review, discovery refers to the formal process whereby the parties collect 
evidence and learn the details of the opposing case. Under federal rules, either party may 
take discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the subject matter of 
the action, or that might lead to admissible evidence.  
 
Discovery can be an extremely expensive and time-consuming process, often taking years to 
complete, particularly in complex litigation such as fraud actions. Proposals to reform and 
streamline the system are constantly advocated, but seldom adopted, in large measure 
because trial lawyers are unwilling to give up or to limit their opportunities to learn about 
and look for weaknesses in their opponent’s case. 
 
Due to the growth of documents in electronic formats, coupled with the difficulty courts 
have had in determining how electronic documents should be introduced as evidence, 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.603 
several discovery rules in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) were amended in 
2006 to acknowledge electronic information as a necessary component of discoverable 
evidence. Whereas the FRCP once used the term data compilations to refer to electronic 
evidence, the 2006 amendments replaced this term with electronically stored information  (ESI). 
The rules apply to parties in any civil dispute in federal court; however, many states will 
adopt or have adopted similar changes. 
 
The principal means of discovery, whether traditional paper document discovery or 
electronic discovery, include: prediscovery  disclosures, pre-trial conferences, oral 
depositions, written interrogatories, requests to produce documents, request for admission, 
request a physical or mental examination, and requests for inspection of property.  
 
Prediscovery Disclosure  
FRCP 26(a) and similar state rules require parties to make prediscovery disclosures. These rules 
require parties to disclose certain information before formal discovery begins, such as the 
disclosure of witnesses’ identities, materials that may be used to support claims or defenses, 
computations of damages, and insurance agreements that may cover the claim. As amended 
in 2006, Rule 26(a) includes electronically stored information (ESI) in the list of items that 
litigants must provide in their prediscovery disclosures. 
 
Pre-trial Conferences 
As amended in 2006, FRCP 26(f) requires parties to attend a discovery planning conference 
(called a pre-trial conference) to discuss certain issues, such as the form in which the parties 
want electronic information to be produced. Prior to the amendment, parties could  discuss 
electronic discovery issues, whereas now they must.  
 
After attending their discovery planning conference, the parties are to develop a discovery 
report (Form 35 report), which sets forth a description of how disclosure or discovery of 
electronic information should be handled.  
 
The court will enter a scheduling order after receiving a Form 35 report from the parties. 
Among other things, the scheduling order sets forth the time limits for completing 
discovery. The amendments provide that federal courts may also include “provisions for 
disclosure or discovery of electronically stored information” as an item in its scheduling 
order. Consequently, failure to abide by a discovery report or scheduling order might result 
in sanctions, and possibly criminal charges against the parties. 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.604  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Oral Depositions 
Depositions are probably the most popular and useful form of discovery. A deposition is 
sworn testimony given by a party or witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the 
parties before trial and outside of court, usually in a lawyer’s office. Opposing counsel and a 
stenographer, who administers the oath and transcribes the testimony, also are present. 
Deposition testimony may be used to obtain evidence about the party’s own case or the 
opponent’s, or to preserve testimony for trial. In the federal system, a witness outside the 
subpoena power of the court can be deposed in the area he resides and the transcript read to 
the jury at trial. If the deposing attorney wishes to inspect or refer during the proceedings to 
certain documents in the witness’s possession, these can be demanded by a subpoena duces 
tecum, a legal order for the witness to produce the documents for reference during the 
deposition. 
 
Unless otherwise specified, statements made during a deposition can be produced as 
evidence during the trial. According to federal guidelines, “examination and cross-examination
of witnesses may proceed as permitted at the trial ….” The deponent or counsel 
can object to particular questions, as in a trial. At a deposition, the person must answer the 
question, even when counsel enters an official objection; the evidence is “taken subject to 
the objections” (Federal Rule of  Civil Procedure 30). This means the objection is duly noted, 
and if the depositional evidence is presented at trial, the judge will be asked to rule on the 
objection before that part of the deposition is read to the jury.  
 
Interrogatories 
Interrogatories are questions that are submitted to an opposing party in a suit; they are 
something like a written deposition. Interrogatories cannot be given to anyone other than a 
party to a suit. Interrogatories are submitted to the witness in writing. If the receiving party 
thinks that a question is improper, then he may object to the question. If no objection is 
given, then the party must answer the question in writing. All answers must be sworn to 
under oath. Interrogatories are less expensive to perform than depositions. Some parties will 
try to provide as little information as possible but still give a “truthful” answer. However, 
that tactic can backfire — if the answering party does not provide the information requested, 
that party cannot introduce evidence on those issues at trial and can be sanctioned by the 
court.  
 
A typical interrogatory in a fraud case might inquire: 
• State your name, address, telephone number and title of the person answering these 
interrogatories. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.605 
• Describe in detail your educational background, and include the names and addresses of 
all institutions that you have attended, the dates of attendance, and a description of the 
degrees or certificates that you have obtained.  
• Identify all persons having knowledge, either directly or indirectly, of the allegations 
contained in Defendant’s Original Answer. 
• Please list the name, address, and telephone number and the employers name, address, 
and telephone number or each expert witness you expect to call as a witness at trial. 
• Describe in detail your duties at [the Company]? 
 
Interrogatories are covered under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 33. In addition to allowing 
parties to serve interrogatories on other parties, Rule 33 allows a party to produce business 
records in lieu of written responses. But this applies only when the burden for acquiring 
such records is nearly equal on both sides. As amended, Rule 33 adds ESI to the type of 
business records that the responding party may specify and produce in response to an 
interrogatory.  
 
A typical interrogatory in a fraud case regarding ESI might inquire: 
• Identify and describe all e-mail systems presently and previously in use by [PARTY] at 
any time within [TIME PERIOD], including but not limited to the names of the e-mail 
server and the client software, the version numbers of the software in use during [TIME 
PERIOD], and describe the dates of use for each 
• Identify all past and present individuals, including dates, responsible for the ongoing 
operations, expansion, maintenance, and upkeep of [PARTY’s] computer networks 
• For all past and present data backups performed on all computer systems in use during 
[TIME PERIOD], identify the individual(s) responsible for making backups and the 
individual(s) who supervises this process 
 
Requests to Produce Documents 
A written request to produce documents (or other tangible items) demands that specific materials 
be made available for inspection. The request must specify the documents or the type of 
information being sought (e.g., e.g., “All documents identified in your answers to 
interrogatories,” rather than, “Please turn over all documents related to this case”). These 
requests may be served on opposing parties. Records from third-party witnesses or 
institutions may be obtained by subpoenas that often must be accompanied by deposition 
notices as well to take testimony to authenticate the documents.  
 
The Civil Justice System Law 
2.606  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Requests for production are covered under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 34. In 2006, Rule 
34 was amended to specifically entitle any party to serve any other party with a request to 
produce ESI and to establish a procedure that gives parties a means for resolving any form 
of production issues.  
 
Concerning requests to produce ESI, the amended rule provides that a requesting party 
“shall set forth, either by individual item or by category, the items to be inspected, and 
describe each with reasonable particularity.” It further provides that the request shall specify 
a reasonable time, place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related 
acts. In addition, the request may specify the form or forms in which electronically stored 
information is to be produced.  
 
Written requests for production of documents regarding ESI might inquire: 
• Please produce any and all documents relating to [PARTY’s] backup tapes and/or 
archive media containing e-mail and other electronic data from [TIME PERIOD]. 
• All e-mail or computer system logs. 
• Please provide exact copies of any and all disks, CDs, DVDs, and any other storage 
media used to store data related to this action from [TIME PERIOD]. 
 
Requests for Admission  
A request for admission is designed to assist in stipulating certain facts. Admission helps set 
what is and is not at issue in a suit. The request contains statements which are presented to 
the opposing party (witnesses and outside parties are not subject to requests for admission). 
To the declarative, “I, Daisy Miller, have discussed my company’s operations with 
individuals employed by our competition,” Daisy replies either “Admitted” or “Denied.” She 
may also “object to the question” if she feels it is inappropriate or impertinent to the 
proceedings. Alternatively, she can decline to answer since the issue is in dispute (she does 
not deny conversations, just the implication of the question), or because she does not have 
enough information to answer. Requests for admission often are used near the end of the 
discovery process to narrow the focus of the dispute. Any admissions established become 
part of the official record and can be produced during the trial. 
 
Requests for admission also are used to authenticate documents. For instance: 
• Exhibit A is a true and correct copy of check No. 3456. 
• Exhibit A was signed by you. 
• The signature shown on Exhibit A is your signature. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.607 
Physical and Mental Examinations 
Either side of a dispute can request a physical or mental examination of a party to the suit. The 
person’s condition must be “in controversy” and shown to be pertinent to the proceedings. 
The request is made “on motion for good cause” and the examination performed by 
qualified personnel. It may seem unthinkable that a defendant would plead insanity to a 
fraud charge, but mental and physical instability can be part of a defendant’s argument for 
mitigating circumstances. The physical or mental health of a defendant also may come into 
play if the defendant files a counterclaim alleging mental anguish as the result of an improper 
search, wrongful termination, invasion of privacy, and so on. 
 
Requests for Inspection of Property 
Parties may request to inspect equipment, real estate, or other property which has a bearing 
on the proceedings. Requests for inspection set forth as specifically as possible the items of 
the request and the type of examination desired. In fraud cases, this request may pertain to 
records, archives, office machines, or land that has been involved in a crime. For example, in 
the Johnnie McKenzie case, which can be found in the Appendix A, McKenzie was accused 
of taking money out of a safe; therefore, a crucial issue in the case involved who had access 
to the safe and whether the combination of the safe had been changed. The defense filed a 
motion requesting that they be allowed to enter the premises of the West Palm Beach Police 
Department to examine and conduct a test of the safe. (A copy of that motion is included in 
Appendix A.) Requests for inspection of property are covered under Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 34. 
 
Electronic Discovery 
Electronic discovery (e-discovery) refers to the legal discovery process that deals with 
electronically stored information (ESI). ESI is different from paper information because it 
can be stored in larger volumes and in more locations. It is also more volatile. In addition, 
electronic documents usually contain metadata (data about data), which is rarely found in 
paper documents.  
 
Because of ESI’s uniqueness, e-discovery poses additional challenges to the legal process. 
 
PRESERVATION 
The commencement of litigation creates a discovery-related obligation on the parties to 
preserve relevant information whenever litigation is reasonably anticipated. And although the 
duty to preserve is not unique to ESI, electronic information is often difficult to preserve 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.608  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
because of its volatile nature. Also, parties who fail to properly preserve evidence (spoliation) 
may be subject to adverse consequences. Thus, it is important to consider the basic 
characteristics of the obligation to preserve information and examine the relevant 
obligations, especially those concerning the preservation of ESI.  
 
To avoid any adverse consequences, companies should establish policies and procedures 
governing the maintenance, storage, and production of ESI. 
 
DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICIES  
Document retention policies that instruct employees on which documents to preserve or 
destroy are an important component of any risk management program. For this reason, 
organizations should adopt such policies, and management must effectively monitor and 
revise them. This is especially important given the growing amount, locations, and formats 
of ESI in today’s environment, which create additional risks and costs for companies that do 
not have such policies for both physical and digital data. 
 
LITIGATION HOLD PROCEDURES  
Organizations should also create litigation hold procedures, which provide a process whereby a 
company issues a litigation hold communication that notifies employees to suspend the 
destruction of potentially relevant records when the duty to preserve relevant information 
arises. The duty to preserve relevant data begins when a lawsuit is “reasonably anticipated.”  
 
There are, however, certain attributes of ESI that make executing a timely litigation hold 
difficult, including: (1) ESI may only be available for a temporary time period, (2) business 
practices are often designed to free up storage space, and (3) ESI is particularly problematic 
because of its sheer volume.  
 
Timely imposing a litigation hold is necessary to avoid sanctions, including monetary fines 
and sanctions, adverse inference jury instruction sanctions, or dismissal of claims or 
defenses.  
 
SAFE HARBOR 
FRCP 37 allows courts to order sanctions for a party’s failure to make disclosures or to 
cooperate in discovery, but, as amended, Rule 37 contains a “safe harbor” provision, 
providing that courts cannot impose sanctions on a company for failing to provide ESI that 
was lost because of routine data management practices. Nevertheless, it is important to note 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.609 
that ignorance is no defense against how a party’s electronic information is stored. 
 
INADVERTENT PRODUCTION OF PRIVILEGED ESI 
FRCP 26 provides that if a party has inadvertently produced ESI that is later determined to 
be privileged, the receiving party must destroy and refrain from using any protected 
information until any dispute is resolved. This rule recognizes that reviewing large volumes 
of ESI for attorney-client privileged material is generally more costly and time consuming 
than traditional document recovery. This rule, however, does not provide guidance for 
determining whether or not producing the material waives the privilege.  
 
On September 19, 2008, President Bush signed into law a bill adding Evidence Rule 502 to 
the Federal Rules of Evidence. This rule protects against the inadvertent waiver of the 
attorney-client privilege or the work product protection. See the “Basic Principles of 
Evidence” chapter below for further discussion of this rule.  
 
ESI FROM SOURCES THAT ARE NOT REASONABLY ACCESSIBLE 
FRCP 26 also makes a distinction between ESI that is reasonably accessible and that which 
is not. The relevant provision states that a party need not provide discovery of ESI “from 
sources that the party identifies as ‘not reasonably accessible’ because of undue burden or 
cost.”  
 
The rule, however, does not define what is reasonably accessible. Accordingly, disputes will 
continue to center on how “accessible” the information is and what constitutes “undue 
burden or cost.” Thus, at the outset of fores eeable litigation, parties should understand the 
scope and sources of their electronic information that may be related to the case, as well as 
the information’s location and format. Thereafter, it will be the court’s responsibility to 
reconcile disagreements between the parties as to what electronic information is and is not 
reasonably accessible. 
 
THE FORM OF PRODUCTION 
FRCP 34 also provides procedures for resolving any form of production issues. Specifically, 
Rule 34 requires that, where a party objects to the form for producing the electronic 
information, or if no form is specified in a request for information, “the responding party 
must state the form or forms it intends to use.” Furthermore, if a request does not specify a 
form for producing the electronic information, the “responding party must produce the 
information in a form or forms in which it is ordinarily maintained … or that are reasonably 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.610  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
usable.” Given the specificity of Rule 34, parties should decide the format they need prior to 
requesting electronic information from the opponent. 
 
BECOMING LITIGATION READY 
The recent amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure concerning the discovery of 
ESI are exposing companies to further liabilities and costs during litigation because they 
require organizations to adapt how they manage, retain, store, and deliver ESI during legal 
proceedings. The amendments provide that, in most circumstances, parties must voluntarily 
turn over (i.e., without awaiting a discovery request by the other party) a copy, or a 
description by category and location, of all ESI to the other party within 14 days of the pre-
 trial conference. Therefore, it is essential that parties (or organizations) be prepared for the 
advent of electronic discovery prior to a case being filed, or in other words, companies must 
be litigation ready. To be litigation ready, parties (or organizations) must know the scope of 
their ESI, the location of their ESI, the storage format of their ESI, the length of time ESI is 
stored, and whether their ESI is readily accessible. 
 
Pre-trial Motions in Civil Court 
As noted above, there may be a series of pre-trial conferences in which the parties to the suit sit 
down with the judge. These exchanges are designed to narrow the dispute to as few 
contested points as possible, and to remove procedural obstacles that could delay a trial. 
Judges also may encourage parties to settle during this stage.  
 
Once one party files a motion, the other side can object and file an opposing motion. There 
generally will be a hearing in person before the judge on the motion. Sometimes a judge 
reviews the material in each side’s motion papers and will issue a tentative ruling  just before the 
hearing to indicate which way the opinion is likely to go. This gives each side an idea of how 
to prepare their arguments for the hearing. At the hearing, each side argues its case to the 
judge and answers questions from the bench. The judge may announce a decision 
immediately or take the matter “under submission,” making the final ruling later.  
 
Some common pre-trial motions are listed below, but please note that the actual names of 
the motions vary among jurisdictions. 
 
Writ of Attachment 
A writ of attachment is a court order to seize an asset before judgment is rendered. In some 
cases, a party may attach or secure assets before trial to prevent the defendant from 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.611 
disposing of them while the lawsuit is pending if the party can show that the defendant is 
likely to dispose of assets. Most courts do not like to issue writs of attachment, and 
attachment is usually available only in certain types of suit. Ordinarily, judges are very 
reluctant to deprive a defendant of his property until a determination has been made that he 
is liable to the plaintiff. In addition, if the plaintiff loses the suit, the defendant can sue for 
damages. In most cases, the party requesting attachment will be required to post a bond in 
the amount of the attached property.  
 
Sequestration
Sequestration refers to the act of seizing property that is the subject of a controversy and 
placing it in the custody of the court. This is similar to attachment. The difference is that the 
property is physically delivered to the court for safekeeping.  
 
Motion for Injunctive Relief 
As noted above, an injunction is a court order by which a party is required to perform, or is 
restrained from performing, a specific act. In a fraud case, the defendant is likely to have 
misappropriated assets, and there may be a substantial risk that he may try to hide or transfer 
the ill-gotten gains. If the money or assets taken can be located, the plaintiff can ask for a 
writ of attachment to secure the assets. However, there often are cases where the money 
may not be located yet. In these cases, the plaintiff or the prosecutor can ask the judge to 
issue an injunction.  
 
Application for a Preliminary Injunction 
A preliminary injunction is a court order that the defendant perform, or not perform, some 
act while the suit is being contested. If a lawsuit between the parties is pending, a judge can 
issue a preliminary injunction, which freezes everything until a trial can be held. The 
injunction will prohibit the defendant from transferring or moving any assets unless first 
approved by the court. A preliminary injunction is usually issued only after the other party 
has been given an opportunity to respond 
 
Motion for a Temporary Restraining Order  
A temporary restraining order (TRO) is an emergency, temporary injunction ordering the 
defendant to perform, or not perform, some act. Like preliminary injunctions, TROs are 
ordered to prevent irreparable injury. Unlike preliminary injunctions, however, TROs can be 
entered without the defendant being present and are usually entered without notice to the 
other party. It is only good for up to 10 days until the defendant can appear before the judge.  
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.612  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Motion to Dismiss 
This motion asks a judge to throw out the lawsuit because the opposing party’s argument is 
legally unsound. In other words, the motion argues that even if the allegations are taken as 
true, the other party is not entitled to anything.  
 
Motion to Make More Definite and Certain 
This motion asks for greater detail or specificity in the complaint. The specifics of the 
complaint — such as which losses Bartleby’s being held liable for — will affect how the 
defendant chooses to respond. 
 
Motion in Limine 
This motion is made before trial, and it requests the court to rule that evidence is 
inadmissible, prohibiting opposing counsel from referring to or offering the evidence during 
trial. For example, Rock-Hard may use something damaging from Bartleby’s criminal trial in 
their complaint. Bartleby objects to the complaint because it unfairly prejudices the case 
against him.  
 
Motion to Strike 
This motion asks that inflammatory, prejudicial, or irrelevant material be stricken from the 
record.  
 
Motion for Continuance 
A motion for continuance asks the court to postpone a hearing, conference, or an upcoming 
trial. Some courts grant one or two routinely; other districts require justification for each 
motion for continuance. 
 
Motion for Summary Judgment 
A motion for summary judgment asks a judge to decide the case, without a trial, based on 
the evidence contained in the complaint and answer. Judges may also consider affidavits or 
declarations (i.e., sworn written statements), contracts, or other materials in reaching their 
summary decision. Either side in a lawsuit can file for summary judgment. The motion is 
granted unless it can be shown that some of the facts as presented are in dispute.  
 
Counterclaims and Cross-Claims 
In addition to the available motions, defendants can file a counterclaim against the plaintiff in a 
civil action. A counterclaim (also known as a countersuit) does just what its name implies, it 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.613 
levels accusations against the original plaintiff, who is now the defendant of the 
counterclaim. The specifics of this claim may be filed as part of the defendant’s answer or as 
a separate document. If a defendant files a counterclaim, it and the original complaint will be 
tried concurrently, with the final judgment stipulating a decision on each side’s petition. 
 
Additionally, if a case involves more than one defendants, a defendant may file a cross-claim  
against one of its co-defendants. A cross-claim is simply an action between co-parties (i.e., 
claims between two defendants or two plaintiffs). The most common occasion for 
counterclaims in a fraud case is when an employer sues an ex-employee for fraud.  
 
 
Alternative Dispute Resolution 
A current trend in civil litigation is to allow or encourage parties to an action to resolve their 
disputes without the necessity of a trial. Alternative dispute resolution  is the term used to refer to 
these processes.  
 
Alternative dispute resolution has certain advantages over litigation. It helps preserve 
existing business relations between the parties, it provides more flexible remedies, and often, 
but not always, it is less costly. 
 
Alternative dispute resolution usually involves one of two types of methods: mediation or 
arbitration. 
 
Mediation 
Mediation is the process whereby an impartial third-person assists the parties in reaching a 
resolution of the dispute. The mediator does not decide who should win, but instead works 
with the parties to reach a mutually agreeable settlement. Any agreement will be enforced as 
a contract. 
 
Arbitration 
Arbitration is the process whereby a dispute is submitted to an impartial third-person (known 
as an arbitrator) who then decides the outcome of the case (i.e., which party should win). 
The arbitrator acts as a judge or jury by deciding the case on its merits. Arbitration can be 
either “binding” or “nonbinding.” If the arbitration is binding, then the decision of the 
arbitrator is final, and the parties cannot later submit their dispute to a judge or jury for  
  
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.614  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
determination. Conversely, if the arbitration is non-binding, the arbitrator’s determination is 
not binding upon the parties. 
 
Today, many contracts contain arbitration clauses providing that if a dispute arises between 
the parties to the contract, both parties agree to submit their claims to binding arbitration 
rather than filing suit.  
 
 
Trial of a Civil Case 
Trial procedures in civil actions are similar to criminal cases, although there are several 
notable differences. In civil trials, juries need not consist of 12 people; many civil cases are 
heard by six jurors. Also, the parties to a civil action may stipulate that the verdict need not 
be unanimous. The burden of proof for the civil plaintiff is lower than for the criminal 
prosecutor. In most cases, the civil plaintiff must prove his case only by the preponderance of 
the evidence, meaning that there must only be slightly more evidence in favor than against. 
Additionally, the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination is more limited in 
civil proceedings; a party still may refuse to answer questions or produce evidence, but if he 
does, inferences might be drawn and the refusal may be disclosed to the jury. The judge also 
may enter sanctions against the party refusing to produce evidence up to and including the 
entry of a judgment against such party. 
 
Furthermore, various privileges are recognized in civil proceedings, such as the marital 
privilege,  preventing one spouse from being compelled to testify against another; the attorney-client 
privilege, prohibiting the disclosure of communications between an attorney and his 
client for the purpose of rendering legal advice; and the work product doctrine, protecting an 
attorney’s notes and certain other materials the attorney prepares in anticipation of litigation. 
Work undertaken by an accountant, investigator, or fraud examiner at the direction of an 
attorney also may be protected by the attorney-client privilege and the work product 
doctrine. See the chapter on “Evidence” for more information. 
 
Like criminal trials, civil trials begin with the opening statements, starting with the party that 
bears the burden of proof. Thus, civil trials begin with the plaintiff’s counsel speaking first. 
As in criminal trials, the opening is devoted to introducing the parties, stating the nature of 
the dispute, and outlining the evidence the party expects to produce. 
 
Following the opening statements, the parties present their case. Because the plaintiff bears 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.615 
the burden of proof, he offers evidence first. In many civil trials, the proof consists of the 
witnesses and counsel reading portions of depositions taken in discovery from witnesses 
outside the subpoena power of the court. This tends to be particularly uninteresting for the 
jury, and may be very prejudicial for a party forced to rely on a great deal of such testimony. 
Answers to written interrogatories by the opposing party also may be read to the jury, which, 
if extensive, can be even more boring. 
 
Civil parties also may call expert witnesses to give their opinion on matters thought to be too 
technical for the average juror to understand. Fraud examiners and accountants may be used 
as experts in commercial cases to compute and testify to damages. As with expert testimony 
in criminal trials, each side usually produces a qualified expert who disagrees categorically 
with everything the expert for the other side says. Because the jury usually learns through 
cross-examination that each expert has been paid for preparation and trial time — and 
because jurors generally have a difficult time understanding and evaluating expert 
testimony — such testimony may have little effect on the outcome of the trial. 
 
The same rules of evidence apply in civil and criminal trials with certain exceptions, such as 
the application of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination noted above. 
Witnesses, except experts, must relate only facts — not opinions — and irrelevant and 
prejudicial evidence is excluded, as is most hearsay. Both parties may cross-examine and 
attempt to impeach the other side’s witnesses in essentially the same manner as at a criminal 
trial.  
 
The defendant may make a motion for judgment as a matter of law (also referred to as a motion for a 
directed verdict) at the close of the plaintiff’s case, on the grounds that even if the plaintiff’s 
evidence is believed, the defendant still is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Both 
sides may make such a motion at the close of all the evidence. If such motions are denied, 
both sides argue to the jury, with the plaintiff going first. The plaintiff usually is afforded an 
opportunity for final rebuttal. The jury is instructed on the law, regarding elements of liability 
and damages, and then retires for deliberations. Within 10 days of the verdict, the losing 
party may renew his motion for judgment as a matter of law and move for a new trial. In state 
court practice, the motion for judgment as a matter of law also may be referred to as a motion 
for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or motion for judgment n.o.v. (non obstante veredicto). 
 
Both sides may appeal from an adverse verdict, either as to liability or as damages. As in the 
criminal system, the appellate court is largely limited to reviewing the legal decision of the 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.616  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
trial court rather than the factual determination of the jury. The appeals court may reverse 
and remand for a new trial on some or all of the issues, may order that a certain portion of 
the awarded damages be remitted, or may enter final judgment, if legal grounds are clear, in 
favor of either party. 
 
A plaintiff who obtains a money judgment often must take additional steps to collect it. This 
might include garnishing the wages of the defendant or levying against his nonexempt assets. 
In many instances, particularly in fraud litigation, a judgment might go uncollected because 
the defendant has already squandered or secreted the assets. In the latter circumstances, a 
plaintiff may conduct post-judgment discovery, including a deposition of the defendant, in an 
attempt to locate assets to satisfy a judgment. 
 
 
Fidelity Bond Claims 
The fidelity bond claim is an often-overlooked method of recovery for losses due to internal 
fraud. A fidelity bond is a type of policy, which is issued by many large insurance companies, 
under which the insured entity is covered against losses caused by the dishonest or 
fraudulent acts of its employees. Dishonest or fraudulent acts typically are defined as those 
acts committed with the intent to: 
• Cause the insured to sustain a loss 
• Obtain a financial benefit for the employee, or for any third party intended by the 
employee, other than his proper compensation 
 
As with any other insurance agreement, fidelity policies have deductibles, a limit of liability 
(often in the millions of dollars), and certain exclusions. To collect, the insured must submit 
a sworn proof of loss claim within specified time limits, together with supporting evidence 
of liability and the amount of loss. Proof of loss is entirely the responsibility of the insured; 
the carrier will not conduct nor assist in the investigation, nor will it reimburse investigative 
or legal costs incurred in making a claim. 
 
Most policies have express subrogation provisions providing that if the insurance company 
pays a claim, it acquires the rights of the insured to sue the wrongdoer. Policyholders are 
prohibited from interfering with these rights in any way at the risk of jeopardizing coverage, 
such as releasing the wrongdoer from liability. Therefore, no settlement agreements or 
releases should be executed with a dishonest employee or any confederate unless the 
insurance company consents. 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.701 



:


the civil justic system
in thi part we will review the legal aspect of action by privat parti includ fraud
examin auditor account secur personnel privat investig and attornei to
investig and recov loss due to fraud mani of these case will end up in the civil
justic system
civil litig
civil action to recov damag for fraud or to enjoin further fraudul activ can be file
by privat plaintiff in state or feder court most commonlaw fraud action usual style
misrepresent claim ar file in state court suit involv parti from differ state
and involv more than 75000 in controversi known as divers case or action brought
on the basi of feder statut such as the civil rico provis can be brought in feder
court feder court gener is prefer by plaintiff in larger case becaus feder court
provid better access to wit and document locat in differ state the procedur
describ below ar larg drawn from the feder rule
begin the civil action
a civil action begin with the file of a complaint in the appropri court usual in the
jurisdict in which the defend or the plaintiff resid or where the claim aros
the feder rule provid that the complaint should be a short and plain statement
show the court jurisdict to hear the case e g in feder court that there is divers
of citizenship and more than 75000 in issu the ground for relief and a demand for
judgment rule 9b of the feder rule of civil procedur requir that the fact entitl
the plaintiff to relief be state with particular thu wherea a plaintiff in a neglig
case might get into court by mere allegingwithout ani detail or support evid
that the defend oper hi automobil in a neglig manner at such and such place and
time a fraud plaintiff must plead the alleg fraud in detail the actual misrepresent
that were made to whom how thei were fals and so on depend on the type of fraud
claim
the 9b requir often creat a catch22 for fraud plaintiff a compani for
exampl might have good ground to believ that it is the victim of a kickback fraud but it
might need access to the discoveri system subpoena for document and wit etc to
the civil justic system law
2602 2011 fraud examin manual
prove the illeg payment in such circumst particularli where the specif inform
need is within the sole control of the defend the court might relax the 9b
requir somewhat
the complaint togeth with a summon must be serv on the defend the summon
advis the defend that a civil action ha been commenc against him in court and that
he ha a certain time to answer usual 20 dai or suffer a default judgment thi procedur
is call servic of process a corpor mai be serv through ani offic manag agent or
other agent author by law to receiv process process mai be serv on a defend
outsid the state where the court sit if the defend ha signific contact within the
state such as a corpor conduct busi there
onc serv the defend must then file an answer within the specifi period a
defend answer mai deni liabil add counterclaim against the plaintiff or rais
motion to dismiss the action base on ground such as failur to state a claim expir of
the statut of limit and improp servic in major litig these procedur
challeng might consum a year or more and result in enorm legal fee befor the case
reach the merit of the issu if the defend doe not file the answer befor the deadlin
the defend forfeit the case and is held liabl for damag as the court deem fit thi
type of judgment is call a default judgment
the discoveri stage
if the legal hurdl requir to begin a civil action ar overcom the case enter the
discoveri stage to review discoveri refer to the formal process wherebi the parti collect
evid and learn the detail of the oppos case under feder rule either parti mai
take discoveri regard ani matter not privileg that is relev to the subject matter of
the action or that might lead to admiss evid
discoveri can be an extrem expens and timeconsum process often take year to
complet particularli in complex litig such as fraud action propos to reform and
streamlin the system ar constantli advoc but seldom adopt in larg measur
becaus trial lawyer ar unwil to give up or to limit their opportun to learn about
and look for weak in their oppon case
due to the growth of document in electron format coupl with the difficulti court
have had in determin how electron document should be introduc as evid
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2603
sever discoveri rule in the feder rule of civil procedur frcp were amend in
2006 to acknowledg electron inform as a necessari compon of discover
evid wherea the frcp onc us the term data compil to refer to electron
evid the 2006 amend replac thi term with electron store inform esi
the rule appli to parti in ani civil disput in feder court howev mani state will
adopt or have adopt similar chang
the princip mean of discoveri whether tradit paper document discoveri or
electron discoveri includ prediscoveri disclosur pretrial confer oral
deposit written interrogatori request to produc document request for admiss
request a physic or mental examin and request for inspect of properti
prediscoveri disclosur
frcp 26a and similar state rule requir parti to make prediscoveri disclosur these rule
requir parti to disclos certain inform befor formal discoveri begin such as the
disclosur of wit ident materi that mai be us to support claim or defens
comput of damag and insur agreement that mai cover the claim as amend
in 2006 rule 26a includ electron store inform esi in the list of item that
litig must provid in their prediscoveri disclosur
pretrial confer
as amend in 2006 frcp 26f requir parti to attend a discoveri plan confer
call a pretrial confer to discuss certain issu such as the form in which the parti
want electron inform to be produc prior to the amend parti could discuss
electron discoveri issu wherea now thei must
after attend their discoveri plan confer the parti ar to develop a discoveri
report form 35 report which set forth a descript of how disclosur or discoveri of
electron inform should be handl
the court will enter a schedul order after receiv a form 35 report from the parti
among other thing the schedul order set forth the time limit for complet
discoveri the amend provid that feder court mai also includ provis for
disclosur or discoveri of electron store inform as an item in it schedul
order consequ failur to abid by a discoveri report or schedul order might result
in sanction and possibl crimin charg against the parti
the civil justic system law
2604 2011 fraud examin manual
oral deposit
deposit ar probabl the most popular and us form of discoveri a deposit is
sworn testimoni given by a parti or wit upon question by counsel for on of the
parti befor trial and outsid of court usual in a lawyer offic oppos counsel and a
stenograph who administ the oath and transcrib the testimoni also ar present
deposit testimoni mai be us to obtain evid about the parti own case or the
oppon or to preserv testimoni for trial in the feder system a wit outsid the
subpoena power of the court can be depos in the area he resid and the transcript read to
the juri at trial if the depos attornei wish to inspect or refer dure the proceed to
certain document in the witnesss possess these can be demand by a subpoena duce
tecum a legal order for the wit to produc the document for refer dure the
deposit
unless otherwis specifi statement made dure a deposit can be produc as
evid dure the trial accord to feder guidelin examin and crossexamin
of wit mai proce as permit at the trial the depon or counsel
can object to particular question as in a trial at a deposit the person must answer the
question even when counsel enter an offici object the evid is taken subject to
the object feder rule of civil procedur 30 thi mean the object is duli note
and if the deposit evid is present at trial the judg will be ask to rule on the
object befor that part of the deposit is read to the juri
interrogatori
interrogatori ar question that ar submit to an oppos parti in a suit thei ar
someth like a written deposit interrogatori cannot be given to anyon other than a
parti to a suit interrogatori ar submit to the wit in write if the receiv parti
think that a question is improp then he mai object to the question if no object is
given then the parti must answer the question in write all answer must be sworn to
under oath interrogatori ar less expens to perform than deposit some parti will
try to provid as littl inform as possibl but still give a truth answer howev
that tactic can backfir if the answer parti doe not provid the inform request
that parti cannot introduc evid on those issu at trial and can be sanction by the
court
a typic interrogatori in a fraud case might inquir
state your name address telephon number and titl of the person answer these
interrogatori
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2605
describ in detail your educ background and includ the name and address of
all institut that you have attend the date of attend and a descript of the
degre or certif that you have obtain
identifi all person have knowledg either directli or indirectli of the alleg
contain in defend origin answer
pleas list the name address and telephon number and the employ name address
and telephon number or each expert wit you expect to call as a wit at trial
describ in detail your duti at the compani
interrogatori ar cover under feder rule of civil procedur 33 in addit to allow
parti to serv interrogatori on other parti rule 33 allow a parti to produc busi
record in lieu of written respons but thi appli onli when the burden for acquir
such record is nearli equal on both side as amend rule 33 add esi to the type of
busi record that the respond parti mai specifi and produc in respons to an
interrogatori
a typic interrogatori in a fraud case regard esi might inquir
identifi and describ all email system present and previous in us by parti at
ani time within time period includ but not limit to the name of the email
server and the client softwar the version number of the softwar in us dure time
period and describ the date of us for each
identifi all past and present individu includ date respons for the ongo
oper expans mainten and upkeep of parti comput network
for all past and present data backup perform on all comput system in us dure
time period identifi the individu respons for make backup and the
individu who supervis thi process
request to produc document
a written request to produc document or other tangibl item demand that specif materi
be made avail for inspect the request must specifi the document or the type of
inform be sought eg eg all document identifi in your answer to
interrogatori rather than pleas turn over all document relat to thi case these
request mai be serv on oppos parti record from thirdparti wit or
institut mai be obtain by subpoena that often must be accompani by deposit
notic as well to take testimoni to authent the document
the civil justic system law
2606 2011 fraud examin manual
request for product ar cover under feder rule of civil procedur 34 in 2006 rule
34 wa amend to specif entitl ani parti to serv ani other parti with a request to
produc esi and to establish a procedur that give parti a mean for resolv ani form
of product issu
concern request to produc esi the amend rule provid that a request parti
shall set forth either by individu item or by categori the item to be inspect and
describ each with reason particular it further provid that the request shall specifi
a reason time place and manner of make the inspect and perform the relat
act in addit the request mai specifi the form or form in which electron store
inform is to be produc
written request for product of document regard esi might inquir
pleas produc ani and all document relat to parti backup tape andor
archiv media contain email and other electron data from time period
all email or comput system log
pleas provid exact copi of ani and all disk cd dvd and ani other storag
media us to store data relat to thi action from time period
request for admiss
a request for admiss is design to assist in stipul certain fact admiss help set
what is and is not at issu in a suit the request contain statement which ar present to
the oppos parti wit and outsid parti ar not subject to request for admiss
to the declar i daisi miller have discuss my compani oper with
individu emploi by our competit daisi repli either admit or deni she
mai also object to the question if she feel it is inappropri or impertin to the
proceed altern she can declin to answer sinc the issu is in disput she doe
not deni convers just the implic of the question or becaus she doe not have
enough inform to answer request for admiss often ar us near the end of the
discoveri process to narrow the focu of the disput ani admiss establish becom
part of the offici record and can be produc dure the trial
request for admiss also ar us to authent document for instanc
exhibit a is a true and correct copi of check no 3456
exhibit a wa sign by you
the signatur shown on exhibit a is your signatur
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2607
physic and mental examin
either side of a disput can request a physic or mental examin of a parti to the suit the
person condit must be in controversi and shown to be pertin to the proceed
the request is made on motion for good caus and the examin perform by
qualifi personnel it mai seem unthink that a defend would plead insan to a
fraud charg but mental and physic instabl can be part of a defend argument for
mitig circumst the physic or mental health of a defend also mai come into
plai if the defend file a counterclaim alleg mental anguish as the result of an improp
search wrong termin invas of privaci and so on
request for inspect of properti
parti mai request to inspect equip real estat or other properti which ha a bear
on the proceed request for inspect set forth as specif as possibl the item of
the request and the type of examin desir in fraud case thi request mai pertain to
record archiv offic machin or land that ha been involv in a crime for exampl in
the johnni mckenzi case which can be found in the appendix a mckenzi wa accus
of take monei out of a safe therefor a crucial issu in the case involv who had access
to the safe and whether the combin of the safe had been chang the defens file a
motion request that thei be allow to enter the premis of the west palm beach polic
depart to examin and conduct a test of the safe a copi of that motion is includ in
appendix a request for inspect of properti ar cover under feder rule of civil
procedur 34
electron discoveri
electron discoveri ediscoveri refer to the legal discoveri process that deal with
electron store inform esi esi is differ from paper inform becaus it
can be store in larger volum and in more locat it is also more volatil in addit
electron document usual contain metadata data about data which is rare found in
paper document
becaus of esi uniqu ediscoveri pose addit challeng to the legal process
preserv
the commenc of litig creat a discoveryrel oblig on the parti to
preserv relev inform whenev litig is reason anticip and although the
duti to preserv is not uniqu to esi electron inform is often difficult to preserv
the civil justic system law
2608 2011 fraud examin manual
becaus of it volatil natur also parti who fail to properli preserv evid spoliat
mai be subject to advers consequ thu it is import to consid the basic
characterist of the oblig to preserv inform and examin the relev
oblig especi those concern the preserv of esi
to avoid ani advers consequ compani should establish polici and procedur
govern the mainten storag and product of esi
document retent polici
document retent polici that instruct employe on which document to preserv or
destroi ar an import compon of ani risk manag program for thi reason
organ should adopt such polici and manag must effect monitor and
revis them thi is especi import given the grow amount locat and format
of esi in todai environ which creat addit risk and cost for compani that do
not have such polici for both physic and digit data
litig hold procedur
organ should also creat litig hold procedur which provid a process wherebi a
compani issu a litig hold commun that notifi employe to suspend the
destruct of potenti relev record when the duti to preserv relev inform
aris the duti to preserv relev data begin when a lawsuit is reason anticip
there ar howev certain attribut of esi that make execut a time litig hold
difficult includ 1 esi mai onli be avail for a temporari time period 2 busi
practic ar often design to free up storag space and 3 esi is particularli problemat
becaus of it sheer volum
time impos a litig hold is necessari to avoid sanction includ monetari fine
and sanction advers infer juri instruct sanction or dismiss of claim or
defens
safe harbor
frcp 37 allow court to order sanction for a parti failur to make disclosur or to
cooper in discoveri but as amend rule 37 contain a safe harbor provis
provid that court cannot impos sanction on a compani for fail to provid esi that
wa lost becaus of routin data manag practic nevertheless it is import to note
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2609
that ignor is no defens against how a parti electron inform is store
inadvert product of privileg esi
frcp 26 provid that if a parti ha inadvert produc esi that is later determin to
be privileg the receiv parti must destroi and refrain from us ani protect
inform until ani disput is resolv thi rule recogn that review larg volum
of esi for attorneycli privileg materi is gener more costli and time consum
than tradit document recoveri thi rule howev doe not provid guidanc for
determin whether or not produc the materi waiv the privileg
on septemb 19 2008 presid bush sign into law a bill ad evid rule 502 to
the feder rule of evid thi rule protect against the inadvert waiver of the
attorneycli privileg or the work product protect see the basic principl of
evid chapter below for further discuss of thi rule
esi from sourc that ar not reason access
frcp 26 also make a distinct between esi that is reason access and that which
is not the relev provis state that a parti need not provid discoveri of esi from
sourc that the parti identifi as not reason access becaus of undu burden or
cost
the rule howev doe not defin what is reason access accordingli disput will
continu to center on how access the inform is and what constitut undu
burden or cost thu at the outset of fore eeabl litig parti should understand the
scope and sourc of their electron inform that mai be relat to the case as well as
the inform locat and format thereaft it will be the court respons to
reconcil disagr between the parti as to what electron inform is and is not
reason access
the form of product
frcp 34 also provid procedur for resolv ani form of product issu specif
rule 34 requir that where a parti object to the form for produc the electron
inform or if no form is specifi in a request for inform the respond parti
must state the form or form it intend to us furthermor if a request doe not specifi a
form for produc the electron inform the respond parti must produc the
inform in a form or form in which it is ordinarili maintain or that ar reason
the civil justic system law
2610 2011 fraud examin manual
usabl given the specif of rule 34 parti should decid the format thei need prior to
request electron inform from the oppon
becom litig readi
the recent amend to the feder rule of civil procedur concern the discoveri of
esi ar expos compani to further liabil and cost dure litig becaus thei
requir organ to adapt how thei manag retain store and deliv esi dure legal
proceed the amend provid that in most circumst parti must voluntarili
turn over ie without await a discoveri request by the other parti a copi or a
descript by categori and locat of all esi to the other parti within 14 dai of the pre
trial confer therefor it is essenti that parti or organ be prepar for the
advent of electron discoveri prior to a case be file or in other word compani must
be litig readi to be litig readi parti or organ must know the scope of
their esi the locat of their esi the storag format of their esi the length of time esi is
store and whether their esi is readili access
pretrial motion in civil court
as note abov there mai be a seri of pretrial confer in which the parti to the suit sit
down with the judg these exchang ar design to narrow the disput to as few
contest point as possibl and to remov procedur obstacl that could delai a trial
judg also mai encourag parti to settl dure thi stage
onc on parti file a motion the other side can object and file an oppos motion there
gener will be a hear in person befor the judg on the motion sometim a judg
review the materi in each side motion paper and will issu a tent rule just befor the
hear to indic which wai the opinion is like to go thi give each side an idea of how
to prepar their argument for the hear at the hear each side argu it case to the
judg and answer question from the bench the judg mai announc a decis
immedi or take the matter under submiss make the final rule later
some common pretrial motion ar list below but pleas note that the actual name of
the motion vari among jurisdict
writ of attach
a writ of attach is a court order to seiz an asset befor judgment is render in some
case a parti mai attach or secur asset befor trial to prevent the defend from
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2611
dispos of them while the lawsuit is pend if the parti can show that the defend is
like to dispos of asset most court do not like to issu writ of attach and
attach is usual avail onli in certain type of suit ordinarili judg ar veri
reluct to depriv a defend of hi properti until a determin ha been made that he
is liabl to the plaintiff in addit if the plaintiff lose the suit the defend can sue for
damag in most case the parti request attach will be requir to post a bond in
the amount of the attach properti
sequestr
sequestr refer to the act of seiz properti that is the subject of a controversi and
place it in the custodi of the court thi is similar to attach the differ is that the
properti is physic deliv to the court for safekeep
motion for injunct relief
as note abov an injunct is a court order by which a parti is requir to perform or is
restrain from perform a specif act in a fraud case the defend is like to have
misappropri asset and there mai be a substanti risk that he mai try to hide or transfer
the illgotten gain if the monei or asset taken can be locat the plaintiff can ask for a
writ of attach to secur the asset howev there often ar case where the monei
mai not be locat yet in these case the plaintiff or the prosecutor can ask the judg to
issu an injunct
applic for a preliminari injunct
a preliminari injunct is a court order that the defend perform or not perform some
act while the suit is be contest if a lawsuit between the parti is pend a judg can
issu a preliminari injunct which freez everyth until a trial can be held the
injunct will prohibit the defend from transfer or move ani asset unless first
approv by the court a preliminari injunct is usual issu onli after the other parti
ha been given an opportun to respond
motion for a temporari restrain order
a temporari restrain order tro is an emerg temporari injunct order the
defend to perform or not perform some act like preliminari injunct tro ar
order to prevent irrepar injuri unlik preliminari injunct howev tro can be
enter without the defend be present and ar usual enter without notic to the
other parti it is onli good for up to 10 dai until the defend can appear befor the judg
the civil justic system law
2612 2011 fraud examin manual
motion to dismiss
thi motion ask a judg to throw out the lawsuit becaus the oppos parti argument is
legal unsound in other word the motion argu that even if the alleg ar taken as
true the other parti is not entitl to anyth
motion to make more definit and certain
thi motion ask for greater detail or specif in the complaint the specif of the
complaint such as which loss bartlebi be held liabl for will affect how the
defend choos to respond
motion in limin
thi motion is made befor trial and it request the court to rule that evid is
inadmiss prohibit oppos counsel from refer to or offer the evid dure
trial for exampl rockhard mai us someth damag from bartlebi crimin trial in
their complaint bartlebi object to the complaint becaus it unfairli prejudic the case
against him
motion to strike
thi motion ask that inflammatori prejudici or irrelev materi be stricken from the
record
motion for continu
a motion for continu ask the court to postpon a hear confer or an upcom
trial some court grant on or two routin other district requir justif for each
motion for continu
motion for summari judgment
a motion for summari judgment ask a judg to decid the case without a trial base on
the evid contain in the complaint and answer judg mai also consid affidavit or
declar ie sworn written statement contract or other materi in reach their
summari decis either side in a lawsuit can file for summari judgment the motion is
grant unless it can be shown that some of the fact as present ar in disput
counterclaim and crossclaim
in addit to the avail motion defend can file a counterclaim against the plaintiff in a
civil action a counterclaim also known as a countersuit doe just what it name impli it
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2613
level accus against the origin plaintiff who is now the defend of the
counterclaim the specif of thi claim mai be file as part of the defend answer or as
a separ document if a defend file a counterclaim it and the origin complaint will be
tri concurr with the final judgment stipul a decis on each side petit
addition if a case involv more than on defend a defend mai file a crossclaim
against on of it codefend a crossclaim is simpli an action between coparti ie
claim between two defend or two plaintiff the most common occas for
counterclaim in a fraud case is when an employ sue an exemploye for fraud
altern disput resolut
a current trend in civil litig is to allow or encourag parti to an action to resolv their
disput without the necess of a trial altern disput resolut is the term us to refer to
these process
altern disput resolut ha certain advantag over litig it help preserv
exist busi relat between the parti it provid more flexibl remedi and often
but not alwai it is less costli
altern disput resolut usual involv on of two type of method mediat or
arbitr
mediat
mediat is the process wherebi an imparti thirdperson assist the parti in reach a
resolut of the disput the mediat doe not decid who should win but instead work
with the parti to reach a mutual agreeabl settlement ani agreement will be enforc as
a contract
arbitr
arbitr is the process wherebi a disput is submit to an imparti thirdperson known
as an arbitr who then decid the outcom of the case ie which parti should win
the arbitr act as a judg or juri by decid the case on it merit arbitr can be
either bind or nonbind if the arbitr is bind then the decis of the
arbitr is final and the parti cannot later submit their disput to a judg or juri for
the civil justic system law
2614 2011 fraud examin manual
determin convers if the arbitr is nonbind the arbitr determin is
not bind upon the parti
todai mani contract contain arbitr claus provid that if a disput aris between
the parti to the contract both parti agre to submit their claim to bind arbitr
rather than file suit
trial of a civil case
trial procedur in civil action ar similar to crimin case although there ar sever
notabl differ in civil trial juri need not consist of 12 peopl mani civil case ar
heard by six juror also the parti to a civil action mai stipul that the verdict need not
be unanim the burden of proof for the civil plaintiff is lower than for the crimin
prosecutor in most case the civil plaintiff must prove hi case onli by the preponder of
the evid mean that there must onli be slightli more evid in favor than against
addition the fifth amend privileg against selfincrimin is more limit in
civil proceed a parti still mai refus to answer question or produc evid but if he
doe infer might be drawn and the refus mai be disclos to the juri the judg also
mai enter sanction against the parti refus to produc evid up to and includ the
entri of a judgment against such parti
furthermor variou privileg ar recogn in civil proceed such as the marit
privileg prevent on spous from be compel to testifi against anoth the attorneycli
privileg prohibit the disclosur of commun between an attornei and hi
client for the purpos of render legal advic and the work product doctrin protect an
attornei note and certain other materi the attornei prepar in anticip of litig
work undertaken by an account investig or fraud examin at the direct of an
attornei also mai be protect by the attorneycli privileg and the work product
doctrin see the chapter on evid for more inform
like crimin trial civil trial begin with the open statement start with the parti that
bear the burden of proof thu civil trial begin with the plaintiff counsel speak first
as in crimin trial the open is devot to introduc the parti state the natur of
the disput and outlin the evid the parti expect to produc
follow the open statement the parti present their case becaus the plaintiff bear
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2615
the burden of proof he offer evid first in mani civil trial the proof consist of the
wit and counsel read portion of deposit taken in discoveri from wit
outsid the subpoena power of the court thi tend to be particularli uninterest for the
juri and mai be veri prejudici for a parti forc to reli on a great deal of such testimoni
answer to written interrogatori by the oppos parti also mai be read to the juri which
if extens can be even more bore
civil parti also mai call expert wit to give their opinion on matter thought to be too
technic for the averag juror to understand fraud examin and account mai be us
as expert in commerci case to comput and testifi to damag as with expert testimoni
in crimin trial each side usual produc a qualifi expert who disagre categor
with everyth the expert for the other side sai becaus the juri usual learn through
crossexamin that each expert ha been paid for prepar and trial time and
becaus juror gener have a difficult time understand and evalu expert
testimoni such testimoni mai have littl effect on the outcom of the trial
the same rule of evid appli in civil and crimin trial with certain except such as
the applic of the fifth amend privileg against selfincrimin note abov
wit except expert must relat onli fact not opinion and irrelev and
prejudici evid is exclud as is most hearsai both parti mai crossexamin and
attempt to impeach the other side wit in essenti the same manner as at a crimin
trial
the defend mai make a motion for judgment as a matter of law also refer to as a motion for a
direct verdict at the close of the plaintiff case on the ground that even if the plaintiff
evid is believ the defend still is entitl to a judgment as a matter of law both
side mai make such a motion at the close of all the evid if such motion ar deni
both side argu to the juri with the plaintiff go first the plaintiff usual is afford an
opportun for final rebutt the juri is instruct on the law regard element of liabil
and damag and then retir for deliber within 10 dai of the verdict the lose
parti mai renew hi motion for judgment as a matter of law and move for a new trial in state
court practic the motion for judgment as a matter of law also mai be refer to as a motion
for judgment notwithstand the verdict or motion for judgment nov non obstant veredicto
both side mai appeal from an advers verdict either as to liabil or as damag as in the
crimin system the appel court is larg limit to review the legal decis of the
the civil justic system law
2616 2011 fraud examin manual
trial court rather than the factual determin of the juri the appeal court mai revers
and remand for a new trial on some or all of the issu mai order that a certain portion of
the award damag be remit or mai enter final judgment if legal ground ar clear in
favor of either parti
a plaintiff who obtain a monei judgment often must take addit step to collect it thi
might includ garnish the wage of the defend or levi against hi nonexempt asset
in mani instanc particularli in fraud litig a judgment might go uncollect becaus
the defend ha alreadi squander or secret the asset in the latter circumst a
plaintiff mai conduct postjudg discoveri includ a deposit of the defend in an
attempt to locat asset to satisfi a judgment
fidel bond claim
the fidel bond claim is an oftenoverlook method of recoveri for loss due to intern
fraud a fidel bond is a type of polici which is issu by mani larg insur compani
under which the insur entiti is cover against loss caus by the dishonest or
fraudul act of it employe dishonest or fraudul act typic ar defin as those
act commit with the intent to
caus the insur to sustain a loss
obtain a financi benefit for the employe or for ani third parti intend by the
employe other than hi proper compens
as with ani other insur agreement fidel polici have deduct a limit of liabil
often in the million of dollar and certain exclus to collect the insur must submit
a sworn proof of loss claim within specifi time limit togeth with support evid
of liabil and the amount of loss proof of loss is entir the respons of the insur
the carrier will not conduct nor assist in the investig nor will it reimburs investig
or legal cost incur in make a claim
most polici have express subrog provis provid that if the insur compani
pai a claim it acquir the right of the insur to sue the wrongdoer policyhold ar
prohibit from interf with these right in ani wai at the risk of jeopard coverag
such as releas the wrongdoer from liabil therefor no settlement agreement or
releas should be execut with a dishonest employe or ani confeder unless the
insur compani consent
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2701
