2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Alternative Dispute Resolution


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Alternative Dispute Resolution 
A current trend in civil litigation is to allow or encourage parties to an action to resolve their 
disputes without the necessity of a trial. Alternative dispute resolution  is the term used to refer to 
these processes.  
 
Alternative dispute resolution has certain advantages over litigation. It helps preserve 
existing business relations between the parties, it provides more flexible remedies, and often, 
but not always, it is less costly. 
 
Alternative dispute resolution usually involves one of two types of methods: mediation or 
arbitration. 
 
Mediation 
Mediation is the process whereby an impartial third-person assists the parties in reaching a 
resolution of the dispute. The mediator does not decide who should win, but instead works 
with the parties to reach a mutually agreeable settlement. Any agreement will be enforced as 
a contract. 
 
Arbitration 
Arbitration is the process whereby a dispute is submitted to an impartial third-person (known 
as an arbitrator) who then decides the outcome of the case (i.e., which party should win). 
The arbitrator acts as a judge or jury by deciding the case on its merits. Arbitration can be 
either “binding” or “nonbinding.” If the arbitration is binding, then the decision of the 
arbitrator is final, and the parties cannot later submit their dispute to a judge or jury for  
  
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.614  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
determination. Conversely, if the arbitration is non-binding, the arbitrator’s determination is 
not binding upon the parties. 
 
Today, many contracts contain arbitration clauses providing that if a dispute arises between 
the parties to the contract, both parties agree to submit their claims to binding arbitration 
rather than filing suit.  
 
 



:


altern disput resolut
a current trend in civil litig is to allow or encourag parti to an action to resolv their
disput without the necess of a trial altern disput resolut is the term us to refer to
these process
altern disput resolut ha certain advantag over litig it help preserv
exist busi relat between the parti it provid more flexibl remedi and often
but not alwai it is less costli
altern disput resolut usual involv on of two type of method mediat or
arbitr
mediat
mediat is the process wherebi an imparti thirdperson assist the parti in reach a
resolut of the disput the mediat doe not decid who should win but instead work
with the parti to reach a mutual agreeabl settlement ani agreement will be enforc as
a contract
arbitr
arbitr is the process wherebi a disput is submit to an imparti thirdperson known
as an arbitr who then decid the outcom of the case ie which parti should win
the arbitr act as a judg or juri by decid the case on it merit arbitr can be
either bind or nonbind if the arbitr is bind then the decis of the
arbitr is final and the parti cannot later submit their disput to a judg or juri for
the civil justic system law
2614 2011 fraud examin manual
determin convers if the arbitr is nonbind the arbitr determin is
not bind upon the parti
todai mani contract contain arbitr claus provid that if a disput aris between
the parti to the contract both parti agre to submit their claim to bind arbitr
rather than file suit
