2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law


:


Law


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


Law
 
OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM 
 
Basic Concepts of the Law 
The material below introduces the fraud examiner to the basic concepts of the law. Legal 
issues related to fraud are often complex, and their interpretation might require the assistance 
of an experienced attorney. The Certified Fraud Examiner always should consult with counsel 
if legal questions arise during a fraud examination.  
 
Constitutional Law 
The U.S. Constitution and its accompanying amendments are the foundation of our legal 
system. The Constitution defines and limits the powers of the various branches of the 
government and guarantees basic rights to all citizens — rights such as equal protection under 
the law, due process, and the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. 
 
The Constitution is the supreme law of the land. The legislature may not properly pass, the 
executive branch enforce, nor the judiciary uphold, any law or action that violates its 
provisions. 
 
Constitutional rights that are of particular importance to Certified Fraud Examiners include 
those found in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. The Fourth Amendment 
guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. This 
means that the government may not seize any records in a criminal case unless reasonable 
grounds exist — “probable cause” — to believe that the records would constitute evidence of a 
crime, and that a suspect may not be arrested unless there is probable cause to believe that he 
committed an offense. The Fifth Amendment guarantees subjects of a criminal investigation 
the right to refuse to answer questions or to provide certain personal information that might 
be incriminating. The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right 
to counsel, the right to confront (cross-examine) the witnesses against them, and the right to 
a speedy trial.  
 
Substantive and Procedural Law 
Additionally, in the United States, there are two main categories of law: substantive law and 
procedural law. Substantive law is comprised of the basic laws of rights and duties (contract 
law, tort law, criminal law, etc.) as opposed to procedural law, which involves rules governing 
pleadings, evidence, jurisdiction, and so on. If someone says an act is “against the law,” he 
means substantive law, which includes statutes and ordinances at every level; common law, or 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.102  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
case law, from all the various courts; and state and federal constitutions.  
 
Procedural law sets out the rules of the legal system, including the procedures to be followed in 
hearing a grievance. This means deadlines, filing requirements, steps to follow in bringing a 
claim, rules of evidence, and so on. Substantive law sets the terms of any dispute; procedural 
law dictates how a legal dispute is handled. 
 
In federal courts, procedures are governed by the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and the 
Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.  
 
There are special procedural laws governing appeals courts and evidence. The Federal Rules of 
Appellate Procedure are collected in the U.S. Code (following Title 28); individual courts of 
appeal may supplement the general rules with their own publications. These are listed under 
the name of the court (e.g., Appeals to the Fifth Circuit Manual). 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence cover what counts as evidence, the conditions of its admissibility 
in court, and the methods which authorities must use in acquiring and processing evidence.  
 
Each state (and some counties) publishes its own procedural rules. Most states follow the 
general outline of the federal rules, but procedural rules can be vastly different. If you have a 
specific question about a procedural or evidentiary rule at the state or county level, consult a 
copy of the rules for the particular jurisdiction or your attorney. 
 
Statutory and Common Law 
There are two sources of substantive law: statutory law and common law. Statutory law  
includes statutes passed by the federal or state legislatures (and regulations passed by 
administrative bodies). The common law consists of the usages and customs of a society as 
interpreted by the judiciary; it often is referred to as “judge-made” law. Criminal law is 
statutory, while civil actions can be based on either statutory or common law. 
 
Although criminal fraud statutes outlaw certain behavior, they often contain provisions that 
do not have any obvious connection to basic principles of right and wrong. For example, a 
violation of the federal mail fraud statute can be charged only if the wrongdoers placed or 
received a letter in the U.S. mail, regardless of how serious the underlying fraud might be. 
Similarly, defendants are liable under the Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations 
(RICO) statute only if they engage “in a pattern of racketeering activity” through “an 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.103 
enterprise” that is engaged in interstate commerce, while violations of the federal money 
laundering statute occur only if the defendants have engaged in “specified unlawful activity” 
and have thereafter conducted a “prohibited financial transaction.” Certified Fraud 
Examiners preparing criminal cases must be familiar with the specific technical elements of 
the applicable statutes, and they must carefully review the evidence to make certain that all 
essential elements of proof are met. 
 
In contrast to criminal fraud statutes, civil cases brought under the common law usually 
contain fewer technical elements and incorporate traditional principles of fairness and 
morality. For example, a plaintiff may file a common law claim for fraud by alleging simply 
that the defendant misrepresented important facts upon which the plaintiff relied, resulting in 
loss to the plaintiff.  
 
The common law is based not on statutes passed by the legislatures, but upon “precedent” 
established by previously decided cases stretching back hundreds of years in U.S. and English 
courts. That is, decisions that establish particular legal principles are called precedent, and in a 
common law system, the decision in an individual case binds judges in later cases of a similar 
nature, until or unless the rule of law established is overturned by a higher court or the 
legislature. The body of judicial opinions is sometimes referred to as case law. There are an 
increasing number of civil statutes in the fraud area, including the federal Civil RICO and 
Civil False Claims statutes. 
 
 
The Court System 
Civil and criminal cases will be filed in either state or federal court. The power to hear a case 
and render a judgment is strictly limited to a court’s jurisdiction, which is defined both by 
geographic boundaries and by the specific powers granted to it by the legislature. This reflects 
the basic constitutional principle of separation of powers among the three branches of 
government: the legislature, elected popularly, enacts the laws; the executive (e.g., state or 
federal prosecutors) enforces them (with a great deal of discretion); and the judiciary 
interprets and applies them.  
 
Jurisdiction and Venue 
Courts are defined by their jurisdiction and venue. To hear and decide a case, a court must 
have jurisdiction over the parties and subject matter involved and proper venue.  
 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.104  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Jurisdiction is the power of a court to hear and decide a given case; it refers to the subject 
matter or persons over which lawful authority may be exercised by a court. A probate court, 
for instance, only has jurisdiction to hear cases related to wills and other probate matters. 
Lower trial courts (such as a justice of the peace court) may only have jurisdiction to hear 
matters under a certain dollar amount, e.g., cases with less than $5,000 in controversy.  
 
Venue refers to the geographical area covered by the court; it is the physical location where 
the lawsuit is to be tried. A trial court in Dallas County, Texas, for example, can only hear 
cases that have some connection with either parties or events that occurred in that county. 
Venue is technically an element of the court’s jurisdiction. This issue may be important in 
deciding where to file charges or claims.  
 
Determining the proper court requires a three-part test. (1) Does the court hear cases of the 
type in question? Claiming $500,000 in damages, the plaintiff needs a court that hears civil 
complaints of that magnitude. (2) Does the court have the authority to exercise its power 
over a particular defendant or piece of property? You can sue a Nebraska company in a 
Nebraska state court because courts have personal jurisdiction over all businesses that do 
business in that state. (3) Does the claim arise within the court’s venue? If the claim for 
damages is against the Missouri office of a company headquartered in Nebraska, determining 
the proper venue is essential. If you file the claim in North Dakota, the court will have no 
jurisdiction to hear the case.  
 
State and Federal Court Systems  
The U.S. justice system uses separate but interlocking organizations of courts. State courts 
can decide nearly every type of case, limited only by the U.S. Constitution, their own state 
constitutions, and state law. Citizens will have most of their legal dealings with the state and 
local courts situated throughout the country. Most fraud cases will be tried at this level. 
Probate cases, marital disputes, and real estate suits are heard by state courts. 
 
Federal courts are principally located in larger cities and hold limited jurisdictions. They hear 
only those cases over which the Constitution or federal law gives them authority. Federal 
courts have jurisdiction in only two kinds of cases: (1) federal question cases, and (2) diversity 
jurisdiction cases.  
 
A court has federal question jurisdiction over cases based on (arising under) any federal law.  
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.105 
In diversity cases, a federal court can hear a state action that involves more than $75,000 and 
is between parties who are citizens of different states. Diversity of citizenship must be 
complete—all of the plaintiffs must be citize ns of a different state(s) from all of the 
defendants. For purposes of determining diversity jurisdiction, a party is a citizen of the state 
where he is domiciled (i.e., where he is present and intends to make his permanent home). A 
corporation is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorporated and the state in which it 
has its principal place of business. 
 
State Courts 
Most states use a three- or four-tier system. 
• Lower courts try misdemeanors and preliminaries for felony cases, as well as civil disputes 
below a certain dollar amount (e.g., $10,000 or less).  
• Higher-level trial courts (sometimes called Superior courts) try felony cases and civil disputes 
above a certain amount (e.g., $10,000 or more). 
• Appellate courts review trial court decisions. 
• Superior appellate courts, or Supreme courts, review lower appellate court decisions. 
 
Many states have different systems — at the trial court and appellate court levels — for trying 
civil and criminal cases. Local and state criminal courts might have limited jurisdiction; for 
example, some courts only handle traffic violations and minor offenses. Some jurisdictions 
include a small-claims civil court to hear cases involving no more than $2,000 to $3,000. 
 
Federal Courts 
The federal system uses a three-tier model. 
• U.S. District Courts conduct trials on criminal charges and civil complaints under federal 
law. 
• Courts of Appeal, including the Court of Military Appeals, reviews trial court decisions. 
• The U.S. Supreme Court  reviews lower court decisions. It is sometimes called the court of 
last resort. 
 
Each federal district has a chief prosecutor, a political appointee, known as the United States 
Attorney, and a staff of prosecutors, known as Assistant United States Attorneys. Almost all cases 
are prosecuted by assistants. Criminal cases at the state and local level are prosecuted by the 
District Attorney’s office or the Attorney General’s office. 
 
The federal system also includes specialized courts. These are:  
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.106  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Bankruptcy Court — handles matters involving the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.  
• Tax Court — deals with tax law violations.  
• Court of Federal Claims — jurisdiction over complaints filed against the federal government 
and its agencies.  
• Court of Veterans Appeals — hears veterans’ benefits cases. 
• Court of International Trade — covers business cases of international jurisdiction. 

*Although federal administration agencies are not part of the federal judiciary, they are included here because
appeals from their decisions go to the federal courts.
**Appeals from the highest state court also may be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court.
  
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.107 

FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
 
 U.S. SUPREME COURT **
 9 Justices 

 U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 
 Federal Circuit

 U.S. COURT OF APPEALS 
 12 Circuits
 (Three-judge panels, not the entire 
 circuit court, hear almost all cases.) 
 
 U.S. ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES
 (In a few cases,
 appeals go to a U.S.
 District Court,
 instead of the circuit
 courts.)
 
 U.S. DISTRICT COURTS
 50 States
 Washington, D.C.
 Puerto Rico,
 Virgin Islands, The
 Canal Zone,
 Guam
 
 US TAX COURT 
 (Reviews IRS 
 decisions.) 

 
 U.S. COURT OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE 
 (Created in 1980, 
 formerly the U.S. 
 Customs Court.)

 U.S. CLAIMS COURTS
 and some special
 agencies (E.g., Board of
 Contract Appeals, Patent
 and Trademark Office,
 and Merit Systems
 Protection Board)

 U.S. BANKRUPTCY COURTS
 U.S. MAGISTRATES

(One court created in 1982, by 
a congressional statute;  
formed by merging the Court
of Claims and the Court of 
Custom and Patent Appeals;  
judges sit in panels of three on 
cases involving customs, 
copyright, trademarks, and 
patents.)
 
2.108  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A TYPICAL STATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
 
 HIGHEST–LEVEL APPELLATE COURT  
 (A state’s highest court; 
 usually called the State Supreme 
 Court; sometimes called the Court of 
 Appeals of the Supreme Judicial 
 Court) 
 Typically, 5 to 9 judges 
 
 
 
 
 INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE OR 
 REVIEWING COURTS  
 (Found in 41 of the 50 states) 
 Generally, 3 Judges per Panel 
 
 
 
 
 TRIAL COURTS 
 General Jurisdiction
  (Called, for example, Circuit Courts 
 or Superior Courts) 
 LAW                     EQUITY 
 
 
 
 LOWER TRIAL COURTS   (Usually presided over by judges, 
 although some states have justices of 
 the peace or magistrates) 
 Nonjury—Limited Jurisdiction   
 
 (In some states, 
 handled by several 
 types of courts; in 
 others, by the 
 same trial court) 
 Traffic 
 Courts
  
 Housing 
 (Rent) 
 
 Small 
 Claims 
 Courts 
 
 Probate 
 (Orphan’s) 
 Courts 
 
 County or 
 Municipal 
 Courts 
 
 Juvenile 
 Courts 
 
 Domestic 
 Relations 
 Courts 
 Criminal 
 Courts 
 (Maximum amounts vary, 
 depending on the state, from 
 $200 to about $5,000) 
 (Serious criminal cases tend 
 to be handled by the general 
 jurisdiction trial courts) 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.109 
In general, the judge and jury serve important roles during a trial. In the trial setting, the jury 
finds the facts, and the judge applies the law, rules on evidence, and generally moderates the 
proceeding to ensure a fair trial. If, however, a jury is waived by the defendant and 
government, the judge decides both the facts and the law.  
 
Evidence in a criminal or civil case is presented based on burdens of proof. In general terms, 
the burden of proof is the responsibility of a party to prove each element necessary to 
establish the existence of a cause of action. In a criminal case, the prosecution must prove its 
case beyond a reasonable doubt; in a civil case, the burden of proof usually is a 
preponderance of the evidence — a lower standard. 
 
After the trial court enters its decision, a party may file an appeal with a higher court. Appeals 
involve questions of law or questions involving both law and fact. Most questions of law are 
decided by precedent, that is, prior court decisions of equal or higher authority that have 
considered similar cases. Obviously, however, disputes exist over what precedent should 
prevail, with both sides attempting to persuade the court to interpret existing law in a manner 
favorable to its client. 
 
The right to appeal differs in criminal and civil cases. Because of the Fifth Amendment’s 
double jeopardy provisions, which prohibits defendants from being tried twice for the same 
crime, only a convicted defendant in a criminal case can appeal a verdict. The government 
cannot appeal an acquittal on the merits. If a statute authorizes the prosecution to appeal, 
such an appeal is constitutional only if the appellate court can decide the appeal without 
subjecting the defendant to a second trial. The prosecution may appeal adverse pre-trial 
rulings on the admissibility of evidence and certain other matters that can terminate a 
prosecution temporarily (but do not result in a decision on the merits in favor of the 
defendant). Either party in a civil case may appeal a judgment. 
 
An appellate court will not reverse a conviction unless it finds error that affected the 
“substantial rights” of a party; “harmless error,” which supposedly does not affect the jury’s 
decision, is tolerated. Defendants are entitled to a fair trial—not a perfect one. If the appellate 
court reverses a conviction, it will usually order a new trial, but it may also direct dismissal of 
the case. 
 
Appeals from decisions of the U.S. District Courts are heard in the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the “Circuit,” which covers a particular geographic area. The United States is divided into 11 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.110  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
judicial circuits, plus the District of Columbia. The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest 
appellate court in the federal system and may hear certain appeals from state courts, 
particularly on constitutional grounds. 
 
In the federal system, an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court is accomplished by applying for a 
Writ of Certiorari. Relatively few appeals — “writs” — are granted. The Supreme Court usually 
hears only those cases that present an important question of constitutional law, or may be 
used to resolve a “split” or disagreement on a point of law among the circuits, or that have 
considerable significance to the judicial system beyond the interest of the litigants. If the 
Supreme Court “denies Cert.,” the lower court decision stands and the appeal process ends 
unless the defendant can find some collateral ground, such as alleged constitutional errors in 
state court proceedings, to attack the judgment. As death penalty challenges illustrate, appeals 
on such points, often brought by people in custody under “Habeas Corpus” proceedings, can 
sometimes consume a decade or more. 
 
The various state and federal courts operate in separate spheres, confined by their own 
jurisdictional limitations. State courts are “inferior” to federal courts only in the sense that 
they are subject to Constitutional and “federal question” limitations. Without these factors, a 
federal court will not interfere in state court proceedings. A single act might violate both state 
and federal law, and actions may be brought in separate courts for both violations without 
violating the double jeopardy protection. However, one jurisdiction will usually abstain if the 
other has already prosecuted. 
 
 
Civil and Criminal Actions for Fraud 
This section seeks to provide an overview of the law as it relates to fraud.  
 
Criminal Versus Civil Actions for Fraud 
Fraud may be prosecuted criminally, civilly, or both, in sequence or simultaneously, but there 
are a number of differences between criminal and civil actions with which the Certified Fraud 
Examiner should be familiar. The following is a brief description of some of the differences 
between civil and criminal actions. More information about each action is contained in the 
chapters on Criminal Prosecutions and the Civil Justice System. 
 
One key difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns who files the suit. 
Criminal actions for fraud are brought by the government acting through the prosecutor’s 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.111 
office. The prosecutor has almost unbridled discretion in such matters as whether to bring a 
criminal case, what charges to file, who to charge, and whether to try the case or negotiate a 
plea bargain. Conversely, civil actions may be brought by private individuals or organizations, 
usually without the involvement or permission of the government or court. However, 
corporate civil liability may be enforced by both private individuals as well as government 
agencies (e.g., the SEC). Moreover, a civil action usually involves a dispute over something 
(such as the terms of a contract) or a claim that one part has violated a legal duty owed to it 
by the other party, which can be generally referred to as tort actions. 
 
Another key distinction concerns who investigates the cases. Criminal cases are investigated 
by law enforcement agencies, at times with the assistance of the prosecutor’s office and the 
grand jury. The grand jury  is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas —
 legal orders to produce documents, witnesses, or other things — for testimony and documents 
to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. Law enforcement agencies and the 
prosecution can therefore subpoena evidence before charges are filed to determine whether 
an offense has occurred. In civil actions brought by private parties, however, there generally is 
no opportunity to compel the production of testimony or other evidence until a complaint is 
filed. 
 
Moreover, criminal investigations and prosecutions for fraud are subject to constitutional 
limitations, such as those in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments, and other procedural 
rules to protect the rights of the defendant, including the requirement to give Miranda 
warnings. In general, these requirements have limited applicability to civil actions. Violations 
of constitutional rights in a criminal case can result in the “suppression,” or exclusion, of any 
evidence or statement obtained by such means, or in some instances, in dismissal of the 
indictment. 
 
Also, the burden of proof differs. The burden of proof in a criminal case is always beyond a 
reasonable doubt. In civil cases, however, the burden of proof is lower, usually a preponderance of 
the evidence.  
 
Another difference between criminal and civil actions for fraud concerns the outcomes of 
each type of case. Criminal cases are punished by outcomes such as imprisonment, fine, order 
of restitution, probation, and community service.  
 
Civil cases, if successful, result in an award of civil remedies. In general, remedy is a term used 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.112  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to refer to any process, procedure, or consequence of a legal wrong by which a victim of 
misconduct can be redressed for his loss.  
 
Civil remedies generally are of three principal types: monetary (damages), declaratory, and 
equitable. Monetary (damages) remedies are remedies for the victim’s recovery of money 
damages for the injury. Declaratory remedies  are remedies in which the court states or declares 
the rights of the parties. For example, when a court interprets a will or a contract or when a 
court decides who owns personal property, its decisions are declaratory in nature. Equitable 
remedies are remedies used when the legal remedy by itself would be inadequate compensation 
for the wronged suffered. One of the primary equitable remedies is the injunction, which is a 
court order by which a party is required to perform, or is restrained from performing, a 
specific act. 
 
Parallel Proceedings 
Parallel proceedings are simultaneous criminal and civil actions against the same defendant that 
are based upon a single set of facts. The general rule is that criminal and civil actions for fraud 
may proceed simultaneously even though such “parallel proceedings” present a dilemma for 
the defendant. For example, a defendant lawfully may assert his Fifth Amendment right 
against self-incrimination to avoid answering questions or producing certain documents in the 
criminal investigation. He may not do so in the corresponding civil case, however, without 
suffering the possibility of sanctions that can include the dismissal of affirmative defenses or 
the striking of testimony. For example, if a defendant takes the stand in a civil case and 
testifies on his own behalf, he cannot later invoke the Fifth Amendment and refuse to answer 
questions concerning the same subject matter on cross-examination. If he does, the judge 
may order that his testimony on direct examination be stricken from the record. 
 
Generally, courts have not been sympathetic to the defendant’s dilemma and have allowed 
civil discovery to proceed even though criminal charges are pending. In some instances, the 
court or the parties may seal the civil record by agreement. In rare cases, the court may order 
that the civil case be stayed pending resolution of the criminal case. Normally, however, the 
court will allow the cases to proceed simultaneously despite the substantial prejudice to the 
defendant. In parallel civil and criminal cases in which the government is a party, the criminal 
process, including the use of grand jury subpoenas, may not be used to obtain evidence solely 
for a civil case. 
 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.113 
Parallel Investigations 
Parallel investigations  are simultaneous independent investigations conducted by civil regulatory 
agencies and federal prosecutors that involve substantially the same issues and parties. U.S. v. 
Stringer, 521 F.3d 1189 (9th Cir. 2008) recently addressed the applicable boundaries of lawful 
government conduct while conducting parallel investigations. Although parallel investigations 
are generally permissible, the government may not initiate a civil action solely to obtain 
evidence for its criminal prosecution, and it may not affirmatively mislead defendants to 
conceal the existence of a criminal investigation. Stringer reaffirmed the broad discretion that 
courts afford civil regulatory agencies and federal prosecutors in pursuing parallel 
investigations, ruling that so long as targets are generally aware of the possibility of 
prosecution, the government has no obligation to inform them about a criminal investigation. 
Furthermore, where a regulatory agency initiates a legitimate civil investigation before a 
criminal investigation, federal prosecutors may use and guide the civil investigation to 
facilitate criminal prosecution. Thus, Stringer underscores the possibility that a federal criminal 
investigation may be skulking behind every ongoing civil investigation.  
 
Jurisdiction 
Criminal and civil actions for fraud may be brought in federal or state court. Federal courts 
have jurisdiction over federal criminal or civil statutes, certain common law claims involving 
parties who are residents of different states, and controversies in which $75,000 or more is at 
issue. State courts have jurisdiction over state statutes and most common law civil claims.  
 
Corporate Civil and Criminal Liability 
At the federal level and in many states corporate civil and criminal liability is vicarious liability 
(the absolute liability of one party for the misconduct of another party) that is imposed under 
the doctrine of respondeat superior. Under the doctrine of respondeat superior, a corporation is 
liable for the acts of their employees if those acts occur within the scope of employment and 
with some intent to benefit the corporation.  
 
The doctrine of respondeat superior is very broad and will in fact impose liability on a 
corporation even if those in management had no knowledge or participation in the underlying 
criminal events. Moreover, the acts of any em ployee, from the lowest clerk to the CEO, can 
impute liability upon a corporation, and a corporation may be liable for the acts of its 
employees that violate security laws, banking laws, anti-bribery laws, and many others. 
 
In addition, there is no due diligence defense to a federal criminal charge, meaning that it 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.114  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
does not matter that a corporation had reasonable and effective policies in place to prevent an 
employee from committing the illegal act. However, some states allow management’s due 
diligence as a good-faith affirmative defense to corporate criminal liability.  
 
Corporate Mens Rea 
When a corporation is being charged with a crime that requires proof of a mental state, the 
moving party must only show that the agent who committed the wrongdoing had the 
required state of mind. Thus, the required mental state is attributable to the corporation. For 
example, to impose liability against a corporation for fraud, the moving party must prove that 
an agent of the corporation made the alleged false statements with specific intent to defraud. 
 
Liability of a Corporation’s Directors and Officers 
The current legal environment imposes civil and criminal liabilities on a corporation’s directors 
and officers. Generally, director and officer liability stems from the certain duties imposed by 
law to their corporation. The duties, which are discussed in more detail below, are as follows: 
• Duty of loyalty. Directors and officers must act solely in the best interest of the 
employer/principal, free of any self-dealing, conflicts of interest, or other abuse of the 
principal for personal advantage. 
• Duty of care. Directors and officers must conduct business affairs prudently with the skill 
and attention normally exercised by people in similar positions. 
• Statutory duties. Numerous state and federal laws regulate directors’ and officers’ actions 
and decisions regarding the management of their companies, including: securities laws, 
antitrust laws, racketeering laws, tax laws, intellectual property and patent laws, and state 
corporation laws.  
 
Even though directors and officers may be pursued in criminal proceedings, criminal law 
often imposes mens rea (i.e., intent) requirements that generally make it more difficult to 
impose criminal liability on directors and officers.  
 
 
 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.201 
THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1) 
 
Definition of Fraud 
Black’s Law Dictionary defines fraud as: 
 
… all multifarious means which human ingenuity can devise, and which are resorted to by one 
individual to get an advantage over another by false suggestions or suppression of the truth. It 
includes all surprise, trick, cunning or dissembling, and any unfair way by which another is 
cheated. 
  
Put more succinctly, fraud includes any intentional or deliberate act to deprive another of 
property or money by guile, deception, or other unfair means. 
 
The principal categories of fraud (or white-collar crime) are: 
• Misrepresentation of material facts 
• Concealment of material facts 
• Bribery 
• Extortion 
• Conflicts of interest 
• Forgery 
• Theft of money or property 
• Theft of trade secrets  
• Breach of fiduciary duty 
• Statutory offenses 
 
 
Principal Types of Fraud 
 
Misrepresentation of Material Facts 
Misrepresentation of material facts is most often thought of when the term fraud is used. 
Misrepresentation cases can be prosecuted criminally or civilly under a variety of statutes, 
such as false statements, false claims, or mail and wire fraud. They might also be the basis for 
common law claims. The gist of the offense is the deliberate making of false statements to 
induce the intended victim to part with money or property.  
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.202  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The specific elements composing proof of misrepresentation vary somewhat according to 
the jurisdiction and whether the case is prosecuted as a criminal or civil action. The elements 
normally include: 
• A material false statement  
• Knowledge of its falsity 
• Reliance on the false statement by the victim 
• Damages suffered 
 
Although it might be necessary to prove that the victim relied upon the false statements and 
actually suffered a loss in a civil case, these elements of proof might not be necessary in a 
criminal prosecution. In addition, in some statutes, materiality is assumed and need not be 
proved. 
 
In most instances, only false representations of “presently existing facts” may be prosecuted. 
Opinions or speculative statements about future events may not be the basis for a fraud case, 
even if made with the intent to mislead. A used car salesperson, for example, who assures 
the naive customer that the 20-year-old car towed to the lot will give him “years of driving 
pleasure” probably cannot be prosecuted for fraud. The salesperson could be prosecuted, 
however, if he tells the customer that the car has been driven only 15,000 miles when he 
knows that it has gone 150,000 miles. 
 
The rule limiting fraud cases to misrepresentations of existing facts is often applied to bar 
fraud claims in contract disputes. A party to a contract who promises to perform certain 
services by a particular date but fails to do so generally may not be prosecuted for fraud 
unless the plaintiff can demonstrate that the defendant had the intent not to perform the 
promised services when the contract was made. Of course, the other party may file an action 
for breach of contract. 
 
The rule precluding fraud actions based on false “opinions” is subject to certain exceptions, 
principally cases involving opinions provided by professional advisers such as Certified 
Public Accountants. For example, an independent auditor may be liable for 
misrepresentation if he: 
• Certifies that a financial statement fairly presents the financial condition of the company 
when the auditor knows it does not, 
• Falsely states that the audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards, or 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.203 
• Deliberately distorts the audit results. 
 
Normally, only material false statements may serve as the basis for a fraud case. Materiality  
usually refers to statements sufficiently important or relevant to the defendant to influence 
the defendant’s decision. For example, a claim that a company enjoyed a 50 percent growth 
in profits would probably be material to a prospective investor, whereas a statement that the 
company was considering moving its headquarters from New York City to Chicago might 
not be. The materiality of allegedly false statements often is a central issue in security fraud 
cases.  
 
In all fraud cases, the prosecution or plaintiff must prove that a false statement was 
intentional and part of a deliberate scheme to defraud. A person intentionally makes a false 
statement if it is his desire to cause the social harm, or if he acts with knowledge that the 
social harm will almost certainly result from his actions. In some instances, particularly those 
involving civil actions for fraud and securities cases, the intent requirement is met if the 
prosecution or plaintiff is able to show that the false statements were made recklessly; that is, 
with complete disregard for truth or falsity. 
 
Moreover, there is no such thing as an accidental or negligent fraud. For exampale, 
mistakenly entering incorrect numbers on a financial statement is not fraud; however, 
knowingly entering incorrect numbers with the intent that someone will take action in 
reliance on them is fraud if the other elements are present. 
 
Although a misrepresentation fraud case may not be based on negligent or accidental 
misrepresentations, in some instances a civil action may be filed for negligent 
misrepresentation. This action is appropriate if a defendant suffered a loss because of the 
carelessness or negligence of another party upon which the defendant was entitled to rely. 
Examples would be negligent false statements to a prospective purchaser regarding the value 
of a closely held company’s stock or the accuracy of its financial statements. 
 
Concealment of Material Facts 
An action for fraud may be based on the concealment of material facts, but only if the 
defendant had a duty in the circumstances to disclose. The essential elements of fraud based 
on failure to disclose material facts are: 
• That the defendant had knowledge 
• Of a material fact 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.204  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• That the defendant had a duty to disclose 
• And failed to do so 
• With the intent to mislead or deceive the other party 
 
The duty to disclose usually depends on the relationship between the parties. Those people 
who occupy a special relationship of trust, such as the officers or directors of a corporation, 
an attorney, accountant, trustee, stockbroker, or other agent, may be found to have a duty to 
completely disclose material facts to the parties who rely upon them. Statutes might expand 
the duty to disclose to areas in which traditionally there was no such duty, such as to the 
sellers of personal or real property or to the purchasers or sellers of securities. 
 
Proof that the concealed fact was material probably is the most important element in a 
concealment case; there can be no liability if  the withheld information would not have 
affected the other party. In addition to fraudulent concealment, a defendant might also be 
liable for negligent failure to discover and disclose material facts. An accountant, for 
example, might be liable for failure to discover or report material facts in a financial 
statement or audit. Of course, as with neg ligent misrepresentation, the penalties are less 
severe for negligence than fraudulent misrepresentation, and there is no criminal liability. 
 
Bribery 
Bribery is a form of corruption that may be defined as the offering, giving, receiving, or 
soliciting of anything of value to influence an act or a decision.  
 
Types of Bribery Schemes 
Bribery includes official bribery and commercial bribery.  
 
OFFICIAL BRIBERY 
Official bribery  refers to the corruption of a public official. Illegal payments to public officials 
can give rise to stiff criminal penalties. The elements of official bribery vary by jurisdiction 
but generally are: 
• Giving or receiving 
• A thing of value 
• With the intent to corruptly influence 
• An official act 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.205 
COMMERCIAL BRIBERY 
In contrast, commercial bribery refers to the corruption of a private individual to gain a 
commercial or business advantage. Commercial bribery may be prosecuted either as a criminal 
act or by a civil action. About half of the states in the U.S. have criminal statutes that 
prohibit commercial bribery. If a state does not have a commercial bribery statute, 
commercial bribery schemes can usually be prosecuted under criminal fraud statutes on the 
theory that the payment of a commercial bribe defrauds the business owner of the right to 
an employee’s unbiased and loyal services. 
 
There is no federal statute prohibiting commercial bribery, but such offenses may be 
prosecuted at the federal level as mail or wire fraud, as a RICO violation, or as a violation of 
some other law. The elements of commercial bribery vary by jurisdiction, but typically 
include: 
• Giving or receiving 
• A thing of value 
• With intent to corruptly influence 
• A business decision 
• Without the knowledge or consent of the principal 
 
The “without the knowledge or consent of the principal” element is included on the theory 
that a private business owner is not defrauded if the owner knows of or allows employees to 
accept gifts, favors, or other payments from vendors or other business contacts. 
 
Most state commercial bribery statutes are misdemeanors punishable by a jail term of no 
more than one year. Commercial bribery is a felony in Colorado, Kansas, Texas, Arizona (if 
the value of the bribe payment is $100 or more) and New Hampshire (if the value of the 
bribe is $500 or more). The New York commercial bribery law is a typical statute that makes 
it a misdemeanor to give or receive (or to offer or solicit) “any benefit” without the consent 
of the employer, with the intent of influencing the employee’s business conduct. The 
Louisiana, Michigan, and New Jersey commercial bribery statutes confer immunity on the 
party to the scheme who first agrees to testify against the other party in a criminal 
proceeding. 
 
Businesses injured by commercial bribery schemes may sue for treble damages and attorneys’ 
fees under the Civil RICO statute (Title 18 U.S. Code Section 1964) and the Clayton 
Antitrust Act (Title 15 U.S. Code Section 13(c)), and for compensatory and punitive 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.206  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
damages for common law fraud, conflict of interest, and breach of fiduciary duty. Civil 
actions may be brought even if commercial bribery is not a crime in a jurisdiction. 
 
Methods of Making Corrupt Payments 
In bribery schemes, the thing of value  is not limited to cash or money. Any tangible benefit 
given or received with the intent to corruptly influence the recipient may be an illegal 
payment. Courts have held that such things as lavish gifts and entertainment, payment of 
travel and lodging expenses, payment of credit card bills, loans, promises of future 
employment, and interests in businesses, can be bribes if they were given or received with 
the intent to influence or be influenced. Some state statutes might distinguish between 
felonies or misdemeanors according to the amount of illegal payment. 
 
Corrupt Influence 
To establish a bribery claim, it must be proven that the defendant acted with Proof of corrupt 
influence often involves demonstration that the person receiving the bribe favored the bribe-
 payer in some improper or unusual way, such as by providing preferential treatment, bending 
or breaking the rules, taking extraordinary steps to assist the bribe-payer, or allowing the 
bribe-payer to defraud the agency or company. It is not necessary, however, that the 
prosecution or plaintiff demonstrate that the bribe-taker acted improperly; a bribe might be 
paid to induce an official to perform an act that otherwise would be legal, or an act that the 
official might have performed without a bribe. Bribery schemes involving these 
circumstances, however, are difficult to prove and lack appeal for prosecution. 
 
Illegal Gratuity 
Illegal gratuities are similar to bribery schemes. In fact, under the federal legislation governing 
the offenses of bribery and illegal gratuity (Title 18 U.S. Code Section 201), an illegal gratuity 
is a lesser-included offense of official bribery. The elements of an illegal gratuity are:  
• Giving or receiving 
• A thing of value 
• For or because of 
• An official act 
 
The big difference between a bribe and an illegal gratuity is that an illegal gratuity charge 
does not require proof that the gratuity was given for the purpose of influencing an official 
act. In other words, an illegal gratuity charge only requires that the gratuity be given for or 
because of an official act.  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.207 
In the typical illegal gratuities scenario, a decision is made which happens to benefit a certain 
person or company. The party who benefited from the decision then gives a gift to the 
person who made the decision. The gifts are merely offered as a “thank you” for something 
that has been done. 
 
The federal statute governing the illegal gratuity offense prohibits a public official from 
accepting any payment of money or thing of value other than his lawful compensation. In 
practice, the statute often is applied when relatively small payments, such as gifts or 
entertainment, are used to attempt to influence a public official. 
 
Extortion 
An extortion case is often the flip side of a bribery case. Extortion is defined as the obtaining 
of property from another with the other party’s “consent” having been induced by wrongful 
use of actual or threatened force or fear. Fear might include the apprehension of possible 
economic damage or loss. A demand for a bribe or kickback, coupled with a threat of 
adverse action if the payment is not paid, also might constitute extortion. 
 
In most states and the federal system, extortion is not a defense to bribery. That is, a person 
who makes a bribe payment upon demand of the recipient still is culpable for bribery. In 
New York, however, extortion may be a defense in certain circumstances. 
 
Conflict of Interest 
A conflict of interest occurs when an employee has an undisclosed personal or economic 
interest in a transaction. These schemes involve self-dealing by an employee and can occur in 
various ways. A conflict may occur when an employee accepts inappropriate gifts, favors, or 
kickbacks from vendors, or when an employee engages in unapproved employment 
discussions with current or prospective contractors or suppliers. 
 
Statutes in every state and the federal system (as well as common law decisions in all 
jurisdictions) prohibit people from engaging in conduct that involves a conflict of interest. A 
conflict of interest may be prosecuted civilly or criminally. The criminal statutes vary widely 
and include prohibitions on public officers from accepting employment with government 
contractors or lobbying government agencies during specified times. 
 
Elements of a typical civil claim for conflict of interest include: 
• An agent taking an interest in a transaction 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.208  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• That is actually or potentially adverse to the principal 
• Without full and timely disclosure to and approval by the principal 
 
An agent includes any person who, under the law, owes a duty of loyalty to another, including 
officers, directors, and employees of a corporation, public officials, trustees, brokers, 
independent contractors, attorneys, and accountants. People who do not occupy positions of 
trust with another party, such as arms-length commercial parties, do not owe a duty of 
loyalty to each other and therefore are not subject to conflict of interest restrictions. 
 
The defendant in a civil conflict of interest case must repay any losses that the conflict 
caused and “disgorge” any profits he earned because of the conflict, even if there was no 
actual loss to the principal. The “disloyal” party also might be required to forfeit all 
compensation received during the period of disloyalty. The victim of a conflict of interest 
also may void any contracts entered into on its behalf that were the result of or influenced by 
the conflict. 
 
Forgery 
Forgery includes two distinct common law offenses: forgery and uttering a forged 
instrument. Both crimes are specific intent offenses, i.e., they both require proof of specific 
intent to defraud. 
 
Forgery is: 
• The fraudulent making or altering 
• Of a false writing or instrument that has apparent legal significance 
• With the intent to defraud 
 
Uttering a forged instrument expands the forgery offense by including the offering or 
passing of a forged document as genuine. The elements of uttering a forged instrument are: 
• Offering as genuine 
• A forged instrument 
• With the intent to defraud 
 
A forgery occurs when a document is not what it purports to be. It is not forgery just 
because the writing contains a false representation. The writing as a whole must have 
apparent legal significance. Forgery occurs not just when an entire writing or instrument is 
created, but also when there is any material alteration that affects the legal significance of the 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.209 
document and/or whenever a signature on a writing is fraudulently procured from a person 
who does not know what he is signing. Furthermore, the offense is committed even if no 
one is actually defrauded. 
 
Although forgery is a crime, not a civil wrong, it can occur in connection with a fraud or a 
conversion of property or property interests, for which the victim can seek civil remedies. 
 
Theft of Money and Property 
Theft is a term often used to describe a wide variety of fraudulent conduct. Many state 
statutes describe misrepresentation fraud as theft by deception or larceny by trick. As used here, 
the term theft is limited to embezzlement, larceny, and misappropriation of trade secrets and 
proprietary information. 
 
Embezzlement 
Embezzlement is the wrongful appropriation of money or property by a person to whom it has 
been lawfully entrusted (or to whom lawful possession was given). Embezzlement involves a 
breach of trust, although it is not necessary to show a fiduciary relationship between the 
parties. The elements of embezzlement are generally: 
• The defendant took or converted 
• Without the knowledge or consent of the owner 
• Money or property of another 
• That was entrusted to the defendant (defendant had lawful possession of the property) 
 
Larceny 
Larceny is defined as the unlawful taking of money or property of another with the intent to 
convert or to deprive the owner. Unlike in embezzlement, in larceny the defendant never has 
lawful possession of the property, but may have mere custody of it (e.g., a cashier has 
custody, not possession, of money in a register). The elements of larceny typically include: 
• Unlawfully taking or carrying away 
• Money or property of another 
• Without the consent of the owner 
• With the intent to permanently deprive the owner of its use or possession 
 
Misappropriation of Trade Secrets 
Misappropriation is the intentional, illegal use of the property, funds, or ideas of another 
person for an unauthorized purpose. In the fraud context, misappropriation claims generally 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.210  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
involve trade secrets or other proprietary information. 
 
Trade secret includes not only secret formulas and processes, but also more mundane 
proprietary information, such as customer and price lists, sales figures, business plans, or any 
other confidential information that has a value to the business and would be potentially 
harmful if disclosed. 
 
Theft or misappropriation of trade secrets may be prosecuted under a variety of federal and 
state statutes and the common law. The definition of what constitutes a trade secret depends 
on the organization, industry, and jurisdiction, but the following three characteristics are 
common to most definitions: 
• The information is not generally known to the relevant portion of the public. 
• It confers some sort of economic benefit on its holder (where this benefit must derive 
specifically from its not being generally known, not just from the value of the 
information itself). 
• It is the subject of reasonable efforts to maintain its secrecy. 
 
The elements of a typical theft of trade secret claim are: 
• That a party possessed information of value to the business 
• The information was treated confidentially 
• That the defendant took or used the information by breach of an agreement, confidential 
relationship, or other improper means 
 
An organization can only maintain legal protection over its trade secrets if it takes reasonable 
steps to keep that information secret. Thus, it is critical that the information being sought to 
be protected was treated confidentially, although absolute secrecy is not required; it is 
sufficient if the information was “substantially” undisclosed. Limited disclosure to people 
with a need to know or pursuant to confidentiality agreements will not void the secret. 
Methods of demonstrating that information was intended to be kept confidential include a 
written policy describing the information as proprietary or secret; strict limitations on 
distribution of the information; and physically securing the information to prevent 
unauthorized access and use. 
 
The owners of the information also should enforce restrictive agreements and act promptly 
to remedy any inadvertent disclosures. Failure to do so might be construed as a waiver of 
confidentiality and make it impossible to prevent future use or disclosures. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.211 
COMMON DEFENSE IN TRADE SECRET CASES 
The most typical defense is that the information was developed independently. If the 
aggrieved party demonstrates that the information came to the defendant as the result of or 
during a confidential relationship, the burden of proof shifts to the defendant to 
demonstrate independent discovery. The defendant also might defend a misappropriation 
claim by showing that the information was not in fact a secret, that the third party’s use was 
authorized, or that the trade secret or proprietary information had been abandoned by the 
owner. 
 
CIVIL ACTION FOR TRADE SECRET THEFT 
A victim of theft of trade secrets may file a civil action for damages or request an injunction 
under a variety of federal and state statutes. Civil damages include reimbursement for actual 
losses caused by the defendant, such as lost profits, reimbursement of development expenses 
and overhead costs, and the cost of efforts to protect the secret or recover damages, as well 
as for reduction in the value of business. Damages also can be measured by the defendant’s 
profits, which may be ordered to be paid to the plaintiff. Punitive damages and attorney’s 
fees also may be awarded. 
 
In addition to or in lieu of monetary damages, the plaintiff in a civil action for theft of trade 
secrets also may obtain an injunction prohibiting further use of the information. To obtain 
an injunction, the plaintiff must demonstrate that: 
• It is the proper owner of the trade secret 
• An unauthorized person has taken or used the trade secret 
• There is a high probability of improper disclosure 
• The plaintiff will suffer irreparable injury (meaning that the plaintiff could not be 
adequately compensated by monetary damages) 
• The plaintiff probably will win the case 
 
Injunctions have been issued in numerous trade secret cases to prevent the use of stolen 
information, to prohibit an employee in possession of a trade secret from accepting 
employment with a competitor, or to order the wrongdoer to return the misappropriated 
information. The injunction usually prohibits use of the trade secret only for that period it 
would have been required for its legitimate independent development. However, injunctions 
are difficult to obtain. 
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.212  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Breach of Contract 
If the fraudster has any kind of a contractual relationship with the victim, there may also be a 
breach of contract claim. Any non-performance of a contractual obligation or an announcement 
that a party cannot or will not perform constitutes a breach. In other words, a breach of 
contract occurs when one party fails to perform, or announces that it does not intend to 
perform, without just cause.  
 
A breach of contract claim can arise under an oral or written contract. Many states have 
recognized certain implied or unwritten duties as a part of almost every contract. For 
instance, some courts have held that it is an implicit part of a contract that each party will 
use their best efforts to fulfill their duties under the contract. A similar duty that has been 
recognized by some states is the duty to deal with each other in good faith. If a party to a 
contract, which includes an employment contract, steals from the other party or acts in bad 
faith, there may be a civil claim for breach of contract. 
 
Gross Negligence 
Gross negligence can be generally defined as the intentional failure to perform a duty in reckless 
disregard of the consequences to the victim. Although the exact definition varies by state, 
the basic elements of this civil cause of action are that the defendant committed an 
intentional act, knowing that it was at least substantially likely to cause harm to the victim. In 
regards to an employee, the employee has a duty to act in the best interests of the employer. 
If the employee consciously steals from the employer, the employee has breached that duty 
and caused harm to the employer; further, the employee knew that the harm would occur 
when he committed the act. One further note about gross negligence — generally, punitive or 
exemplary damages are available if the defendant is found liable. 
 
Breach of Fiduciary Duty 
People in a position of trust or fiduciary relationship — such as officers, directors, high-level 
employees of a corporation or business, and agents and brokers — owe certain duties 
imposed by law to their principals or employers. The principal fiduciary duties are loyalty 
and care. 
 
Duty of Loyalty 
The duty of loyalty requires that the employee/agent act solely in the best interest of the 
employer/principal, free of any self-dealing, conflicts of interest, or other abuse of the 
principal for personal advantage. Thus, corporate directors, officers, and employees are 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.213 
barred from using corporate property or assets for their personal pursuits or taking 
corporate opportunities for themselves. More traditional forms of fraudulent conduct, such 
as embezzlements, thefts, acceptance of kickbacks, and conflicts of interest, also violate the 
duty of loyalty and may be prosecuted as such in addition to or instead of the underlying 
offense. 
 
A breach of duty of loyalty is easier to prove than fraud. The plaintiff does not need to 
prove criminal or fraudulent intent or the other elements of fraud. To prevail, the plaintiff 
must show only that the defendant occupied a position of trust or fiduciary relationship as 
described above, and that the defendant breached that duty to benefit personally. 
 
Duty of Care 
A corporate officer, director, or high-level employee, as well as other people in a fiduciary 
relationship, must conduct business affairs prudently with the skill and attention normally 
exercised by people in similar positions. Fiduciaries who act carelessly or recklessly are 
responsible for any resulting loss to the corporate shareholders or other principals. Damages 
may be recovered in a civil action for negligence, mismanagement, or waste of corporate 
assets. 
 
People in a fiduciary relationship, however, are not guarantors against all business reverses or 
errors in judgment. The business judgment rule protects corporate officers and directors from 
liability for judgments that were made in good faith (e.g., free of self-dealings or conflicts) 
and that appeared to be prudent based on the then-known circumstances. 
 
Corporate officers breach their duty of loyalty if they accept kickbacks, engage in a conflict 
of interest, or are otherwise disloyal. However, corporate officers who carelessly fail to 
prevent such conduct, enforce controls, or pursue recovery of losses might breach their duty 
of care. Corporate defendants in such cases might raise the business judgment rule in 
defense by showing that they had no reasonable grounds to suspect such conduct or that the 
cost of prevention or recovery was too high compared to the anticipated returns. 
 
Breach of Fiduciary Duty Claim 
A breach of fiduciary duty claim is a civil action. The plaintiff may receive damages for lost 
profits and recover profits that the disloyal employee earned—in some instances even the 
salary paid to the employee or agent during the period of disloyalty. The plaintiff may 
recover profits earned by the disloyal agent even if the principal did not suffer an actual loss. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.214  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The plaintiff also may void any contracts entered into on its behalf that were the result of or 
were influenced by the employee or agent’s disloyalty. 
 
 
Federal Legislation Related to Fraud 
Under our federal system, the prosecution of most white-collar crimes, such as 
embezzlement, larceny, and false pretenses, is left to the states. Prosecution under the 
criminal fraud statutes in the U.S. Code requires a federal jurisdictional basis, such as an 
effect on interstate commerce or mail uses. The U.S. laws often are used to prosecute the 
larger and more serious crimes primarily because of the generally superior resources of 
federal law enforcement agencies and their nationwide jurisdiction. 
 
All federal criminal laws are the product of statutes. Statutes vary widely from a statute that 
prohibits unauthorized use of the “Smoky the Bear” emblem to the criminal provisions of 
the antitrust laws. The most important of the hundreds of federal laws, rules, and regulations 
are listed below. 
 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (Public Law 107-204) 
On July 30, 2002, President Bush signed into law the Sarbanes-Oxley Act. This law, which 
was triggered in large part by several corporate accounting scandals that occurred in 2001 
and 2002, significantly changed the laws of corporate governance and the rules and 
regulations under which accounting firms must operate. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act was 
designed to restore investor confidence in capital markets and help eliminate financial 
statement fraud in publicly traded companies while at the same time significantly increasing 
the penalties for corporate accounting fraud. The most significant changes brought on by 
the Act included:  
• The creation of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
• Requirements for senior financial officers to certify SEC filings 
• New standards for audit committee independence 
• New standards for auditor independence 
• Enhanced financial disclosure requirements 
• New protections for corporate whistleblowers 
• Enhanced penalties for white-collar crime 
 
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 101 establishes the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.215 
(PCAOB), whose purpose is: 
 
[T]o oversee the audit of public companies that are subject to the securities laws, and related matters, in 
order to protect the interests of investors and further the public interest in the preparation of informative, 
accurate, and independent audit reports for companies the securities of which are sold to, and held by and 
for, public investors. 
 
In short, the PCAOB is charged with overseeing public company audits, setting audit 
standards, and investigating acts of noncompliance by auditors or audit firms. The PCAOB 
is to be appointed and overseen by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), which 
is part of the Executive branch. It is to be made up of five persons, two who are or have 
been CPAs and three who have never been CPAs. The PCAOB members, which are 
appointed by the SEC, can only be removed by the SEC for cause. 
 
The Act lists the PCAOB’s duties, which include: 
• Registering public accounting firms that audit publicly traded companies 
• Establishing or adopting auditing, quality control, ethics, independence, and other 
standards relating to audits of publicly traded companies 
• Inspecting registered public accounting firms 
• Investigating registered public accounting firms and their employees, conducting 
disciplinary hearings, and imposing sanctions where justified 
• Performing such other duties as are necessary to promote high professional standards 
among registered accounting firms, to improve the quality of audit services offered by 
those firms, and to protect investors 
• Enforcing compliance with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the rules of the PCAOB, 
professional standards, and securities laws relating to public company audits 
 
Recently, the Supreme Court considered a constitutional challenge to the PCAOB in Free 
Enterprise Fund v. Public Comp any Accounting Oversight Board, et al. In this case, the Free 
Enterprise Fund, a nonprofit public interest organization, and a Nevada accounting firm 
sued the PCAOB seeking an order that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act violates the U.S. 
Constitution.  
 
The main issue raised by the suit concerned whether SOX violated the separation of powers 
doctrine by the manner in which the PCAOB’s members are selected and removed. To 
review, the separation of powers doctrine precludes each of the three branches of 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.216  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
government (legislative, executive, and judicial) from interfering upon the domain of the 
other two branches. In particular, the plaintiffs argued that SOX is unconstitutional because 
the PCAOB’s members are impermissibly insulated from presidential oversight, noting that 
the members are appointed by, and can only be removed for cause by, the SEC and not the 
president. 
 
In its opinion, the Supreme Court ruled that, because the President lacks the power to fire 
the Board members, the current method for removing PCAOB members violated the 
separation of powers principles. The Court detailed that the “buck stops” with the President, 
and, therefore, a clear and effective chain of command must be in place. “By granting the 
Board executive power without the Executive’s oversight [SOX] subverts the President’s 
ability to ensure that the laws are faithfully executed — as well as the public’s ability to pass 
judgment on his efforts. The Act’s restrictions are incompatible with the Constitution’s 
separation of powers…. Congress cannot limit the President’s authority in this way.”  
 
Despite ruling that the provision violated the Constitution, the Court allowed SOX to 
remain “fully operative as a law.” It also said that, to bring the PCAOB into compliance with 
the Constitution, the SEC must be given the ability to remove the Board members at will. 
Thus, PCAOB may continue to function without any for operational changes or legislative 
action. 
 
REGISTRATION WITH THE BOARD 
Public accounting firms must be registered with the PCAOB to legally prepare or issue an 
audit report on a publicly traded company. To become registered, accounting firms must 
disclose, among other things, the names of all public companies they audited in the 
preceding year, the names of all public companies they expect to audit in the current year, 
and the annual fees they received from each of their public audit clients for audit, 
accounting, and non-audit services.  
 
AUDITING, QUALITY CONTROL, AND INDEPENDENCE STANDARDS AND RULES 
Section 103 of the Act requires the PCAOB to establish standards for auditing, quality 
control, ethics, independence, and other issues relating to audits of publicly traded 
companies. Although the Act places the responsibility on the PCAOB to establish audit 
standards, it also sets forth certain rules that the PCAOB is required to include in those 
auditing standards. Among these rules are:  
• Audit work papers must be maintained for at least seven years. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.217 
• Auditing firms must include a concurring or second partner review and approval of audit 
reports, as well as concurring approval in the issuance of the audit report by a qualified 
person other than the person in charge of the audit. 
• All audit reports must describe the scope of testing of the company’s internal control 
structure and present the auditor’s findings from the testing, including an evaluation of 
whether the internal control structure is acceptable and a description of material 
weaknesses in internal controls and any material noncompliance with controls. 
 
Since the enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the PCAOB, in conjunction with the 
Security Exchange Commission (SEC), has promulgated several rules requiring compliance 
with additional auditing standards. Because these rules are extensive and ever-changing, 
auditors should periodically review the SEC’s website for updates and new rules at 
http://sec.gov/rules/final.shtml.  
 
INSPECTIONS OF REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRMS 
The Act also authorizes the PCAOB to conduct regular inspections of public accounting 
firms to assess their degree of compliance with laws, rules, and professional standards 
regarding audits. Inspections are to be conducted once a year for firms that regularly audit 
more than 100 public companies and at least once every three years for firms that regularly 
audit 100 or fewer public companies.  
 
INVESTIGATIONS AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS 
The PCAOB has the authority to investigate registered public accounting firms (or their 
employees) for potential violations of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, professional standards, any 
rules established by the board, or any securities laws relating to the preparation and issuance 
of audit reports. During an investigation, the PCAOB has the power to compel testimony 
and document production.  
 
Additionally, the PCAOB has the power to issue sanctions for violations or for 
noncooperation with an investigation. Sanctions can include temporary or permanent 
suspension of a firm’s registration with the board (which would mean that firm could no 
longer legally audit publicly traded companies), temporary or permanent suspension of a 
person’s right to be associated with a registered public accounting firm, prohibition from 
auditing public companies, and civil monetary penalties of up to $750,000 for an individual 
and up to $15,000,000 for a firm.  
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.218  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Certification Obligations for CEOs and CFOs 
One of the most significant changes affected by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is the requirement 
that the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and the Chief Financial Officer (CFO) of public 
companies personally certify annual and quarterly SEC filings. These certifications essentially 
require CEOs and CFOs to take responsibility for their companies’ financial statements and 
prevent them from delegating this responsibility to their subordinates and then claiming 
ignorance when fraud is uncovered in the financial statements.  
 
There are two types of officer certifications mandated by Sarbanes-Oxley: criminal 
certifications, which are set forth in Sarbanes-Oxley section 906 and codified at 18 U.S.C. § 
1350, and civil certifications, which are set forth in Sarbanes-Oxley section 302. 
 
CRIMINAL CERTIFICATIONS (SARBANES-OXLEY § 906) 
Under Section 906, all periodic filings with the SEC must be accompanied by a statement, 
signed by the CEO and CFO, which certifies that the report fully complies with the SEC’s 
periodic reporting requirements and that the information in the report fairly presents, in all 
material respects, the financial condition and results of operation of the company. 
 
These certifications are known as “criminal certifications” because the Act imposes criminal 
penalties on officers who violate the certification requirements.  
• Corporate officers who knowingly  violate the certification requirements are subject to 
fines of up to $1,000,000 and up to 10 years imprisonment, or both.  
• Corporate officers who willfully violate the certification requirements are subject to fines 
of up to $5,000,000 and up to 20 years imprisonment, or both.  
 
CIVIL CERTIFICATIONS (SARBANES-OXLEY § 302) 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 302 requires the CEO and CFO to personally certify the following 
six items in every annual and quarterly report:  
1. They have personally reviewed the report. 
2. Based on their knowledge, the report does not contain any material misstatement that 
would render the financials misleading. 
3. Based on their knowledge, the financial information in the report fairly presents in all 
material respects the financial condition, results of operations, and cash flow of the 
company. 
4. They are responsible for designing, maintaining, and evaluating the company’s internal 
controls; they have evaluated the controls within 90 days prior to the report; and they 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.219 
have presented their conclusions about the effectiveness of those controls in the report. 
5. They have disclosed to the auditors and the audit committee any material weaknesses in 
the controls and any fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other 
employees who have a significant role in the company’s internal controls. 
6. They have indicated in their report whether there have been significant changes in the 
company’s internal controls since the filing of the last report. 
 
Note that in items two and three, the CEO and CFO are not required to certify that the 
financials are accurate or that there is no misstatement. They are simply required to certify 
that to their knowledge the financials are accurate and not misleading. This does not mean, 
however, that senior financial officers can simply plead ignorance about their companies’ 
SEC filings to avoid liability.  
 
Furthermore, the term fairly presents in item three is a broader standard than what is required 
by GAAP. In certifying that their SEC filings meet this standard, the CEO and CFO 
essentially must certify that the company (1) has selected appropriate accounting policies to 
ensure the material accuracy of the reports; (2) has properly applied those accounting 
standards; and (3) has disclosed financial information that reflects the underlying 
transactions and events of the company. Furthermore, the other certification rules (see items 
one, four, five, and six above) mandate that CEOs  and CFOs take an active role in their 
companies’ public reporting and in the design and maintenance of internal controls. 
 
Also, it is significant that in item four, the CEO and CFO not only have to certify that they 
are responsible for their companies’ internal controls, but also that they have evaluated the 
controls within 90 days prior to their quarterly or annual report.  Essentially, this certification 
requirement mandates that companies actively and continually re-evaluate their control 
structures to prevent fraud. 
 
In conjunction with the Sarbanes-Oxley section 302 certification requirements on the 
responsibility of the CEO and CFO for internal controls, Sarbanes-Oxley section 404 
requires all annual reports to contain an internal control report that (1) states management’s 
responsibility for establishing and maintaining an adequate internal control structure and 
procedures for financial reporting; and (2) contains an assessment of the effectiveness of the 
internal control structure and procedures of the company for financial reporting.  
 
Item five requires the CEO and CFO to certify that they have disclosed to their auditors and 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.220  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
their audit committee any material weaknesses in the company’s internal controls, and any 
fraud, whether material or not, that involves management or other key employees. Obviously, 
this is a very broad reporting standard that goes beyond the “material” standard 
contemplated in auditing standards. The CEO and CFO now must report to their auditors 
and audit committee any fraud committed by a manager. This places a greater burden on the 
CEO and CFO to take part in anti-fraud efforts and to be aware of fraudulent activity within 
their companies to meet this certification requirement.  
 
Item six is significant because periodic SEC filings must now include statements detailing 
significant changes to the internal controls of publicly traded companies. 
 
The overall effect of these certification requirements is to force CEOs and CFOs to take an 
active role in the anti-fraud efforts of their companies, making internal controls and fraud 
prevention a high priority. 
 
Standards for Audit Committee Independence 
AUDIT COMMITTEE RESPONSIBILITIES  
Section 301 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act makes the audit committee for each publicly traded 
company “directly responsible” for appointing, compensating, and overseeing the work of 
the company’s outside auditors. The Act also mandates that the auditors must report directly 
to the audit committee — not management — and makes it the responsibility of the audit 
committee to resolve disputes between management and the auditors. Section 301 also 
requires that the audit committee must have the authority and funding to hire independent 
counsel and any other advisors it deems necessary to carry out its duties.  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE AUDIT COMMITTEE 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act mandates that each member of a company’s audit committee must 
be a member of its board of directors and must otherwise be “independent.” The term 
“independent” means that the audit committee members can only receive compensation 
from the company for their service on the board of directors, the audit committee, or 
another committee of the board of directors. They cannot be paid by the company for any 
other consulting or advisory work.  
 
FINANCIAL EXPERT  
Section 407 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires every public company to disclose in its 
periodic reports to the SEC whether or not the audit committee has at least one member 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.221 
who is a “financial expert,” and if not, to explain the reasons why. The Act defines a 
“financial expert” as a person who, through education and experience as a public accountant, 
auditor, CFO, comptroller, chief accounting officer, or a similar position, (1) has an 
understanding of generally accepted accounting principles and financial statements; (2) has 
experience in preparing or auditing financial statements of comparable companies and the 
application of such principles in accounting for estimates, accruals, and reserves; (3) has 
experience with internal controls; and (4) has an understanding of audit committee 
functions.  
 
ESTABLISHING A WHISTLEBLOWING STRUCTURE 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act makes it the responsibility of the audit committee to establish 
procedures (e.g., a hotline) for receiving and dealing with complaints and anonymous 
employee tips regarding irregularities in the company’s accounting methods, internal 
controls, or auditing matters.  
 
Standards for Auditor Independence 
RESTRICTIONS ON NON-AUDIT ACTIVITY 
Perhaps the greatest concern arising out of the public accounting scandals of 2001 and 2002 
was the fear that public accounting firms that received multimillion-dollar consulting fees 
from their public company clients could not maintain an appropriate level of objectivity in 
conducting audits for those clients. To address this concern, Congress established section 
201, which provides a list of activities that public accounting firms are now prohibited from 
performing on behalf of their audit clients. The prohibited services include:  
• Bookkeeping services 
• Financial information systems design and implementation 
• Appraisal or valuation services, fairness opinions, or contribution-in-kind reports 
• Actuarial services 
• Internal audit outsource services 
• Management functions or human resources 
• Broker or dealer, investment adviser, or investment banking services 
• Legal services and expert services unrelated to the audit 
• Any other service that the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board proscribes 
 
There are certain other non-audit services — most notably tax services — that are not 
expressly prohibited by Sarbanes-Oxley. In order for a public accounting firm to perform 
these services on behalf of an audit client, however, that service must be approved in 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.222  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
advance by the client’s audit committee, which must be disclosed in the client’s periodic SEC 
reports. Furthermore, regarding non-audit services, the SEC prevents accounts from 
providing audit clients with expert opinions and services, as well as legal representation for 
advocating the audit client’s litigation, regulatory, or administrative interests. 
 
MANDATORY AUDIT PARTNER ROTATION 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 204 requires public accounting firms to rotate the lead audit partner 
or the partner responsible for reviewing the audit every five years.  
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST PROVISIONS 
Another provision of Sarbanes-Oxley aimed at improving auditor independence is section 
206, which seeks to limit conflicts or potential conflicts that arise when auditors cross over 
to work for their former clients. The Act now makes it unlawful for a public accounting firm 
to audit a company if, within the prior year, the client’s CEO, CFO, controller, or chief 
accounting officer worked for the accounting firm and participated in the company’s audit.  
 
AUDITOR REPORTS TO AUDIT COMMITTEES 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 301 requires that auditors report directly to the audit committee, and 
section 204 makes certain requirements as to the contents of those reports. To help ensure 
that the audit committee is aware of questionable accounting policies or treatments that were 
used in the preparation of the company’s financial statements, Sarbanes-Oxley section 204 
states that auditors must make a timely report (before any report is filed with the SEC 
pursuant to the federal securities laws) of the following to the audit committee:  
• All critical accounting policies and policies used 
• Alternative GAAP methods that were discussed with management, the ramifications of 
the use of those alternative treatments, and the treatment preferred by the auditors 
• Any other material written communications between the auditors and management 
 
AUDITORS’ ATTESTATION TO INTERNAL CONTROLS 
As was stated previously, section 404 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires every annual report 
to contain an internal control report which states that the company’s management is 
responsible for internal controls, and which also assesses the effectiveness of the internal 
control structures. Sarbanes-Oxley section 404 requires the company’s external auditors to 
attest to and issue a report on management’s assessment of internal controls.  
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.223 
IMPROPER INFLUENCE ON AUDITS 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act also makes it unlawful for any officer or director of a public 
company to take any action to fraudulently influence, coerce, manipulate, or mislead an 
auditor in the performance of an audit of the company’s financial statements. This is yet 
another attempt by Congress to ensure the independence and objectivity of audits to prevent 
accounting fraud and strengthen investor confidence in the reliability of public company 
financial statements.  
 
Enhanced Financial Disclosure Requirements 
OFF-BALANCE SHEET TRANSACTIONS 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act directed the SEC to issue  rules that require the disclosure of all 
material off-balance sheet transactions by publicly traded companies. The rules require 
disclosure of “all material off-balance sheet transactions, arrangements, obligations 
(including contingent obligations), and other relationships the company may have with 
unconsolidated entities or persons that may have a material current or future effect on the 
company’s financial condition, changes in financial condition, liquidity, capital expenditures, 
capital resources, or significant components of revenues or expenses.” These disclosures are 
required in all annual and quarterly SEC reports. 
 
PRO FORMA FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 401 increases the type and extent of disclosures in periodic reports 
filed with the SEC. Under section 401, pro forma financials that are filed with the SEC or 
that are included in any public disclosure or press release must not contain any untrue 
statements or omissions that would make them misleading, and they must be reconciled to GAAP.  
 
PROHIBITIONS ON PERSONAL LOANS TO EXECUTIVES 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 402 makes it illegal for public companies to make personal loans or 
otherwise extend credit, either directly or indirectly, to or for any director or executive 
officer. An exception applies to consumer lenders if the loans are consumer loans of the type 
the company normally makes to the public and are on the same terms. 
 
RESTRICTIONS ON INSIDER TRADING 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 403 establishes disclosure requirements for stock transactions by 
directors and officers of public companies, or by persons who own more than 10 percent of 
a publicly traded company’s stock. SEC rules further specify content and timing 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.224  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
requirements of blackout period notices that must be provided to directors and officers. 
Reports of changes in beneficial ownership by these persons must now be filed with the 
SEC by the end of the second business day following the transaction. 
 
Under Sarbanes-Oxley section 306, directors and officers are also prohibited from trading in 
the company’s securities during any pension fund blackout periods. This restriction only 
applies to securities that were acquired because of their employment or service to the 
company. A blackout period is defined as any period of more than three consecutive 
business days in which at least 50 percent of the participants in the company’s retirement 
plan are restricted from trading in the company’s securities. If a director or officer violates 
this provision, he can be forced to disgorge to the company all profits received from the sale 
of securities during the blackout period. 
 
CODES OF ETHICS FOR SENIOR FINANCIAL OFFICERS  
Pursuant to Sarbanes-Oxley section 406 and SEC release No. 33-8177, public companies 
must disclose in their annual report whether they have adopted a code of ethics for senior 
financial officers, and if they have not, they must explain their reasoning.  
 
ENHANCED REVIEW OF PERIODIC FILINGS 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 408 requires the SEC to make regular and systematic reviews of 
disclosures made by public companies in their periodic reports to the SEC. Reviews of a 
company’s disclosures, including its financial statements, must be made at least once every 
three years. Prior to this enactment, reviews were typically minimal and tended to coincide 
with registered offerings. 
 
REAL TIME DISCLOSURES  
Under Sarbanes-Oxley section 409, public companies must publicly disclose information 
concerning material changes in their financial condition or operations. These disclosures 
must be “in plain English” and must be  made “on a rapid and current basis.”  
 
Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act establishes broad protections for corporate whistleblowers. There 
are two sections of the Act that address whistleblower protections: Section 806 deals with 
civil protections and section 1107 establishes criminal liability for those who retaliate against 
whistleblowers.  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.225 
CIVIL LIABILITY WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 806, which is codified at 18 U.S.C. § 1514A, creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it only protects employees of publicly traded 
companies. Section 806 makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. To trigger section 806 protections, the employee must 
report the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a 
member of Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also 
protected against retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a 
proceeding filed, or about to be filed, relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or 
SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections not only cover retaliatory acts by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
If a public company is found to have violated Sarbanes-Oxley section 806, the Act provides 
for an award of compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties 
include reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages, 
including litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
CRIMINAL SANCTION WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION  
Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107—codified at 18 U.S. C. § 1513 — makes it a crime to knowingly, 
with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for providing truthful 
information relating to the commission or possible commission of any federal offense. This 
protection is only triggered when information is provided to a law enforcement officer. It 
does not apply to reports made to supervisors or to members of Congress, as is the case 
under Sarbanes-Oxley section 806.  
 
In general, the coverage of Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107 is much broader than the civil 
liability whistleblower protections of Sarbanes-Oxley section 806. While the Sarbanes-Oxley 
section 806 protections apply only to employees of publicly traded companies, Sarbanes-Oxley 
section 1107’s criminal whistleblower protections cover all individuals (and 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.226  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
organizations) regardless of where they work. Also, Sarbanes-Oxley section 806 only applies 
to violations of securities laws or SEC rules and regulations, whereas Sarbanes-Oxley section 
1107 protects individuals who provide truthful information about the commission or 
possible commission of any Federal offense.  
 
Violations of Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and 
up to 10 years in prison for individuals. Corporations that violate the Act can be fined up to 
$500,000.  
 
Enhanced Penalties for White-Collar Crime 
As part of Congress’ general effort to deter corporate accounting fraud and other forms of 
white-collar crime, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act also enhances the criminal penalties for a number 
of white-collar offenses.  
 
ATTEMPT AND CONSPIRACY (18 U.S.C. § 1349) 
The Act amends the fraud provisions of the U.S. Code (Chapter 63) to make “attempt” and 
“conspiracy to commit” offenses subject to the same penalties as the offense itself. This 
applies to mail fraud, wire fraud, securities fraud, bank fraud, and health care fraud. The text 
of the statute provides: 
 
Any person who attempts or conspires to commit any offense under this chapter [U.S. Code 
Chapter 63] shall be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense, the 
commission of which was the object of the attempt or conspiracy. 
 
MAIL FRAUD AND WIRE FRAUD 
Sarbanes-Oxley amends the mail fraud and wire fraud statutes (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343), 
increasing the maximum jail term from five to 20 years.  
 
SECURITIES FRAUD  
Section 807 creates an additional securities fraud offence that can carry a maximum sentence 
of 25 years in prison. Specifically, this law imposes criminal liability for anyone who 
knowingly executes, or attempts to execute, a scheme or artifice to defraud in connection 
with registered securities.  
 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 (FERA), signed into law by President 
Obama on May 20, 2009, contains a number of measures intended to combat fraud. Among 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.227 
other provisions, the legislation expands the definition of securities fraud in section 1348 to 
include fraud schemes involving commodities for future delivery or options on commodities 
for future delivery. 
 
DOCUMENT DESTRUCTION   
Sarbanes-Oxley section 802 makes destroying evidence to obstruct an investigation or any 
other matter within the jurisdiction of any U.S. department illegal and punishable by a fine of 
up to $250,000 and up to 20 years in prison.  
 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 802 also specifically requires that accountants who perform audits 
on publicly traded companies maintain all audit or review work papers for a period of five 
years. Violations of this rule may be punished by fines up to $250,000 and up to 10 years in 
jail for individuals, or fines up to $500,000  for corporations. (Although Sarbanes-Oxley  
section 802 only requires work papers to be maintained for five years, keep in mind that 
under Sarbanes-Oxley section 103, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board is 
directed to set standards that require public accounting firms to maintain audit work papers 
for seven years. Accounting firms should design their document retention policies 
accordingly.)  
 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 1102 amends section 1512 of the U.S. Code to make it a criminal 
offense to corruptly alter, destroy, mutilate, or conceal a record or document with the intent 
to impair its integrity or use in an official proceeding, or to otherwise obstruct, influence, or 
impede any official proceeding or attempt to do so. Violations of this section are punishable 
by fines up to $250,000 and imprisonment for up to 20 years.  
 
FREEZING OF ASSETS 
During an investigation of possible securities violations by a publicly traded company or any 
of its officers, directors, partners, agents, controlling persons, or employees, the SEC can 
petition a federal court to issue a 45-day freeze on “extraordinary payments” to any of the 
foregoing persons. If granted, the payments will be placed in an interest-bearing escrow 
account while the investigation commences. This provision was enacted to prevent 
corporate assets from being improperly distributed while an investigation is underway.  
 
BANKRUPTCY LOOPHOLES 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 803 amends the bankruptcy code so that judgments, settlements, 
damages, fines, penalties, restitution payments, disgorgement payments, etc., resulting from 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.228  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
violations of federal securities laws are nondischargeable. This was intended to prevent 
corporate wrongdoers from sheltering their assets under bankruptcy protection.  
 
DISGORGEMENT OF BONUSES 
One of the most unique aspects of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act is section 304, which states that 
if a publicly traded company is required to prepare an accounting restatement due to the 
company’s material noncompliance (as a result of “misconduct”) with any financial reporting 
requirement under securities laws, then the CEO and CFO must reimburse the company for: 
• Any bonus or other incentive-based or equity-based compensation received during the 
12 months after the initial filing of the report that requires restating; and  
• Any profits realized from the sale of the company’s securities during the same 12-month 
period. 
 
While the Act requires the CEO and CFO to disgorge their bonuses if the company’s 
financial statements have to be restated because of “misconduct,” it makes no mention of 
whose misconduct triggers this provision. There is certainly nothing in the text of Sarbanes-
 Oxley section 304 that limits the disgorgement provision to instances of misconduct by the 
CEO and CFO. Presumably, then, the CEO and CFO could be required to disgorge their 
bonuses and profits from the sale of company stock even if they had no knowledge of and 
took no part in the misconduct that made the restatement necessary.  
 
Extended Statute of Limitations for Federal Securities Fraud 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act also amended the statute of limitations for several securities fraud 
claims. Section 804 of the Act extends the statute of limitations to the earlier of two years 
after the discovery of facts constituting fraud or five years after such violation. Prior to the 
Act, the statute of limitations was the earlier of one year after the discovery of facts 
constituting fraud or three years after such violation.  
 
However, the extended statute of limitations only applies to causes of action involving “a 
claim of fraud, deceit, manipulation, or contrivance.” Even though litigation has arisen over 
the types of claims subject to the extension, it is clear that section 804 extends the statute of 
limitations for section 10(b) and Rule 10b-5 claims.  
 
Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act 
On May 20, 2009, President Obama signed into law the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery 
Act (FERA). This legislation contains a number of measures intended to combat fraud and 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.229 
to protect against fraud, waste, and abuse in federal programs. Specifically, this legislation 
broadens federal statutes used to prosecute financial fraud, expands potential liability for 
false claims, authorizes additional funding for fraud investigations, prosecutions, and civil 
proceedings, and creates the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission to examine the causes, 
domestic and global, of the current financial and economic crisis in the United States. 
 
Strengthened Criminal Statutes 
FERA is designed to increase anti-fraud enforcement by enhancing a number of federal 
criminal statutes used to prosecute financial fraud. First, it amends the definition of 
“financial institution” in the criminal code to include mortgage lending businesses. Under 
the revised definition, the Justice Department  may prosecute mortgage fraud cases as bank 
fraud and seek enhanced penalties under the mail and wire fraud statutes.  
 
Second, FERA broadens the prohibition against making false statements in mortgage 
applications to employees and agents of mortgage lenders. FERA amends the false 
statements in mortgage applications statute (18 U.S.C. § 1014) to include a prohibition of 
false statements in mortgage applications intended to influence any action by a mortgage 
lending business. Before FERA, section 1014 did not necessarily extend to private mortgage 
lending businesses.  
 
Third, FERA amends the major fraud statute (18 U.S.C. § 1031) to cover fraud in funds 
provided under the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) and other funds constituting 
federal assistance.  
 
Fourth, the legislation amends the federal securities statute (18 U.S.C. § 1348), which 
imposes criminal liability for securities fraud, to include fraud schemes involving 
commodities for future delivery or options on commodities for future delivery. 
 
Finally, FERA amends anti-money-laundering laws to broaden the term proceeds to include 
the gross receipts of unlawful activity, rather than merely its profits. This amendment 
addresses a recent Supreme Court ruling that proceeds of criminal activity, as treated by 
federal money laundering statutes, included only the defendant’s profits from such activity.  
 
Modifications to the False Claims Act 
In addition to the modifications of criminal law, FERA enacts several changes to the civil 
False Claims Act (FCA), 31 U.S.C. §§ 3729–37 33, which increase the potential for liability 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.230  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
under the Act. Among other significant changes, FERA amends the FCA in the following 
ways:  
• FERA eliminates the requirement that a false claim be presented to a federal official or 
that it directly involve federal funds. Before FERA, the FCA required that allegedly false 
claims for payment be presented directly to an officer or employee of the government. 
In addition, the legislation broadens the definition of a “claim” under the FCA to include 
any request or demand for property, even if the United States does not have title to the 
money or property.  
• FERA also reduces the intent required to establish liability under section 3729(a) by 
removing the to get language from the statute. By removing the words to get, FERA 
overturns the Supreme Court’s 2008 holding in Allison Engine Co. v. United States that a 
defendant must intend to get a false claim paid by the government. As a result, liability can 
attach even if the defendant did not intend to get a false claim paid by the government.  
• Additionally, FERA enhanced the whistleblower protections under the FCA, which 
allows employees to seek relief against their employer if they are retaliated against for 
whistleblowing. FERA now makes these retaliation claims available to government 
contractors and agents.   
 
Additional Appropriations for Fraud Investigations, Prosecutions, and Civil Proceedings 
In addition to modifying financial fraud statutes, FERA authorizes additional appropriations 
for the government’s fraud enforcement efforts over the next two fiscal years.  
 
Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission 
FERA also creates the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission “to examine the causes, 
domestic and global, of the current financial and economic crisis in the United States.” The 
Commission may hold hearings, take testimony, receive evidence, issue subpoenas, and 
obtain information from governmental entities. 
  
Mail Fraud and Wire Fraud 
The mail and wire fraud laws prohibit the use of mail or wires, including the Internet, in 
furtherance of a fraudulent scheme designed to obtain money or property. Virtually any 
intentional scheme to deceive or deprive another of money, property, or any other valuable 
right or interest by fraud or false pretenses is within the scope of the statute. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.231 
Mail Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1341) 
The mail fraud statute is the workhorse of federal white-collar prosecutions. It has been used 
against virtually all types of commercial fraud, public corruption, and security law violations. 
In general, mail fraud is the use of the mail to perpetrate a scheme to defraud a victim of 
money or property. The statute provides: 
 
Whoever, having devised or intend ing to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtaining 
money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises, or to 
sell, dispose of, loan, exchange, alter, give away, distribute, supply, or furnish or procure for 
unlawful use any counterfeit or spurious coin, obligation, security, or other article, or anything 
represented to be or in timated or held out to be such counterfeit or spurious article, for the 
purpose of executing such scheme or artifice or a ttempting so to do, places in any post office or 
authorized depository for mail matter, any matter or thing whatever to be sent or delivered by 
the Postal Service, deposits or ca uses to be deposited any matter or thing whatever to be sent or 
delivered by any private or commercial interstate carrier, or takes or receive, any such matter or 
thing, or knowingly causes to be delivered by mail according to the direction thereon, or at the 
place at which it is directed to be delivered by  the person to whom it is addressed, any such 
matter or thing, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than twenty years, or 
both. If the violation affects a financial institution, such person shall be fined not more than 
$1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both. 
 
The gist of the offense is the use of the mail. Thus, where the postal system is not used, no 
matter how large or serious the fraud, there is no federal jurisdiction under this statute. Yet, 
the mailing does not itself need to contain the false and fraudulent representations, as long as 
it is an integral part of the scheme. What is integral or incidental depends on the facts of 
each case; generally, a mailing that helps advance the scheme in any significant way will be 
considered sufficient. 
 
Frauds and swindles are not defined in the mail fraud statute or elsewhere in the U.S. Code. 
Most of the cases treat any intentional scheme to deceive and deprive another of a tangible 
property right as being within the statute.  
 
It is not necessary that the fraudulent scheme succeed or that the victim suffer a loss for the 
statute to apply. It also is not necessary that the predicate mailing travel in interstate 
commerce; any use of the U.S. postal system provides sufficient grounds for federal 
jurisdiction. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.232  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Wire Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1343) 
The wire fraud statute is similar to the mail fraud statute. Generally defined, wire fraud is the 
use of wire communications to perpetrate a scheme to defraud a victim of money or 
property. The text of the statute provides: 
 
Whoever, having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for obtaining 
money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises, 
transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire, radio, or television communication in 
interstate or foreign commerce, any writings, signs, signals, pictures, or sounds for the purpose of 
executing such scheme or artifice, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 
twenty years, or both. If the violation affects a financial institution, such person shall be fined 
not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both. 
 
The wire fraud statute often is used in tandem with mail fraud counts in federal 
prosecutions. Unlike mail fraud, however, the wire fraud statute requires an interstate or 
foreign communication for a violation. 
 
“Honest Services” Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1346) 
Under section 1346 of Title 18, U.S. Code, the mail fraud and the wire fraud statutes may be 
used to prosecute official corruption, along with the bribery laws, under the theory that the 
payment or receipt of bribes deprived the public of its right to honest and unbiased services 
of public servants. Specifically, section 1346 provides “the term scheme or artifice to defraud  
[which is the term used in the mail and wire fraud statutes among others] includes a scheme 
or artifice to deprive another of the intangible right of honest services.” 
 
This statute generally is referred to as the “honest services” fraud statute, and its core 
application is bribery or conflict of interest involving a public official that affects his official 
duties.  
 
Congress specifically enacted section 1346 in response to the U.S. Supreme Court decision 
rendered in the case of McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350 (1987). In McNally, the Supreme 
Court tried to halt the expansion of the mail and wire fraud statutes, ruling that those laws 
did not prohibit schemes to defraud citizens of the intangible right to honest government.  
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.233 
A year later, Congress effectively overruled McNally by enacting section 1346 to ensure that 
mail and wire fraud would reach the deprivation of citizens’ rights to the honest services of 
their public officials.  
 
The crime of honest services contains the following elements: (1) a scheme to defraud that 
includes a material deception, (2) with the intent to defraud, (3) while using the mail or 
interstate wires in furtherance of that scheme, and (4) that resulted in the deprivation of the 
intangible right of honest services.  
 
Although its core involves public officials who, in violation of their fiduciary duties, accept 
bribes or personally benefit from undisclosed conflicts of interest, prosecutors have used the 
honest services statute to address a wide range of conduct by public officials and private 
actors, which make it a valuable tool for federal prosecutors in cases involving fraud. 
 
The law, however, has long been criticized for being so vague that it allows prosecutors to 
criminalize behavior that might not be explicitly illegal, and over time, the vagueness of 
“honest services” led to a medley of conflicting interpretations as courts struggled with how 
to apply the statute. 
 
In 2009, the U.S. Supreme Court granted certiorari on the conviction of former Enron CEO 
Jeffrey Skilling, agreeing to harmonize the conflicting interpretations of this law. 
 
And on June 24, 2010, the Court issued a unanimous ruling, holding that the honest services 
law couldn’t be used to convict Skilling for his role in the collapse of Enron. 1 
 
In its opinion, the Court rejected Skilling’s argument on appeal that the definition of “honest 
services” was unconstitutionally vague, but it did hold that the government stretched the law 
too far when it prosecuted Skilling. The Court said Congress enacted the statute specifically 
to address bribery and kickbacks, but found that the statute could become vague if applied 
to “a wider range of offensive conduct.”   
 
Accordingly, the Court ruled that the statute wasn’t unconstitutionally vague if limited to 
bribery and kickback schemes. That is, defendants accused of violating the honest services 
statutes must have gained some benefit from the alleged conduct. And because the 
                                                 
1 S killing v. United States, No. 08-1394 (June 24, 2010). 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.234  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
government didn’t accuse Skilling of bribery or taking kickbacks, the Court sent his case 
back to the lower courts to determine whether his conviction should be overturned. 
 
In a companion case, the Court also sided with imprisoned media executive Conrad Black, 
who was convicted of honest services fraud for failing to disclose noncompetition fees, 
setting aside a federal appeals decision that upheld Black’s conviction. But as in Skilling’s 
case, Black’s conviction won’t necessarily be overturned; instead, the case will be sent back 
to the federal appellate court for further consideration.  
 
Moreover, because the Skilling  case has limited the honest services statute to bribery and 
kickbacks, it makes it more difficult for prosecutors to pursue criminal cases against 
corporate executives for misconduct that harms their companies. As a result, the decision 
will likely result in fewer private-sector fraud cases brought under the honest services fraud 
law.  
 
But even with the Court’s ruling, prosecutors still have a variety of other, less controversial 
laws they can invoke in fraud cases.  
 
Embezzlement and Theft of Federal Money or Property (18 U.S.C. § 641) 
Section 641 of Title 18 is the principal federal statute aimed at protecting government 
property. This statute criminalizes intentional and unauthorized taking, destruction, or use of 
government money, property, or records, and it also prohibits receiving or concealing such 
property or records. The text of section 641 provides: 
 
Whoever embezzles, steals, purloins, or knowingly converts to his use or the use of another, or 
without authority, sells, conveys or disposes of any record, voucher, money, or thing of value of 
the United States or of any department or agency thereof, or any proper ty made or being made 
under contract for the United States or any department or agency thereof; or Whoever receives, 
conceals, or retains the same with intent to convert it to his use or gain, knowing it to have been 
embezzled, stolen, purloined or converted — Shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not 
more than ten years, or both; but if the value of such property in the aggregate, combining 
amounts from all the counts for which the defendant is convicted in a single case, does not exceed 
the sum of $1,000, he shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or 
both.  
 
The following sections outline the offenses encompassed by section 641. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.235 
Embezzlement of Government Property 
To review, embezzlement is the fraudulent appropriation of money or property by a person to 
whom it has been lawfully entrusted (or to whom lawful possession was given). The 
elements of embezzlement, as defined in section 641, are: 
• There was a trust or fiduciary relationship between the defendant and the property 
owner. 
• The defendant took or converted money or property.  
• The property was entrusted to the defendant (defendant had lawful possession of the 
property).  
• The defendant intended to take or convert the property (not by accident or mistake). 
• The property at issue belonged to the United States. 
 
Larceny  
Larceny is defined as the unlawful taking of money or property of another with the intent to 
convert or to deprive the owner. Unlike embezzlement schemes, in larceny schemes, the 
defendant never has lawful possession of the property, but he may have mere custody of it 
(e.g., a cashier has custody, not possession, of money in a register). To establish a violation 
under section 641, the government must prove the following: 
• The defendant fraudulently appropriated money or property of another. 
• The appropriation occurred without the consent of the owner. 
• The defendant intended to convert it to his use. 
• The property at issue belonged to the United States. 
 
However, it is not necessary to prove that the defendant knew that the property belonged to 
the federal government. 
 
Penalties 
If the value of the property is $100 or less, a defendant is subject to one year of 
imprisonment, a $1,000 fine, or both. When the value of the property exceeds $100, the 
defendant may be sentenced to 10 years of imprisonment, a fine equal to the amount of the 
property taken, or both.  
 
Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property (18 U.S.C. § 2314) 
Section 2314 of Title 18, U.S. Code, regulates interstate transportation of stolen property. 
Popularly known as ITSP, section 2314 is often used in fraud prosecutions in conjunction 
with mail or wire fraud counts, or to provide federal jurisdiction in their absence when 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.236  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
proceeds of a value of $5,000 or more obtained by fraud are transported across state lines. 
The statute also is violated if a defendant induces the victim to travel in interstate commerce 
as part of the scheme to defraud. Individual transportation of money or other items valued 
at less than $5,000 as part of the same sc heme may be aggregated to meet the value 
requirement. 
 
Also, prosecutors have attempted to charge defendants in violation of the ITSP statute in 
addition to or in lieu of the theft of commercial trade secrets or the theft of other 
proprietary information charges. It is clear that section 2314 applies when defendants steal 
tangible items, which qualify as goods, wares, or merchandise, that contain intellectual 
property. However, courts have had varying opinions on the characterization of intellectual 
property as “goods, wares, merchandise, securities, or money” when an individual steals 
intangible property through intangible means. For example, in United States v. Brown, 925 F.2d 
1301 (10th Cir. 1991), the Tenth Circuit held that the theft of intellectual property through 
intangible means does not implicate section 2314. Alternatively, the courts in United States v. 
Riggs, 739 F.Supp. 414 (N.D. Ill. 1990) and United States v. Farraj, 142 F. Supp. 2d 484 
(S.D.N.Y. 2001) reached the opposite result.  
 
Even though prosecutors may use the ITSP to prosecute theft of commercial trade secrets, 
proprietary information, or other types of intellectual property in certain situations, they 
cannot use the ITSP to prosecute copyright infringement cases unless the infringement 
involves the theft of a tangible piece of hardware. 
 
Finally, when patent infringement is the only theory for an individual to steal a piece of 
property, the ITSP does not allow prosecution for interstate transportation of patent-
 infringing goods. 
 
Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (18 U.S.C. § 1961, et. seq.)  
The Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) statute is probably the best-
 known and most controversial federal statute in use today. Originally enacted in 1970 to 
fight organized crime’s infiltration of legitimate business, its powerful criminal and civil 
provisions have come to be used in a wide range of fraud cases. The statute outlaws the 
investment of ill-gotten gains in another business enterprise; the acquisition of an interest in 
an enterprise through certain illegal acts; and the conduct of the affairs of an enterprise 
through such acts.  
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.237 
RICO provides both criminal penalties and civil remedies. Criminal penalties include stiff 
fines and prison terms, as well as the forfeiture of all illegal proceeds or interests. Civil 
remedies include treble damages, attorneys’ fees, dissolution of the offending enterprise, and 
other penalties. 
 
RICO Violations Under Section 1962(c) 
Section 1962(c) is probably the most commonly used provision. It makes it an offense for 
any person associated with an “enterprise” that is engaged in interstate commerce to 
participate in the affairs of such an enterprise through a “pattern of racketeering activity.” 
The elements of a section 1962(c) offense are: 
• The defendant was employed by or associated with an “enterprise” as defined in the 
statute, which can be a business, union, a group of individuals “associated in fact,” or 
even a single individual. 
• The enterprise was engaged in or affected interstate commerce. 
• The defendant conducted the affairs of the enterprise through a “pattern of racketeering 
activity,” that is, two or more illegal acts enumerated in the statute as predicate 
violations, such as mail and wire fraud or ITSP violations. 
 
EMPLOYED BY OR ASSOCIATED WITH AN ENTERPRISE 
Under this element, the government must show that the defendant was directly involved in 
the management of the enterprise as an employee, officer, director, owner, or other person 
with substantial management authority. An outside consultant, accountant, or attorney who 
does not have substantial management authority is not liable. 
 
An enterprise includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal 
entity, and any union or group of individuals associated in fact, although not a legal entity. 
The enterprise should be an entity distinct from the “person” or “persons” who violate the 
statute. An enterprise includes both a legitimate and an illegal organization. 
 
ENGAGED IN INTERSTATE OR FOREIGN COMMERCE 
This element is met if the enterprise conducts business in or affects, even if only to a 
minimal extent, commerce or trade between two or more states or a foreign country. Proof 
of an effect on interstate commerce may be showing that the enterprise buys, sells, or 
transports goods or services in more than one state or a foreign country. 
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.238  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CONDUCTED THE AFFAIRS THROUGH A PATTERN OF RACKETEERING ACTIVITY 
The defendant violates this element if he has some involvement in the management or 
operation of the enterprise and in the commission of two or more “racketeering offenses” 
through the enterprise. The term racketeering activity  includes a broad assortment of state and 
federal crimes, such as bribery, extortion, bankruptcy fraud, mail fraud, and securities fraud. 
 
Pattern means at least two acts of racketeering activity, the last of which occurred within 10 
years (excluding any period of imprisonment) after a prior act. Proof of a pattern requires 
that the acts be connected in some manner and not be separate, isolated, or random crimes. 
Each act must have “continuity plus relationship,” that is, the same or a similar purpose, 
result, participants, victims, methods of commission, or be otherwise related. 
 
Civil RICO Actions 
The most controversial aspect of RICO is its civil provisions. Under section 1964, civil 
actions may be brought by the government or any private party injured in his business or 
property. Critics complain that private party suits have been used to reach “deep pocket” 
defendants, such as accounting firms, who cannot be characterized as “racketeers”; and to 
coerce unwarranted settlements from blameless defendants fearful of possible treble damage 
judgments. Supporters contend that a plaintiff cannot recover unless there is proof of fraud 
or other criminal acts — whomever the defendant — making the stigma of being alleged a 
racketeer and the award of treble damages justified.  
 
False Claims and Statements 
Chapter 47 of Title 18, U.S. Code, contains a number of related provisions that punish false 
or fraudulent statements, orally or in writing, made to various federal agencies and 
departments.  
 
The principal federal false statements statute is 18 U.S.C. § 1001. Briefly stated, section 1001 
prohibits a person from lying to or concealing information from a federal official; however, 
this statute overlaps with many of the more specific laws, such as 18 U.S.C. § 1014, which 
apply to false statements made on certain loan and credit applications. 
 
A statement is false for the purposes of section 1001 if it was known to be untrue when it 
was made, and it is fraudulent if it was known to be untrue and was made with the intent to 
deceive a government agency. For a violation to occur, the agency need not actually have 
been deceived, nor must it have in fact relied upon the false statement. The statement must 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.239 
have been capable, however, of influencing the agency involved. 
The elements of a typical section 1001 violation are set forth below: 
• The defendant made a false statement (or used a false document) 
• That was material 
• Regarding a matter within the jurisdiction of any agency of the United States 
• With knowledge of its falsity 
• Knowingly and willfully (or with reckless disregard for truth or falsity) 
 
Section 1001 is most often used to prosecute false statements to law enforcement or 
regulatory officials not made under oath, in the course of an official investigation, or on an 
application for such things as federal employment, credit, and visa applications. The 
statute — a felony — also may be used in lieu of the misdemeanor provisions of the IRS Code 
for filing false documents with tax returns. (See the Financial Transactions Section for 
additional information on tax fraud.) 
 
In recent years, we have seen more instances of prosecution under this statute. Take, for 
example, the infamous case of Martha Stewart in 2003. In Stewart’s case, the SEC was 
conducting an investigation into an insider-trading scheme based upon Stewart’s disposal of 
ImClone stock shares in 2001. Rather than prosecuting Stewart for insider trading, she was 
charged with and convicted of, among other crimes, providing the government with false 
statements. Another prominent example of a prosecution under this statute involved Lewis 
“Scooter” Libby, a former senior White House official. On March 6, 2007, Libby was found 
guilty of, among other crimes, lying to the FBI about information he disbursed regarding a 
CIA operative’s employment. 
 
The false statement statutes of greatest importance to the fraud examiner follow. 
 
18 U.S.C. § 1001. Statements or Entries Generally 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, whoever, in any matter within the jurisdiction 
of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Government of the United States, 
knowingly and willfully — 
(1) falsifies, conceals or covers up by any trick, scheme, or device a material fact; 
(2) makes any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations; 
(3) makes or uses any false writing or document knowing the same to contain any false, 
fictitious or fraudulent statement or entry; 
shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or, if the offense involves 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.240  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
international or domestic terrorism, imprisoned not more than 8 years, or both. If the 
matter relates to an offense under chapter 109A, 109B, 110, or 1 17, or section 1591, 
then the term of imprisonment imposed under this section shall be not more than 8 years.  
  
(b) Subsection (a) does not apply to a party to a judicial proceeding, or that party’s counsel, for 
statements, representations, writings, or documents submitted by such party or counsel to a 
judge or magistrate in that proceeding. 
 
(c) With respect to any matter within the jurisdiction of the legislative branch, subsection (a) 
shall apply only to — 
(1)  administrative matters, including a claim for payment, a matter related to the 
procurement of property or services, personnel or employment practices, or support 
services, or a document required by law, rule, or regulation to be submitted to the 
Congress or any office or officer within the legislative branch; or 
(2)  any investigation or review, conducted purs uant to the authority of any committee, 
subcommittee, commission or office of the congress, consistent with the applicable rules 
of the House or Senate. 
 
18 U.S.C. § 1002. Possession of False Papers to Defraud the United States  
Section 1002 makes it a crime to knowingly possess any false, altered, forged, or 
counterfeited writing or document with intent to defraud the government. The text of this 
statute provides: 
 
Whoever, knowingly and with intent to defraud the United States, or any agency thereof, 
possesses any false, altered, forged, or counterf eited writing or document for the purpose of 
enabling another to obtain from the United States, or from any agency, officer or agent thereof, 
any sum of money, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both.  
 
18 U.S.C. § 1003. Demands Against the United States  
This statute criminalizes the making of fraudulent demands for money against the United 
States. Specifically, section 1003 provides: 
 
Whoever knowingly and fraudulently demands or endeavors to obtain any share or sum in the 
public stocks of the United States, or to have any part thereof transferred, assigned, sold, or 
conveyed, or to have any annuity, dividend, pension, wages, gratuity, or other debt due from the 
United States, or any part thereof, received, or paid by virtue of any false, forged, or 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.241 
counterfeited power of attorney, authority, or instrument, shall be fined under this title or 
imprisoned not more than five years, or both; but if the sum or value so obtained or attempted to 
be obtained does not exceed $100, he shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 
one year, or both. 
 
18 U.S.C. § 1005. Bank Entries, Reports, and Transactions 
Section 1005 makes it unlawful, among other things, for any officer, director, agent, or 
employee of a federally insured or chartered bank to make any false entries on the books of 
such institution with the intent to injure or defraud the bank or third parties, or to deceive 
any bank officer, examiners, or government agency. The text of the statute states:  
 
Whoever, being an officer, director, agent, or employee of any Federal Reserve Bank, member 
bank, depository institution holding company, national bank, insured bank, branch or agency of a 
foreign bank, or organization operating under section 25 or section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve 
Act without authority from the directors of such bank, branch, agency, or organization or 
company, issues or puts in circulation any notes of such bank, branch, agency, or organization or 
company; or 
 
Whoever, without such authority, makes, draws, issues, puts forth, or assigns any certificate of 
deposit, draft, order, bill of exchange, acceptan ce, note, debenture, bond, or other obligation, or 
mortgage, judgment or decree; or 
 
Whoever makes any false entry in any book, report, or statement of such bank, company, branch, 
agency, or organization with intent to injure or defraud such ba nk, company, branch, agency, or 
organization, or any other company, body politic or corporate, or any individual person, or to 
deceive any officer of such bank, company, branch, agency, or organization, or the Comptroller of 
the Currency, or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or any agent or examiner appointed 
to examine the affairs of such bank, company, branch, agency, or organization or the Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System; 
 
Whoever with intent to defraud the United States or any agency thereof, or any financial 
institution referred to in this section, participates or shares in or receives (directly or indirectly) any 
money, profit, property, or benefits through any transaction, loan, commission, contract, or any 
other act of any such financial institution — 
 
Shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than thirty years, or both. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.242  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
18 U.S.C. § 1014. Loan and Credit Applications Generally; Renewals and Discounts; Crop Insurance 
Section 1014 prohibits false statements or reports upon any credit application or related 
document submitted to a federally insured bank or credit institution for purposes of 
influencing such organization’s action in any way.  As with section 1001, the false statements 
must be willful, but they need not have been relied upon or actually deceived the agency for 
a violation to occur.  
 
On May 20, 2009, President Obama signed into law the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery 
Act (FERA), which contains a number of measures intended to combat fraud. Among other 
things, FERA amends section 1014 to include a prohibition of false statements in mortgage 
applications intended to influence any action by a mortgage lending business.  
 
The text of section 1014 provides: 
 
Whoever knowingly makes any false statement or report, or willfully overvalues any land, 
property, or security, for the purp ose of influencing in any way the action of the Farm Credit 
Administration, Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, or a company the Corporation reinsures, 
the Secretary of Agriculture acting through the Farmers Home Administration or successor 
agency, the Rural Development Administration or successor agency, any Farm Credit Bank, 
production credit association, agricultural credit association, bank for cooperatives, or any 
division, officer, or employee thereof, or of any regional agricultural credit corporation established 
pursuant to law, or a Federal land bank, a Federal land bank association, a Federal Reserve 
Bank, a small business investment company, as defined in section 103 of the Small Business 
Investment Act of 1958 (15 U.S.C. 662), or the Small Business Administration in 
connection with any provision of that Act, a Federal credit union, an insured State-chartered 
credit union, any institution the accounts of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, the Office of Thrift Supervision, any Federal home loan bank, the Federal 
Housing Finance Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Resolution Trust 
Corporation, the Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation, or the National Credit Union 
Administration Board, a branch or agency of a foreign bank (as such terms are defined in 
paragraphs (1) and (3) of section 1(b) of the International Banking Act of 1978), or an 
organization operating under section 25 or section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, upon any 
application, advance, discount, purchase, purchase agreement, repurchase agreement, 
commitment, or loan, or any change or extension of any of the same, by renewal, deferment of 
action or otherwise, or the acceptance, release, or substitution of security therefor, shall be fined 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.243 
not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or both. The term “State-
 chartered credit union” includes a credit union chartered under the laws of a state of the United 
States, the District of Columbia, or any commonw ealth, territory, or possession of the United 
States. 
 
Conspiracy to Defraud Federal Government with False Claims (18 U.S.C. § 286) 
This section makes it a crime for two or more persons to agree or conspire to defraud the 
United States by obtaining or aiding in obtaining payment or allowance of any false, 
fictitious, or fraudulent claim. The statute provides: 
 
Whoever enters into any agreement, combination, or conspiracy to defraud the United States, or 
any department or agency thereof, by obtaining or aiding to obtain the payment or allowance of 
any false or fraudulent claim, shall be fined under this title or impris oned not more than ten 
years or both. 
 
False, Fictitious, or Fraudulent Claims (18 U.S.C. § 287) 
Frequently referred to as the Criminal False Claims Act, this statute makes it illegal to 
present or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim against any agency or department of 
the United States. Section 287 provides: 
 
Whoever makes or presents to any person or officer in the civil, military, or naval service of the 
United States, or any department or agency thereof, any claim upon or against the United 
States, or any department or agency thereof, knowing such claim to be false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent shall be imprisoned not more than five years and subject to a fine in the amount 
provided in this title. 
 
To establish violation of this statute, the government must establish that the defendant:  
• Made or presented a false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim to a department of the United 
States  
• Knew such claim was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
• Did so with the specific intent to violate the law or knew that what he was doing was 
wrong 
 
The Major Fraud Act of 1988 (18 U.S.C. § 1031) 
The Major Fraud Act covers conduct prohibited by existing statutes and applies to contracts 
with the United States of $1 million or more. If convicted, the defendant may be imprisoned 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.244  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
for up to 10 years, and fined up to $10 million. See the “Laws Relating to Government 
Contracting” section below for more information. 
 
Civil False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. § 3729, et seq.) 
The Civil False Claims Act is the civil counterpart to the criminal False Claims Act. It 
provides a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal 
prosecution. 
 
The Civil False Claims Act provides in part that a person who commits the following acts is 
liable to the government for treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to 
$10,000 per false claim: 
• Knowingly presents or causes to be presented a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval (§ 3729(a)(1)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used a false record or statement to get a 
false or fraudulent claim paid or approved (§ 3729(a)(2)) 
• Conspires to defraud the government by getting a false or fraudulent claim allowed or 
paid (§ 3729(a)(3)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used a false record or statement to 
conceal, avoid, or decrease an obligation to pay or transmit money or property to the 
government (§ 3729(a)(7)) 
 
Knowing and knowingly are defined as the person having actual knowledge of the information; 
acting in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of the information; or acting in reckless 
disregard of the truth or falsity of the information. No proof of specific intent to defraud is 
required.  
 
A claim is defined as any request or demand, whether under a contract or otherwise, for 
money or property that is made to a contractor, grantee, or other recipient if the U.S. 
government provides any portion of the money or property which is requested or 
demanded, or if the government will reimburse such contractor, grantee, or other recipient 
for any portion of the money or property which is requested or demanded. 
 
On May 20, 2009, President Obama signed into law the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery 
Act (FERA), which enacts several changes that expand liability under the False Claims Act. 
Among other significant changes, FERA amends the False Claims Act in the following ways:  
• FERA eliminates the requirement that a false claim be presented to a federal official or 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.245 
that it directly involve federal funds. Before FERA, the False Claims Act required that 
allegedly false claims for payment be presented directly to an officer or employee of the 
government. The legislation broadens the definition of a claim under the False Claims 
Act to include any request or demand for property, even if the United States does not 
have title to the money or property.  
• FERA also reduces the intent required to establish liability under section 3729(a) by 
removing the to get language from the statute. By removing the words to get, FERA 
overturns the Supreme Court’s 2008 holding in Allison Engine Co. v. United States that a 
defendant must intend to get a false claim paid by the government. As a result, liability can 
attach even if the defendant did not intend to get a false claim paid by the government.  
 
The False Claims Act also allows a private person to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a qui tam action. Once the suit is 
filed, the federal government may take over prosecution or leave the case to the private 
individual. If the government joins the case, the Justice Department has primary 
responsibility, but the plaintiff continues to be a party to the action. If the government 
successfully prosecutes the suit, the private party may be awarded 15–25 percent of the 
recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs.  If the government does not take over 
the prosecution, and the qui tam plaintiff successfully wins the case on his own, the court 
may award the plaintiff 25–30 percent of the recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and 
costs.  
 
Program Fraud Civil Remedies (31 U.S.C. §§ 3801-3812) 
These provisions provide for agency administrative adjudication of relatively small false 
claims (less than $150,000) and for which the agency has approval to prosecute from the 
Department of Justice. The purpose of the fraud civil remedy is to provide the agency with 
the ability to prosecute those cases that would otherwise not be prosecuted in the courts 
because of the cost of a civil court action and relatively low potential recovery.  
 
Civil Monetary Penalty Law (42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7a) 
The Civil Monetary Penalty Law (CMPL) was passed to impose administrative sanctions 
against providers who defraud any federally funded program by filing false claims or other 
improper billing practices. Any person (including an organization, agency, or other entity, 
but excluding a beneficiary) that presents or causes to be presented a claim for a medical 
service or other item or service that the person knows or should know is false or fraudulent 
is subject to a civil monetary penalty.  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.246  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The penalty is not more than $10,000 per line item or service and an assessment of not more 
than three times the amount claimed. In addition, the person may be excluded from 
participation in government programs.  
 
Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications 
• False certifications or assurances 
• False records or invoices 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices 
• Billing for fictitious employees 
• Billing for goods and services not provided 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods 
 
Other examples of false claims and statements might include false statements about 
employees, fictitious transactions, and falsified documents. 
 
Insurance Fraud Prevention Act (18 U.S.C. § 1033) 
The Insurance Fraud Prevention Act criminalizes certain actions by people who are 
“engaged in the business of insurance.” The statute makes it a crime to provide false 
statements or reports to any insurance regulatory agency. It also prohibits false statements of 
any kind made to anyone regarding the financial condition or solvency of an insurance 
company. Section 1033 also criminalizes the embezzlement or misappropriation of any 
money, funds, premiums, or other property related to the insurance business.  
 
Misprision of Felony (18 U.S.C. § 4) 
Even though citizens have no general duty to report criminal activity, 18 U.S.C. § 4 
recognizes misprision of felony as a criminal offense. In general terms, misprision of felony 
is a crime dealing with the failure to report a crime where there is a legal duty to do so. The 
text of 18 U.S.C. § 4 provides:  
 
Whoever, having knowledge of the actual commission of a felony cognizable by a court of the United 
States, conceals and does not as soon  as possible make known the same to some judge or other person in 
civil or military authority under the United States, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more 
than three years, or both. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.247 
Under the federal statute, the prosecution must prove the following four elements to obtain 
a misprision of felony conviction: “(1) the principal committed and completed the felony 
alleged; (2) the defendant had knowledge of the fact; (3) the defendant failed to notify the 
authorities; and (4) the defendant took affirmative steps to conceal the crime of the 
principal.” 
 
Even though the federal misprision of felony is rarely prosecuted, a recent bribery scandal 
illustrates its applicability to white collar crime. In July 2008, attorney Zach Scruggs received 
fourteen months in prison and a $250,000 fine after pleading guilty to misprision of felony. 
Specifically, Scruggs committed a criminal offense because he failed to report a conspiracy 
by other lawyers to bribe a Mississippi judge. 
 
Federal Corruption Statutes (18 U.S.C. § 201, et seq.) 
Chapter 11 of 18 U.S.C. § 201 has 19 separate criminal provisions that define and prohibit a 
wide variety of conflicts of interest and other corrupt and unethical conduct involving public 
officials. The statutes of particular interest to fraud examiners follow. 
 
Bribery of Public Officials and Witnesses (18 U.S.C. § 201) 
Section 201 is the principal federal anti-corruption statute, and applies to virtually any U.S. 
official, juror, or witness. The section contains two separate offenses: bribery of public 
officials and illegal gratuities. 
 
BRIBERY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS (18 U.S.C. § 201(b)) 
Section 201(b) makes it a crime for anyone to bribe a public official. More specifically, it 
prohibits giving or receiving something of value for the purpose of influencing the 
performance of an official act. Under section 201(b), bribery is punishable by up to 15 years 
imprisonment, fine, and disqualification from holding public office. 
 
The elements of an official bribery offense under section 201(b) are as follows: 
• Giving or receiving 
• Anything of value 
• With intent to corruptly influence 
• An official act 
 
GRATUITIES (18 U.S.C. 201(c)) 
Section 201(c) prohibits giving a government employee something of value because of his 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.248  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
official position. The illegal gratuity statute is a lesser-included offense of bribery. As stated, 
a bribe is a payment made with the purpose of influencing (changing) official conduct. A 
gratuity is a payment made to reward or compensate an official for performing duties he 
lawfully is required to perform. Moreover, unlike the bribery offense, there is no requirement 
for the government to prove that the gratuity was given for the purpose of influencing any 
official act. Illegal gratuity violations carry only a maximum two-year term, fine, or both. 
 
The elements of an illegal gratuities offense under section 201(c) are as follows: 
• Giving or receiving 
• Anything of value 
• For or because of 
• An official act 
 
Bribery of a Bank Examiner (18 U.S.C. §§ 212–213) 
Title 18, U.S. Code, sections 212 and 213 forbid the giving of a loan or gratuity “to any 
examiner or assistant examiner who examines or has authority to examine such bank, 
branch, agency, organization, corporation, association or institution …” The only reported 
case construing these statutes held that the prosecution need not prove that the loan or 
gratuity was given or received with a corrupt or wrongful intent. The strict application of the 
statute has been justified by the public’s need for disinterested bank examiners. It is 
important to note that examiner in this context refers to an individual who is appointed by a 
federal financial institution regulatory agency (which is further defined in the statutory 
language), pursuant to state law, or one who is elected under state law to conduct 
examinations of financial institutions. Thus, the term examiner, in this paragraph, should not 
be confused with a fraud examiner.  
 
Bank Bribery (18 U.S.C. § 215) 
Title 18, U.S. Code, section 215 bars the corrupt giving or receiving of anything of value to 
influence the action of an employee or agent of a federally connected financial institution. 
The statute is aimed primarily at reducing corrupt influence in loan making. Unlike sections 
212 and 213 above, a specific intent to influence or be influenced through illegal payment 
must be proven to obtain a conviction. A payment made after a loan has been approved and 
disbursed may be in violation of the law if it is part of a prearranged plan or agreement. 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.249 
Anti-Kickback Act of 1986 (41 U.S.C. §§ 51–58) 
The Anti-Kickback Act outlaws the giving or receiving of anything of value for the purpose 
of improperly obtaining or receiving favorable treatment in connection with U.S. 
government contracts. The Act provides both civil and criminal penalties for violations. 
Criminal violations can be punished by a fine, up to 10 years in prison, or both. Civil 
penalties up to twice the amount of the kickback also may be assessed. Additionally, the 
United States may offset the amount of any kickback against the amount owed on the prime 
contract. 
 
ELEMENTS OF ANTI-KICKBACK ACT VIOLATIONS 
Under the Act, it is prohibited for: 
• Any person to 
• Knowingly and willfully 
• Offer or solicit kickbacks or any type of government contract or subcontract 
 
AUDIT OF RECORDS AND PREVENTION PROCEDURES 
The Anti-Kickback Act also provides for inspection by the Inspector General with access to 
books and records, and section 57 requires that the prime contractor have in place in its 
operations reasonable procedures to prevent and detect kickbacks. If a contractor has 
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation, the contractor is required to 
report the possible violation. The contractor also is required to cooperate fully with any 
federal agency investigation. 
 
According to the congressional notes following the statute, “reasonable procedures to detect 
and prevent kickbacks” include: 
• Educational programs for employees and subcontractors 
• Policy manuals 
• Special procurement and audit procedures 
• Ethics policies 
• Applicant screening 
• Reporting procedures 
 
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 78dd-1, 78dd-2, 78dd-3, 78m) 
The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) was originally enacted in 1977 to prohibit certain 
publicly held companies from making corrupt payments to foreign officials or political 
organizations. Other amendments to the Act make it illegal for any U.S. citizen to make such 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.250  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
payments. The statute was the result of disclosures from the Watergate investigations of 
corporate grease payments to foreigners to obtain business overseas.  
 
The FCPA criminalizes the bribery of a foreign public official in order to obtain or retain 
business, and it requires publicly traded companies to keep accurate books and records and 
adopt internal controls to prevent diversion of assets or other improper use of corporate 
funds. 
 
FCPA enforcement actions can include criminal actions by the Department of Justice (DOJ), 
civil actions brought by either the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or the DOJ, 
or both, and administrative actions filed by the SEC.  
 
Since the FCPA was enacted, there have been a number of international initiatives to 
strengthen anti-bribery laws around the world. One of the most significant is the work of the 
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). The OECD has 30 
member countries, including many of the world’s largest economic powers—the United 
States, Canada, Germany, France, Japan, Italy, Mexico, Spain, Australia, and the United 
Kingdom. In response to the articles drafted by the OECD, the member countries have or 
are in the process of drafting new, tougher transnational bribery laws. 
 
ANTI-BRIBERY PROVISIONS (15 U.S.C. § 78dd) 
The anti-bribery provisions of the FCPA make it unlawful to bribe a foreign official for 
business purposes.  
 
FIVE ELEMENTS  
There are five elements to a violation: (1) regulated party, (2) payment or offer, (3) foreign 
official, (4) corrupt intent, and (5) business purpose.  
 
First, under the FCPA, U.S. jurisdiction over corrupt payments to foreign officials depends 
upon whether the violator is a regulated party. Regulated persons include all of the following: 
• A domestic concern : Any citizen, national, or resident of the United States, or any business 
entity that has its principal place of business in the United States or that is organized 
under the laws of a state, territory, possession, or commonwealth of the United States 
• Issuer : A corporation that has issued securities that have been registered in the United 
States or who is required to file periodic reports with the SEC 
• The agents or other representatives of domestic concerns and issuers 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.251 
• A foreign national or business that takes any act in furtherance of a corrupt payment 
within U.S. territory 
 
Second, the FCPA prohibits paying, offering, promising to pay, or authorizing to pay or 
offer money or anything of value. Under the FCPA, payments can include payments of 
money, gifts, charitable contributions or donation of benefit to foreign official, in-kind 
service, scholarship to foreign official’s relative, overpayments for shares, and loans at 
favorable interest rates. 
 
Third, the prohibition extends only to corrupt payments to a foreign official. The term 
foreign official is very broad and includes: 
• Any foreign department, instrumentality, or agency 
• Any entity owned or controlled by a foreign government 
• Any official or candidate of a foreign political party 
• Any public international organization  
• Any person acting in an official capacity on behalf of any of the above entities 
 
Fourth, the person making or authorizing the payment must have a corrupt intent. That is, 
the payment must be intended to influence the recipient to misuse his position.  
 
Finally, the payment must be related to a specific business purpose. Put differently, the 
payments must be related to obtaining business, retaining business, or directing business. 
The prohibition also covers payments to gain favorable tax or customs treatment or to 
obtain permits or licenses. 
 
CRIMINAL ENFORCEMENT OF ANTI-BRIBERY PROVISIONS  
The Department of Justice (DOJ) is responsible  for all criminal enforcement of the FCPA. 
Under the anti-bribery provisions, corporations and other business entities are subject to a 
fine of up to $2,000,000, while  officers, directors, stockholders, employees, and agents are 
subject to a fine of up to $250,000 and imprisonment for up to five years. Fines imposed on 
individuals may not be paid by their employer or principal. 
 
CIVIL ENFORCEMENT OF ANTI-BRIBERY PROVISIONS  
Civil enforcement of the anti-bribery provisions of the FCPA is shared by the Securities 
Exchange Commission (SEC) and the DOJ. The primary civil enforcement tool is an 
injunction, though the FCPA also provides for monetary penalties. The maximum civil 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.252  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
penalty for a violation by any firm, as well as by any officer, director, employee, or agent, is 
$10,000 per occurrence. In addition, in an SEC enforcement action, the court may impose 
an additional fine not to exceed the greater of (1) the gross amount of the pecuniary gain to 
the defendant as a result of the violation, or (2) a specified dollar limitation based on the 
flagrancy of the violation. 
 
ACCOUNTING PROVISIONS (15 U.S.C. § 78m) 
In addition to outlawing bribery payments, the FCPA also contains separate accounting 
provisions for certain entities already subject to the FCPA provisions. Congress enacted the 
FCPA’s accounting provisions as an additional deterrent to bribery based on its conclusion 
that U.S. companies concealed most bribes in their corporate books.  
 
Under the accounting provisions, issuers (i.e., companies with securities listed in the U.S. 
trading markets) must (1) maintain accurate books and records, and (2) adopt internal 
controls to prevent the improper use of corporate funds. 
 
In addition, the FCPA requires that a covered entity make a good-faith effort to ensure that 
any company, including joint ventures, in which the U.S. company or one of its subsidiaries 
holds 50 percent or less of the voting power comply with the FCPA accounting provisions. 
 
BOOKS AND RECORDS (RECORD-KEEPING) PROVISION  
The first major requirement of the accounting provisions is that all issuers must accurately 
record all transactions, keep receipts and other support for transactions, and keep records in 
a manner consistent with overall document retention and record-keeping policies. 
 
In practice, the books and records provisions are used to prevent three types of 
improprieties:  
• The failure to record improper transactions 
• The falsification of records to conceal improper transactions 
• The creation of records that are quantitatively correct, but fail to specify the qualitative 
aspects of a transaction that might reveal the true purpose of a particular payment 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.253 
INTERNAL CONTROLS PROVISION  
The internal controls provision is designed to prevent unauthorized or unrecorded 
transactions. Under the internal controls provision, a company must maintain robust 
compliance policies and must take reasonable steps to ensure that its affiliates maintain 
suitable internal controls. 
 
The SEC has considered several factors to determine the adequacy of a system of internal 
controls. The factors include:  
• The role of the board of directors 
• Communication of corporate procedures and policies 
• Assignment of authority and responsibility 
• Competence and integrity of personnel 
• Accountability for performance and compliance with policies and procedures 
• Objectivity and effectiveness of the internal audit function 
 
SEC REGULATIONS REGARDING THE ACCOUNTING PROVISIONS  
The SEC has adopted two regulations enforcing the accounting provisions. First, Rule 13b2-
 1 makes it unlawful to falsify accounts, providing that “[n]o person shall, directly or 
indirectly, falsify or cause to be falsified, any book, record or account” required to be kept 
under the accounting provisions of the FCPA. Second, the SEC established Rule 13b2-2, 
which makes it unlawful to supply false information to auditors. This rule states that:  
 
ENFORCEMENT OF THE ACCOUNTING PROVISIONS  
The FCPA’s accounting provisions are enforced by both the SEC and the DOJ. The SEC 
has authority to initiate civil enforcement actions and can impose civil fines and 
disgorgement on the company and individuals. The SEC has brought enforcement actions of 
the accounting provisions both in cases involving actual foreign bribes and in domestic 
transactions. The SEC can seek civil penalties of up to $500,000 for covered entities and 
$100,000 for individuals. 
 
The DOJ is responsible for criminal prosecution of “willful” violations  of the accounting 
provisions, and criminal penalties can include large fines and imprisonment. A willful 
violation of the accounting and controls provision is punishable by a fine up to $25 million 
against entities, and a fine up to $5 million and imprisonment up to 20 years against 
individuals. 
 
Natural persons convicted of willful violations of the accounting provisions may be fined up  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.254  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to $5 million, imprisoned up to 20 years, or both. Corporations convicted of willful 
violations may be fined up to $25 million. Also, the FCPA provides that an individual may 
be held criminally liable for “knowingly” falsifying any book, records, or account, or 
circumventing or failing to implement a system of internal accounting controls. Knowing 
may include willful blindness or conscious attempts not to know. But no criminal liability is 
imposed for technical or insignificant accounting errors.  
 
In addition, administrative and civil relief also is available. A corporation or individual found 
in violation of the FCPA may be subject to debarment before many government agencies, 
and an indictment under the FCPA can also lead to the suspension of one’s right to do 
business with the government or the immediate suspension of export licenses for military 
defense equipment. 
 
Theft or Bribery Concerning Programs Receiving Federal Funds (18 U.S.C. § 666) 
Under this statute, a person can be convicted of a federal offense if he commits fraud or 
theft against a company that receives federal funds. The victim of the theft or bribe must be 
(1) an organization and (2) must receive benefits in excess of $10,000 within any one-year 
period under a federal program involving a grant, contract, subsidy, loan, guarantee, 
insurance, or other form of federal assistance.  
 
In determining whether the organization receives more than $10,000 in benefits, do not 
include any of the following: salaries, wages, fees, or other compensation paid, or expenses 
paid or reimbursed in the usual course of business. 
 
To sustain a conviction under section 666, the following conditions also must be met: 
• The defendant must be an agent of an organization (as defined above), a state or local 
government, or Native American tribal government 
• Who embezzled, stole, or otherwise obtained by fraud 
• Property valued at $5,000 or more 
• The property is owned or is under the care or custody of the organization or agency 
• The organization or agency must receive more than $10,000 in federal funding 
 
The statute also makes it a federal crime to solicit, offer, or accept (or agree to offer or 
accept) bribes in relation to any transactions involving the federally funded organization or 
agency if the transaction is valued at $5,000 or more. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.255 
Federal Securities Laws 
Because of several high profile corporate scandals in 2001 and 2002, Congress passed the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which was discussed previously in this chapter. In addition to the 
numerous reporting and certification requirements for financial statements, the Act also 
created a criminal statute relating to securities fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1348) set forth below. In 
addition to this statute, there are also numerous other federal statutes which prohibit false 
statements and other fraudulent activity in connection with securities transactions. The most 
commonly used are section 17(a) of the Securities Act of 1933 (popularly known as the 1933 
Act) and Rule 10b-5, promulgated under section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 
1934 (the 1934 Act). Both contain civil and administrative remedies (such as the power to 
initiate actions to enjoin further violations) enforced by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), as well as criminal sanctions enforced by the Department of Justice 
(DOJ). Whether a particular violation is pros ecuted civilly or criminally depends in large 
measure on the degree of willfulness that can be proved. 
 
The 1933 and 1934 Acts 
Section 17(a) of the 1933 Act makes it unlawful to employ fraudulent devices or 
misrepresentations in connection with the offer or sale of securities through jurisdictional 
facilities (e.g., the U.S. mail), whereas Rule 10b-5 prohibits the same conduct “in 
connection” with the “purchase or sale” of any security by “any person.” Because Rule 10b-
 5 has the broadest reach — including insider trading — it is the most often used.  
 
More specifically, a successful 10b-5 action requires the plaintiff to allege and prove the 
following four elements: 
• The defendant made a material misstatement or omission 
• The defendant acted with scienter (typically meaning that the party charged with the 
violation acted with a specific intent to defraud) 
• The plaintiff relied on the misrepresentation or omission in the purchase or sale of a 
security 
• The plaintiff suffered economic loss caused by the purchase or sale of the security 
 
To bring a successful insider trading claim under Rule 10b-5, however, the government must 
prove all of the following elements: 
• The defendant bought or sold securities in a company. 
• At the time of purchase, the defendant was in possession of non-public, material 
information.  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.256  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The defendant was an insider of the company (e.g., an employee), a “constructive 
insider” (i.e., someone who is temporarily en trusted with confidential information), a 
tippee (i.e., someone who receives information from an insider), or an outsider who gets 
the information from a temporary insider.  
• The defendant traded “by the use of any means or instrumentality of interstate 
commerce or of the mails, or of any facility of any national securities exchange.” 
 
To allow action under Rule 10b-5, the false statement must be material. The test for 
materiality is whether there is a substantial likelihood under all the circumstances that a 
reasonable investor would have considered the misstated or omitted facts significant in 
deciding whether to invest. Materiality is most often expressed in dollar terms or in terms of 
its effect on financial statements. Materiality, however, might relate to serious questions of 
management’s integrity regardless of the dollar amount involved. 
 
Specific intent to defraud is an essential element of a violation of section 17(a) and Rule 10b-
 5. However, intent to defraud  is defined more broadly in securities regulations than in other 
areas of common-law fraud, and it includes reckless statements, as well as the knowing 
circulation of half-truths and false opinions or predictions that elsewhere might be 
considered non-actionable puffing. To prove liability against a corporation, a plaintiff must 
show that an agent of the corporation made the alleged false statements with specific intent 
to defraud, and both the fraudulent act and required mental state are attributable to the 
corporation. 
 
Good faith is always a defense to a section 17(a) or Rule 10b-5 fraud action. However, intent 
can be — and usually is — proved by circumstantial evidence, as in any fraud case. Violations 
of other indirect anti-fraud provisions of the federal securities laws (such as certain 
registrations and disclosure requirements) do not require a showing of fraudulent intent. 
 
SEC civil actions often are settled by consent decrees in which the party agrees to stop the 
offending practice without admitting or denying he engaged in it in the first place. Violations 
of such decrees may be punishable as contempt with jail terms or fines. 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.257 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act passed in June 2002 made a number of important changes to 
securities law. One of the most significant changes was the addition of a criminal offense 
under section 807 (codified at 18 U.S.C. § 13 48).  Section 1348 provides for fines up to 
$250,000, imprisonment for up to 25 years, or both.  
 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 (FERA), signed into law by President 
Obama on May 20, 2009, contains a number of measures intended to combat fraud. Among 
other provisions, the legislation expands the definition of securities fraud in section 1348 to 
include fraud schemes involving commodities for future delivery or options on commodities 
for future delivery. 
 
Tax Evasion, False Returns, and Failure to File  
(26 U.S.C. §§ 7201, 7203, 7206[1], et. seq.) 
Fraud and corruption prosecutions might include tax evasion, false returns, or failure to file 
counts if — as is often the case — the recipient of illegal payments has not reported them as 
income, or if the payer has attempted to conceal and deduct them as a legitimate business 
expense. 
 
Offshore Tax Avoidance and Evasion  
Even though offshore banking is not illegal, federal law requires individuals to disclose any 
offshore accounts to the U.S. government. Generally, the principal disclosure requirement is 
satisfied by filing Treasury Form 90-22.1, the “Report of Foreign Bank and Financial 
Accounts” (FBAR). Specifically, Treasury Department regulations require U.S. citizens and 
resident aliens to file a report when they maintain a financial interest or signature authority 
over a foreign bank account with a balance of more than $10,000 during the calendar year. 
Furthermore, individuals with reportable offshore accounts must acknowledge whether they 
have an offshore account on their tax return.  
 
Violation of these reporting requirements may be  punished by civil or criminal penalties. 
Section 5321 of the Bank Secrecy Act sets forth the civil penalties for noncompliance, 
providing that a covered entity that willfully violates the above reporting requirements can 
be hit with a penalty of up to the amount of the transaction (not to exceed $100,000) or 
$25,000, whichever is greater. In addition, civil tax penalties may be imposed for failing to 
disclose foreign account activity.  
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.258  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Generally, tax evasion, (26 U.S.C. § 7201), failure to file a return or pay a tax (26 U.S.C. § 
7203), and making a false tax return (26 U.S.C. § 7206(1)) are the most common criminal 
offenses arising from holding a foreign account. Section 7201 carries a felony charge of not 
more than $100,000 ($500,000 in the case of a corporation) and/or imprisonment for not 
more than five years. A person convicted under section 7203 can be fined up to $100,000 or 
sentenced to up to one year in prison in addition to any other penalties. A person found 
guilty of section 7206 may be subject to a fine of up to $100,000 (or $500,000 in the case of 
a corporation) and/or imprisonment of up to three years.  
 
Recently, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and the Department of Justice (DOJ) have 
intensified crackdowns on offshore bank accounts, attempting to locate and punish 
individuals that use offshore bank accounts to illegally shield income. This development has 
occurred primarily because offshore tax havens result in lost revenue for the U.S. 
government. In fact, according to the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, 
offshore tax evasion costs the United States an estimated $100 billion in lost revenue each 
year.  
 
Bankruptcy Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 151, et seq.) 
Two related but somewhat different types of criminal conduct fall under the general heading 
of bankruptcy fraud. The first is the planned bankruptcy  or bustout  scheme in which the 
wrongdoer sells off for cash, usually below cost, inventory obtained on credit (often through 
false or inflated financial statements) and then absconds with the proceeds. Formal 
bankruptcy proceedings often are not initiated and the crime may be prosecuted under 
general fraud statutes, such as mail or wire fraud.  
 
The second type of bankruptcy offense involves misconduct by a person or entity actually 
involved or contemplating being involved in a formal bankruptcy proceeding. The federal 
criminal laws that regulate bankruptcy proceedings are set out in the Financial Transactions 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud 
This section examines some common federal statutes that prohibit fraud against banks or 
other similar financial institutions. 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.259 
Bank Fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1344, 1345) 
Title 18, U.S. Code, section 1344 is the broadest of all bank fraud statutes. It punishes those 
obtaining assets owned or controlled by a bank by false or fraudulent pretenses, 
representations, or promises. It covers both insiders and all other persons, even if not 
affiliated with the bank. It also applies to check kiting and to offshore frauds (extraterritorial 
reach). Bank fraud is a predicate offense under the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt 
Organization statute. Penalties for bank fraud include a fine of up to $1,000,000 and/or 
imprisonment of up to 30 years.  
 
In a related provision, section 1345 allows the government to commence a civil action in 
federal court to enjoin fraudulent activity that violates section 1344. 
 
As in the mail and wire fraud statutes, the terms scheme and artifice to defraud include any 
misrepresentations or other conduct intended to deceive others to obtain something of 
value. The prosecution must prove only an attempt to execute the scheme. It need not show 
actual loss, that the victim institution was deceived, or that the defendant personally 
benefited from the scheme. 
 
Fraud by Bank Personnel and Receivers  
FALSE ENTRIES (18 U.S.C. § 1006) 
Section 1006 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code is a typical conflict of interest prohibition. It 
makes it a crime for “officers, agents, or employees” of financial institutions to defraud 
financial institutions or the U.S. government by making false entries or withdrawing or 
transferring funds without authorization. The penalties are severe — up to 30 years in prison 
and/or a fine of up to $1,000,000. 
 
To prove illegal participation under section 1006, the government must prove: 
• The defendant was an officer, agent, or employee of a lending institution authorized by 
and acting under the laws of the United States 
• Direct or indirect receipt of some benefit from the transaction in question 
• The defendant knowingly and willfully made, or caused to be made, a false entry 
concerning a material fact in a book, report, or statement of the institution 
 
CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS FROM A RECEIVER (18 U.S.C. § 1032) 
Section 1032 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code makes it a crime for a conservator or receiver of a 
financial institution to conceal or impede the recovery of funds or property. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.260  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
THEFT, EMBEZZLEMENT, AND MISAPPLI CATION (18 U.S.C. §§ 656, 657) 
Section 656 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code is the principal federal bank embezzlement statute. 
It prohibits theft, embezzlement, and misapplication of a bank’s funds by its officers, 
directors, or employees. The essential elements of a typical section 656 violation are: 
• The defendant was an officer, director, agent, or employee of 
• A federally insured bank 
• Who willfully 
• Embezzled, abstracted, purloined, or willfully misapplied funds of the bank 
• With the intent to injure or defraud the bank 
 
The terms abstract, purloin, and misapply as used in the statute are largely repetitive and in 
normal usage mean to take or to convert bank funds for one’s own use or the use of a third-
 party for improper purposes without the bank’s knowledge or consent.  
 
Section 657 prohibits the embezzlement of funds from designated federally connected 
lending, credit, and insurance organizations. The basic elements of a violation are the same 
as those in section 656. 
 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) (12 U.S.C. § 1811, et. seq.) 
Following the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, Congress passed the Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) to enhance the safety of savings 
institutions. Among other things, FIRREA greatly strengthened the government’s 
prosecutorial arm against insiders and outsiders. The law’s provisions are applicable to any 
institution-affiliated party, which includes (but is not limited to) directors, officers, 
employees, and controlling shareholders. Institution-affiliated parties can include attorneys, 
accountants, and appraisers. 
 
FIRREA provides for enhanced penalties for convictions of several bank-related statutes. 
Under FIRREA, civil penalties range from $1 million per day, a total of $5 million for 
continuing violations, or the amount of wrongful gain or loss.  
 
Financial Institutions Anti-Fraud Enforcement Act of 1990 (12 U.S.C. § 4201, et. seq.) 
The Financial Institutions Anti-Fraud Enforcement Act is also directed at the financial 
services industry. This Act allows private informants to notify the government about 
violations that could give rise to civil actions under FIRREA, and it provides for private civil 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.261 
enforcement in certain situations. The statute also allows for the hiring of private counsel to 
investigate and prosecute civil claims. 
 
Continuing Financial Crime Enterprise Statute (18 U.S.C. § 225) 
Also known as the “S&L Kingpin” statute or the “Financial Crime Kingpin Statute,” 
Congress enacted this law in response to the late 1980s savings and loan scandal, in which 
numerous factors such as market forces and criminal activity within saving and loan 
institutions led to the collapse of the savings and loan industry. Primarily concerned with 
punishing financial institution related crimes, the Financial Crime Kingpin Statute 
criminalizes the administration of a continuing financial crimes enterprise.  
 
A criminal enterprise is a series of violations of enumerated crimes related to financial 
institutions that were committed by at least four persons acting in concert. According to 
most courts, a series is three violations. 
 
Punishment under the Financial Crime Kingpin Statute is severe. The law provides for fines 
of up to $20 million for organizational defendan ts, as well as fines of up to $10 million and 
up to life imprisonment for individual defendants receiving $5,000,000 or more during a 24-month 
period from a criminal enterprise.  
 
Participation in the Affairs of a Financial Institution by a Convicted Felon (12 U.S.C. § 1829) 
This statute prohibits people convicted of certain banking crimes from participating in the 
conduct of the affairs of a financial institution, with certain exceptions. A knowing violation 
might result in fines of up to $1 million for each day the prohibition is violated, 
imprisonment of up to five years, or both. 
 
Fraudulent Use of Credit Cards (15 U.S.C. § 1644) 
The federal government uses several different statutes to prosecute credit card fraud, 
including section 1644 of the Truth in Lending Act, the mail fraud statute, and the wire 
fraud statutes. But of these three statutes, only section 1644 is specifically designed to 
combat credit card fraud.   
 
Section 1644 of the Truth in Lending Act provides penalties for the use of counterfeit, 
fictitious, altered, forged, lost, stolen, or fraudulently obtained credit cards. Specifically, 
section 1644 prohibits an individual from using a fraudulently obtained credit card to obtain 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.262  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
money, goods, services, or anything else of value aggregating $1,000 or more. It also 
prohibits a person from receiving, concealing, using, or transporting anything of value that 
was “obtained with a counterfeit, fictitious, altered, forged, lost, stolen, or fraudulently 
obtained credit card.” A violator can be fined up to $10,000 and/or imprisoned for up to 10 
years. 
 
The Electronic Funds Transfer Act (15 U.S.C. § 1693n(b)) 
Congress designed this legislation to allow consumers the ease and benefit of electronic fund 
transfers, while defining the rights and liabilities of the parties involved in such transactions. 
Section 1693n applies to paperless money transfers between accounts, including ATM 
transactions, debit and credit card transactions, point-of-sale (POS) debit transactions, 
telephone transfers, and according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), 
any “other electronic banking transactions that can result in the withdrawal of cash from 
your bank account.” 
 
Generally, this statute attaches criminal liability to the acts of: 
• Giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations 
• Failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations 
 
Section 1693n also prohibits certain actions affecting commerce, including: 
• Using, attempting to use, or conspiring to use any fraudulently obtained debit 
instrument, with knowledge of fraudulent character, to obtain anything with an 
aggregating value of at least $1,000 within a one-year period 
• Transporting, attempting to transport, or conspiring to transport a fraudulent debit 
instrument with unlawful or fraudulent intent and knowledge 
• Selling or transporting in interstate or foreign commerce of any fraudulent debit 
instrument with knowledge 
• Receiving, concealing, using, or transporting any proceeds from a fraudulent activity that 
have a value exceeding $1,000 within any one-year period 
• Receiving, concealing, using, selling, or transporting of one or more tickets for interstate 
or foreign transportation that have a value aggregating $500 or more and were obtained 
by use of a fraudulent debit instrument 
• Furnishing money, property, services, or anything else of value aggregating $1,000 or 
more within a one-year period, in conjunction with the use of a fraudulent debit 
instrument 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.263 
As used in this section, the term debit instrument means a card, code, or other device other 
than a check, draft, or similar paper instrument, by the use of which a person may initiate an 
electronic fund transfer. 
 
Laws Relating to Health Care Fraud 
Health care fraud may be defined as an intentional act to defraud a health care benefit program 
or to obtain through false representations money or other property owned by a health care 
benefit program. Numerous criminal and civil federal and state laws are available in the 
prosecution of health care fraud. In addition, regulatory agencies are also available for 
licensure action.  
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 
As part of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), 
Congress made a number of changes to the federal criminal code. The Act established 
several criminal statutes related specifically to health care fraud. Specifically, under HIPAA, 
there are five federal crimes directed at health care fraud. 
 
HIPAA made it illegal for anyone to knowingly and willfully: 
• Defraud any health care benefit program or obtain by means of false representations any 
money or property of a health care benefit program (18 U.S.C. § 1347) 
• Embezzle, convert, or steal any funds, property, or assets of a health care benefit 
program (18 U.S.C. § 669) 
• Make “false statements,” which criminalizes any false or fictitious statements “in any 
matter involving a health care benefit program” (18 U.S.C. § 1035) 
• Obstruct, delay, prevent, or mislead the investigation of federal health care offenses (18 U.S.C. § 1518) 
 
The term health care benefit program as used in these statutes is defined to mean “any public or 
private plan or contract, affecting commerce, under which any medical benefit, item, or 
service is provided to any individual, and includes any individual or entity who is providing a 
medical benefit, item, or service for which payment may be made under the plan or 
contract” (18 U.S.C. § 24(b)). 
 
HIPAA also provides that a judge may order a person convicted of a federal health care 
offense to forfeit any property that can be traced from the proceeds received from the 
offense. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.264  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For information on HIPAA’s privacy protections for consumers’ health care information,  
see the Identity Theft section below.  
 
False Claims and Statements  
In addition to HIPAA, the federal false claims statutes, including the criminal False Claims 
Act, false statements under section 1001, and the Civil False Claims Act, may be used to 
combat certain types of health care fraud.  
 
These statutes are discussed in more detail in the False Claims and Statements section below.  
 
Anti-Kickback Statute (42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7b(b)) 
Also, the anti-kickback statute (also referred to in the healthcare industry as the Medicare-Medicaid 
Anti-Fraud and Abuse Statute) may be used to combat healthcare fraud. This 
statute prohibits an individual from making payments to induce the purchase of healthcare 
goods or services that will be paid for by a federal health care program.  
 
A violation of the anti-kickback statute carries criminal fines of up to $25,000 per violation, 
imprisonment for up to five years, and exclusion from participation in federal health care 
programs. The government may also impose civil penalties, which could result in treble 
damages plus $50,000 for each violation. 
 
The Stark Law (42 U.S.C. 1395nn) 
The Stark Law (also known as the physician self-referral law) attempts to limit the ability of 
physicians to profit from their referrals by prohibiting physicians from making referrals of 
certain designated health services (DHS) to entities with which the physician or his 
immediate family member has a financial relationship. The DHS include physical therapy 
services; occupational therapy services; radiology and ultrasound services; durable medical 
equipment and supplies; parental and enteral nutrients, equipment, and supplies; prosthetics, 
orthotic, and prosthetic devices; home health services and supplies; outpatient prescription 
drugs; and hospital services.  
 
In contrast to the Anti-Kickback Statute, which is a criminal statute that targets a wide range 
of transactions, the Stark Law is a civil law that specifically targets physician referrals. 
 
An individual who violates the Stark Law can incur civil penalties and be excluded from 
participation in federal health care programs.   
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.265 
Identity Theft  
Technological advancements facilitating the electronic transfer of personal and financial 
information have greatly contributed to the increasing occurrences of identity theft. Identity 
theft occurs when thieves wrongfully obtain and use another person’s personal data (i.e., 
name, address, Social Security number, date of birth, or credit card numbers) in a way that 
involves fraud or deception. There are two primary federal laws that address identity theft: 
the Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act and the Identity Theft Penalty 
Enhancement Act. In addition, there are a number of state, federal, and regulatory data 
breach laws that require companies to inform consumers of data breaches without 
unreasonable delay.  
 
There are, however, other ancillary federal laws regarding fraud in various contexts that this 
section will not cover. These ancillary laws include the federal mail and wire fraud statutes, 
the access device fraud statute, federal statutes that prohibit fraud against banks or other 
similar financial institutions, and statutes prohibiting Social Security fraud. 
 
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998 (18 U.S.C. § 1028) 
The growth of identity theft led Congress to pass the Identity Theft and Assumption 
Deterrence Act, which makes identity theft a federal crime. The Identity Theft and 
Assumption Deterrence Act (outlaws the intentional and unauthorized use of another 
individual’s identification, with the intent to commit a crime. The Act carries a maximum 
term of 15 years of imprisonment, a fine, and criminal forfeiture of any personal property 
used or intended to be used to commit the offense. (The penalty is increased to a maximum 
of 30 years of imprisonment if the offense is committed to facilitate an act of terrorism.) 
Identity theft schemes may also involve other violations such as mail fraud, wire fraud, credit 
card fraud, computer fraud, or financial institution fraud. 
 
In addition, this legislation enables the Secret Service, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, 
and other law enforcement agencies to combat this crime. It allows the identity theft victim 
to seek restitution if there is a conviction. It also establishes the Federal Trade Commission 
as a central agency to act as a clearinghouse for complaints (against credit reporting agencies 
and credit grantors), referrals, and resources for assistance for victims of identity theft.  
 
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act (18 U.S.C. § 1028A) 
In August 2004, Congress passed the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act to deal with 
the increasing frequency of identity theft schemes. This Act strengthens federal law on 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.266  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
identity theft by creating a crime of “aggravated identity theft.” Aggravated identity theft 
occurs when an individual uses a stolen identity to commit other crimes. Specifically, section 
1028A provides that where one “knowingly transfers, possesses, or uses, without lawful 
authority, a means of identification of another” during and in relation to any felony violation 
of/or relating to fraud, embezzlement, false statements, and the like, an additional term of 
imprisonment of two years will be imposed on the individual. In April 2005, the United 
States Sentencing Commission went a step further to impose consecutive mandatory 
minimum sentences of two and five years depending on the underlying offense of misusing a 
stolen identification. The statute also imposes a minimal sentence of two years of 
imprisonment to any punishment for a felony crime committed using a stolen identity. 
 
Data Breaches and Breach Notification Laws 
Businesses with inadequate security safeguards not only leave customers’ confidential data 
vulnerable to misuse or theft, but also increase their risk of regulatory or legal action, direct 
economic loss, and loss of consumer confidence. 
 
EXAMPLE  
In September 2009, TJX Companies (the parent company of T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, 
HomeGoods, and other enterprises) agreed to pay $525,000 to settle a class-action suit filed by 
several banks related to the data breach of its computer system in which hackers compromised 
94 million credit and debit card numbers. According to investigations, inadequate security 
safeguards allowed hackers to access and steal this information. This settlement is one of several 
for TJX, which has estimated that it will spend more than $250 million to address network-security 
weaknesses and respond to lawsuits, investigations, and other claims stemming from the 
breach. 
 
EXAMPLE  
On November 20, 2009, the Hartford Courant reported that Health Net, a health insurance 
provider, lost a portable, external hard drive with unencrypted personal information of 
approximately 1.5 million customers. The missing data included Social Security numbers and 
bank account numbers of Health Net members in Arizona, Connecticut, New Jersey, and 
New York. Although the hard drive reportedly disappeared from Health Net’s office in May 
2009, the company waited six months before disclosing the breach. According to the 
Connecticut Attorney General, Health Net may be in violation of state notification laws that 
require companies to inform consumers of data breaches without unreasonable delay. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.267 
Data breaches are one of the largest contributors to the escalating problem of identity theft, 
which costs Americans more than $50 billion each year. In fact, the Identity Theft Resource 
Center, a nonprofit organization dedicated to understanding and preventing identity theft, 
estimates that in 2008, data breaches left more than 35 million personal records exposed. 
 
Although these cases and statistics illustrate why strengthening information-security practices 
should become a high priority for management in all types of organizations, complying with 
U.S. privacy laws and regulations is becoming increasingly complex. This is primarily because 
the United States uses a sectoral approach to protect information. This approach, which 
relies on a mix of legislation, regulation, and self-regulation, creates a system in which 
privacy standards emerge from a complex interplay of overlapping state and federal laws and 
regulations, as well as industry practices.  
 
In addition to a complex regulatory framework, organizations across various industries have 
experienced a significant increase in the number of information privacy laws and regulations 
affecting their operations. Particularly due to an onslaught of data-breach stories like the 
ones above, concerns about the privacy of personal information have escalated, and this has 
compelled government authorities to enact stronger consumer-protection legislation and 
enhance enforcement efforts to identify and prosecute violations of laws protecting private-
 consumer information. 
 
Although businesses have become subject to a growing number of privacy laws and 
regulations, information-privacy regulation in the United States is more prevalent in areas 
where abuses of personal information are most likely to occur, such as the financial and 
health care industries.  
 
This increasingly complex area of law poses significant compliance challenges for 
organizations operating in regulated industries. In this environment, management must 
understand the complicated and expanding area of privacy law and continually work to 
ensure that their organizations have and follow appropriate procedures and protocols 
addressing information privacy. 
 
This section seeks to provide a general overview on the subject by briefly examining some 
important laws, regulations, and standards designed to protect the privacy, security, and 
confidentiality of customer data. The discussion below is divided into the following  
  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.268  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
categories: financial privacy, private health in formation, and privacy protections applying to 
businesses in other industries. 
 
PRIVATE FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
Privacy protections in the financial services industry are primarily contained in the Fair and 
Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.  
 
FAIR AND ACCURATE CREDIT TRANSACTIONS ACT’S RED FLAG RULES  
In 2007, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued final rules and guidelines (Red Flag 
Rules) implementing sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act 
(FACTA).The Red Flag Rules require financial institutions and certain creditors to develop 
and implement a formal written program to identify, detect, and respond to red flags of 
possible identity theft. 
 
See the chapter on “Financial Institution Fraud” in the Financial Transactions and Fraud 
Schemes section of the Fraud Examiners Manual for more information about the Red Flag 
Rules. 
 
GRAMM-LEACH-BLILEY ACT  
Like FACTA’s Red Flag Rules, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which protects customers’ 
financial information held by banks working in personal finance, imposes privacy obligations 
on financial institutions. Specifically, financial institutions have privacy obligations under the 
Financial Privacy Rule and the Safeguards Rule of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act. 
 
The Financial Privacy Rule requires financial institutions to provide their customers with 
privacy notices explaining the institution’s policies for collecting and sharing personal 
financial information. The Financial Privacy Rule also applies to companies — whether or not 
they are financial institutions — that receive personal financial information. 
 
Conversely, the Safeguards Rule requires all financial institutions to design, implement, and 
maintain safeguards to protect the confidentiality and integrity of customers’ personal 
information. The Safeguards Rule applies not only to financial institutions that collect 
information from their own customers, but also to financial institutions that receive 
customer information from other financial institutions. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.269 
PRIVATE HEALTH INFORMATION 
In addition, certain businesses may need to consider adopting a set of policies and 
procedures to safeguard private health information, which includes any identifiable 
information that relates to a patient’s health, health care, or payment for health care. Federal 
privacy protections for consumers’ health care information are primarily located in the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and the Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act). 
 
THE HEALTH INSURANCE PORTABILITY AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT  
Although Congress originally enacted the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) to protect health insurance coverage for workers and their families, it 
expanded the law to protect patient health information. The HIPAA Privacy Rule applies to 
health care providers, health plans, and health care clearinghouses that electronically transmit 
health information in connection with a covered transaction, and it governs access to and 
use of “protected health information,” which includes any identifiable information that 
relates to a patient’s health, health care, or payment for health care. 
 
The HIPAA Privacy Rule generally provides that covered entities cannot use or disclose any 
protected health information except as authorized by the subject of that information or as 
specifically required or authorized by the regulations. It also provides that when the use or 
disclosure of such information is permitted, covered entities must make all reasonable efforts 
to use or disclose the minimum amount of protected information necessary to accomplish 
the intended purpose.  
 
If protected health information becomes an issue during a fraud examination, the examiner 
should immediately contact the human resources (HR) department. The HR department 
should have information about whether the entity is subject to HIPAA rules and can help 
the examiner comply with those rules.  
 
The most important thing to note is that if HIPAA rules do apply, examiners are restricted 
as to the type of health information they can access without specific written authorization. 
Examiners should never contact the health care provider, the health-plan administrator, or a 
medical-billing service for copies of employee’s records without first consulting the 
employer’s legal counsel or HR department. 
 
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.270  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
THE HEALTH INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY FOR ECONOMIC AND CLINICAL HEALTH ACT  
The American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA), which was enacted on 
February 17, 2009, contains many compliance challenges for entities that create, maintain, 
disclose, or use health information. Title XIII of ARRA, the Health Information Technology 
for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act), imposed additional requirements for 
notifications of federal security breaches and added numerous privacy and data security 
restrictions for covered entities under HIPAA. The act also increased the maximum fine 
under HIPAA from $100,000 to $1,500,000. 
 
BUSINESSES OUTSIDE THE FINANCIAL AND HEALTH CARE INDUSTRIES 
Even if managers believe their companies fall outside of the financial services or health care 
industries, they should determine if they are creditors under the Red Flag Rules and look to 
state laws and industry standards, especially the Payment Card Industry’s Data Security 
Standard (PCI DSS). 
 
STATE PRIVACY LAWS  
In addition to the federal laws summarized above, specific state laws may regulate the 
collection and use of personal information by businesses in the private sector. During the 
past few years, states have been aggressive in creating protections for personal information, 
and these protections typically apply to a broad set of personal information and extend to all 
businesses operating in the state.  
 
Of particular concern for businesses are state laws pertaining to breach notification. Most 
states have responded to the escalating number of security breaches by enacting these laws, 
which typically require businesses to notify their customers of a security breach involving 
personal information.  
 
Although most states’ breach-notification laws contain similar provisions, they contain 
varying definitions of personal information and require different types of notification. 
Therefore, before establishing new policies and practices concerning the handling of  
  
                                                 
2As of April 12, 2010, 46 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands have enacted 
legislation requiring notification of security breaches involving personal information. For a list of state breach 
notification laws, visit the National Conference of State Legislatures website at www.ncsl.org.   
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.271 
personal information, management should consult with legal counsel to identify what laws 
apply.  
 
PAYMENT CARD INDUSTRY’S DATA SECURITY STANDARD  
In addition to state laws, management must be aware of its industry-specific data security 
standards, such as the Payment Card Industry’s Data Security Standard (PCI DSS), one of 
the most important private-industry data-security standards. 
 
Developed by the five major credit card companies (American Express, Discover, JCB, 
MasterCard, and Visa) to prevent security issues, the PCI DSS is a comprehensive set of 
security due diligence practices to help ensure the safe handling of payment card data. All 
companies that store, process, or transmit credit or debit card data must comply with this set 
of standards. 
 
The PCI DSS framework comprises the following 12 security requirements: 
• Install and maintain a firewall configuration to protect cardholder data. 
• Do not use vendor-supplied defaults of system passwords and other security parameters. 
• Protect stored cardholder data. 
• Encrypt transmission of cardholder data across open, public networks. 
• Use and regularly update anti-virus software or programs. 
• Develop and maintain secure systems and applications. 
• Restrict access to cardholder data on a need-to-know basis. 
• Assign a unique ID to each person with computer access. 
• Restrict physical access to cardholder data. 
• Track and monitor all access to network resources and cardholder data. 
• Regularly test security systems and processes. 
• Maintain a policy that addresses information security for employees and contractors. 
 
Failure to comply with PCI DSS can result in severe consequences imposed by the card 
brands, including: 
• Fines up to $500,000 per data breach if data is compromised 
• Fines up to $25,000 per month until compliance is obtained 
• Liability for all fraud losses incurred from compromised account numbers 
• Loss of ability to process payment card transactions 
 
And while the federal government has not mandated compliance with the PCI DSS, some 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.272  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
state laws force elements of the PCI DSS into law, and several states have considered 
amending their breach-notification laws to include liability for an organization’s failure to 
adopt certain safeguards required by the PCI DSS.  
 
Laws Relating to Government Contracting 
Government contracting refers to the acquisition of goods or services by the federal 
government at the best possible value. Since the primary objective of an effective 
procurement policy is achieving the best value of money, it is important that the 
procurement process avoid incidences of fraud. 
 
The U.S. legal system provides for both private and public remedies for procurement fraud. 
Fraudulent conduct related to the procurement process may be challenged by federal 
prosecutors, state prosecutors, or private parties who have been injured by the fraudulent 
conduct and have standing to sue.  
 
This section examines relevant statutes used to prosecute contract fraud and applicable civil 
remedies used to recover damages for fraudulent activity. The following federal statutes may 
be used to combat contracting fraud:  
• False Claims and Statements  
• Mail Fraud and Wire Fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
• Bribery, Gratuities, and Conflicts of Interest, Generally (18 U.S.C. §§ 201–208) 
• Anti-Kickback Act of 1986 (41 U.S.C. §§ 51–58) 
• Procurement Integrity Act (41 U.S.C. § 423)  
• The Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 (15 U.S.C. §§ 12–27, 52–53)  
• Truth in Negotiations Act (10 U.S.C. § 2306) 
• Federal Acquisition Regulation  
 
False Claims and Statements Statutes  
As previously discussed, Chapter 47 of Title 18, U.S. Code contains a number of related 
provisions that punish false or fraudulent statements made to various federal agencies and 
departments, including 18 U.S.C. § 1001, the criminal false claims act (18 U.S.C. § 287), the 
civil false claims act (18 U.S.C. § 3729), and the Major Fraud Act of 1988 (18 U.S.C. § 1031). 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.273 
FALSE STATEMENTS (18 U.S.C. § 1001) 
The principle federal false statement statute is located in section 1001 of Title 18, U.S. Code. 
Section 1001 prohibits false or fraudulent statements, orally or in writing, made to various 
federal agencies and departments.  
 
CRIMINAL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 287) 
Frequently referred to as the Criminal False Claims Act, section 287 makes it illegal to 
present or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim against any agency or department of 
the United States. The crime is complete when the claim is presented and payment of the 
claim is not an element of the offense.  
 
CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (31 U. S.C. § 3729 et seq.) 
The Civil False Claims Act is the civil counterpart to the Criminal False Claims Act. It 
provides a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal 
prosecution. As a result, the submission of a false claim to the government can make a 
contractor liable to the government, both criminally and civilly. 
 
The False Claims Act provides in part that a person who commits the following acts is liable 
to the government for any treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 
per false claim. 
 
In addition to allowing the government to recover penalties and damages for false claims, 
the Civil False Claims Act allows a private party to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a qui tam action and is discussed 
in further detail below.  
 
MAJOR FRAUD ACT OF 1988 (18 U.S.C. § 1031) 
The Major Fraud Act prohibits any scheme to de fraud the United States or obtain money or 
property from the United States by means of false or fraudulent pretenses involving 
procurement contracts worth $1 million or more.  
 
To establish a claim under the Major Fraud Act, the government must show the following 
elements:  
• The defendant knowingly executed or attempted to execute 
• Any scheme or artifice  
• With the intent to defraud the United States or to obtain money by false pretenses 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.274  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• On a contract with the United States valued at $1 million or more 
 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act of 2009 (FERA), signed into law by President 
Obama on May 20, 2009, contains a number of measures intended to combat fraud. Among 
other significant changes, FERA amends section 1031 to cover fraud in connection with 
funds provided under the Troubled Asset Relief Program and other governmental economic 
stimulus or recovery programs.  
 
If convicted, the defendant may be imprisoned for up to 10 years and fined up to $10 
million or twice the amount of the gross loss or gain involved in the offense. The statute 
contains a special seven-year statute of limitations compared to the normal five-year statute 
applicable to federal crimes. 
 
The statute also contains a whistleblower protection clause. This clause provides that any 
individual who is discharged, demoted, harassed, or otherwise mistreated as a result of the 
individual’s cooperation in the prosecution of offenses under this section may obtain 
reinstatement, two times the amount of back pay due, and other damages, including litigation 
costs and attorney’s fees. 
 
Another provision authorizes the attorney general to pay up to $250,000 in certain 
circumstances for information regarding possible prosecutions under this section. This and 
the whistleblower provisions do not apply to people who participated in the offense. 
 
Mail Fraud and Wire Fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
These laws, which are broad enough to apply to many instances of contracting fraud, 
prohibit the use of mail or wires, including the Internet, in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property. Procurement and contract fraud schemes 
that have been prosecuted under the mail fraud statute include: 
• False representation of material facts 
• False claims 
• Official bribery 
• Commercial bribery and kickbacks 
• Conflicts of interest 
 
See the “Mail Fraud and Wire Fraud” section for more information. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.275 
Bribery, Gratuities, and Conflicts of Interest, Generally (18 U.S.C. §§ 201–208) 
These statutes prohibit a wide variety of activities which can be described generally as 
corruption. Such activities include giving or receiving a bribe or gratuity to or from a public 
official, as well as engaging in a conflict of interest. Section 201 is the principal federal anti-
 corruption statute. It applies to virtually any U.S. official and contains two separate offenses: 
bribery of public officials and illegal gratuities. In relation, section 208 prohibits a federal 
government employee from acting on a matter in which he has a conflict of interest. See the 
“Federal Corruption Statutes” section for more information. 
 
BRIBERY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS (18 U.S.C. § 201(B)) 
In general, section 201(b) prohibits giving or receiving something of value for the purpose of 
influencing the performance of an official act. Bribery is punishable by up to 15 years 
imprisonment, fines, and disqualification from holding public office.  
 
GRATUITIES (18 U.S.C. § 201(C)) 
Gratuities include giving a government employee something of value because of his official 
position. However, unlike the bribery offense, there is no requirement for the government to 
prove that the gratuity was given for the purpose of influencing any official act. Illegal 
gratuity violations carry only a maximum two-year term, fine, or both. 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST (18 U.S.C. § 208) 
This statute prohibits those situations in which a government employee engages in activities 
that create a conflict between his personal interests and his duty to protect and serve the 
interests of the government. Violations of section 208 can result in civil penalties for the 
government employee (not exceeding $50,000 per violation, as well as two times the amount 
of compensation he received or was offered) and the government contractor (not exceeding 
$500,000 per violation in addition to two times the amount of compensation the contractor 
received or offered). It also imposes criminal penalties (up to five years imprisonment 
and/or a fine).  
 
Anti-Kickback Act of 1986 (41 U.S.C. §§ 51–58) 
The Anti-Kickback Act prohibits government contractors from soliciting, accepting, or 
attempting to solicit or accept any kickbacks in connection with government contracts. The 
Act provides both civil and criminal penalties for violations. Criminal violations can be 
punished by a fine, up to 10 years in prison, or both. Civil penalties up to twice the amount 
of the kickback also may be assessed. Additionally, the United States may offset the amount 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.276  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of any kickback against the amount owed on the prime contract. 
 
Procurement Integrity Act (41 U.S.C. § 423)  
The Procurement Integrity Act prohibits certain activities by federal employees involved in 
the procurement process. Failure to comply with the Act can result in administrative actions, 
civil penalties, and criminal penalties (imprisonment of not more than five years and/or a 
fine).  
 
Specifically, the Act addresses offers of employment, post-employment restrictions, and 
disclosing/obtaining bid, proposal, or source selection information. Concerning offers of 
employment, employees who are involved in procurements over $100,000 and have had 
contact with a contractor regarding future nonfederal employment must report the contact 
and either reject the employment or exclude themselves from further participation in the 
procurement process. In addition, the Act prohibits certain employees who are involved in a 
procurement action or contract, either of which is valued at $10 million or greater, from 
accepting any compensation from a contractor as an employee or consultant of the 
contractor within a period of one year following their involvement. 
 
The Procurement Integrity Act also prohibits the release of source selection information 
(i.e., information that is prepared for use by a federal agency for the purpose of evaluating a 
bid or proposal) and contractor bid or proposal information (i.e., cost or pricing data; 
proprietary information identified as such by a contractor). 
 
The Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914 (15 U.S.C. §§ 12–27, 52–53)  
Enacted as an amendment to the Sherman Antitrust Act, which was designed to combat 
anticompetitive practices, the Clayton Antitrust Act prohibits certain antitrust activities, 
including a prohibition on anticompetitive price discrimination and a prohibition against 
certain exclusive dealing practices. 
 
The Clayton Antitrust Act permits private parties injured by an antitrust violation to sue in 
federal court for three times their actual damages plus court costs and attorneys’ fees, and it 
authorizes state attorneys general to bring civil suits on behalf of injured consumers in their 
states. 
 
If successful, the plaintiff may recover damages of up to three times the actual loss incurred. 
The plaintiff need not prove the exact amount of damages sustained. A reasonable 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.277 
approximation, based on the best evidence available, is sufficient. The court can award 
interest for the period of the lawsuit if it finds that the defendant unreasonably delayed the 
proceedings. A foreign country plaintiff may be limited to actual damages. 
 
A criminal prosecution for antitrust violations can be brought in addition to a civil action for 
the same conduct. The court may regulate such “parallel proceedings” to prevent undue 
prejudice to the defendant, and may stay (delay) the civil case or discovery in the case until 
the criminal prosecution is completed. A previous criminal conviction of the defendant 
involving the same facts and parties may be admissible to prove liability in a civil action, 
leaving only the amount of the damages to prove. 
 
To recover damages under this Act, the plaintiff must be a person, which includes any 
individual, business, or state government capable of holding a property interest, and the 
plaintiff must establish that his business or property was injured by an antitrust violation 
(e.g., agreement to fix prices, collusive bidding, dividing markets, price discrimination, 
predatory pricing, group boycotts or concerted refusals to deal, or commercial bribery). 
 
Truth in Negotiations Act (10 U.S.C. § 2306) 
In 1962, Congress enacted TINA to protect the government from unscrupulous contractors 
that inflate costs by falsifying their cost proposals with inaccurate, incomplete, or noncurrent 
cost and pricing data.  
 
Under TINA, if a government contractor submits defective information that results in the 
price being artificially inflated and the government relies on it, the government is entitled to 
a reduction in the contract price to eliminate the effect of its reliance on the defective data. 
 
In instances where a contractor unknowingly submits defective data (i.e., defective data 
submitted for non-fraudulent reasons, such as negligence, accident, incompetence, or 
mistake), the government is entitled to a dollar-for-dollar price reduction in the contract 
price to eliminate the effect of its reliance on the defective data. If, however, defective data is 
knowingly submitted, TINA provides for not only a dollar-for-dollar price reduction, but 
“an additional amount equal to the overpayment.” 
 
Federal Acquisition Regulation 
The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) is the system of regulations that govern the 
government’s procurement of goods and services. It does not regulate the purchasing 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.278  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
activities of private sector firms. The FAR is found in Chapter 1 of Title 48 of the Code of  
Federal Regulations (CFR), and the official electronic version is available at 
www.arnet.gov/far. 
 
Among other things, FAR regulates disclosure requirements for government contractors and 
provides administrative remedies against persons or entities that commit government 
contract fraud.  
 
MANDATORY DISCLOSURE RULE (FAR 3.1003(A)(2)) 
On December 12, 2008, a major revision to the FAR went into effect. Among other things, 
the revised FAR provisions require all government contractors to disclose “credible 
evidence” of criminal fraud, conflict of interest, bribery, or gratuity violations found in Title 
18, as well as violations of the civil False Claims Act. Furthermore, the mandatory disclosure 
rules require that the contractor make reports to two different offices: the inspector general 
and the affected contracting officer. In addition, the mandatory disclosure rules make the 
failure to disclose violations a basis for suspension and debarment.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
To help ensure that the government is dealing only with responsible contractors, the 
government uses suspension and debarment of contractors for certain offenses. The current 
regulations governing the debarment and suspension of federal government contractors are 
set forth in subpart 9.4 of the FAR.  
 
Suspension and debarment are administrative sanctions that disqualify contractors from 
government contracting and subcontracting. Suspension refers to an action taken by a 
suspending official to temporarily disqualify a contractor from government contracting. The 
government may suspend a contractor upon “adequate evidence” that the party has 
committed certain civil or criminal offenses. 
 
Debarment is defined as the action taken by a debarr ing official to exclude a contractor from 
government contracting for a specified period. Debarment actions require that this sanction 
be established by a “preponderance of the evidence” that the person engaged in conduct 
warranting debarment. 
 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.301 
THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2) 
 
Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.) 
 
Laws Relating to Mortgage Fraud 
Introduction to the Mortgage Industry 
After the U.S. housing market collapsed during the Great Depression, Congress created the 
National Housing Act to strengthen the deeply troubled housing market. An important 
element of this legislation was to make mortgage funds available to more Americans by 
protecting lenders from the risk of default loans. 
 
To this end, the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) was created through this Act with 
the following goals: 
• To provide mortgage insurance on residential loans, thus affording lenders protection 
against losses as the result of homeowner default. Lenders would bear less risk because 
the FHA would pay claims to the lender in the event of a default. 
• To regulate the rate of interest and the terms of mortgages that it insured. 
 
Similarly, the Veteran’s Administration (VA) Home Loan Guaranty Service was founded in 
1944 to assist veterans in purchasing homes. VA loans were also insured against default by 
the U.S. government. 
 
In 1937, the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) was chartered by the 
FHA. Fannie Mae was created to purchase FHA-guaranteed loans in the secondary market 
and pool them for sale as mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) to investors on the open 
market. 
 
However, as recently as 1968, there was no secondary market for nongovernment loans (also 
called conventional loans). Banks still carried conventional loans in their portfolios, and 
accessibility to conventional loans by homeowners was still largely dictated by local 
economies and markets. A secondary market for conventional loans was needed to stabilize 
the conventional lending market. This could be done by adding liquidity so that there would 
be a steady supply of funds available to lenders who originated conventional loans. 
 
In 1968, Fannie Mae’s charter was amended to allow purchases of conventional mortgages in 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.302  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the secondary market. Congress chartered the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Company 
(Freddie Mac) in 1970 as an additional resource for purchasing conventional mortgages at a 
time when demand was high for savings-and-loan financing. 
 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are shareholder-owned, publicly traded, profit-making 
corporations — or government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) — regulated by the Office of 
Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight (OFHEO). GSEs have loan limits established by law 
and set each January by Congress. 
 
In 1968, along with amending Fannie Mae’s charter, Congress established the Government 
National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) as a government-owned corporation within the 
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). Lenders pool packages of 
qualifying FHA or VA mortgages and convert them into securities, and Ginnie Mae 
guarantees investors the timely payment of principal and interest on these securities. 
 
A final component of the secondary market comprises private investors, such as Wall Street 
firms. Because GSEs typically underwrite prime loans only, private investors are the main 
secondary market for subprime loans. Secondary market investors play an important role in 
dictating loan products, as lenders use secondary market underwriting guidelines to ensure 
the ability to sell loans to these investors. Each investor’s guidelines vary. 
 
In 2007, however, an increasing number of borrowers, particularly those with adjustable rate 
mortgages, were unable to pay their mortgages, causing a sharp increase in home 
foreclosures. As a result, real estate prices began to fall, causing an increase in losses for 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. Because of the potential liabilities facing each company, 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were placed into a government conservatorship, which is 
similar to a Chapter 11 bankruptcy, under the Federal Housing Finance Agency, a 
government agency responsible for overseeing the two entities.  
 
The Evolution of Mortgage Lenders and Brokers 
MORTGAGE LENDERS  
Today, the secondary market has overtaken deposit gathering as the source of funding for 
mortgage lending. Loans are sold in the secondary market at origination, thereby providing 
the bank with a steady supply of capital needed to make additional loans. Without the need 
for a lot of capital (deposits on the books), mortgage lenders started to evolve.  
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.303 
Consequently, a smaller percentage of bankers are keeping their loans than in the past. Even 
large commercial banks with lending authority and capital now sell the mortgage loan 
transactions they originate and close. Few banks wish to rely on depositors’ money to fund 
mortgage loans.  
 
Additionally, many mortgage lenders are non-depository institutions rather than locally 
headquartered depository banks. Mortgage lenders do not take deposits. Instead they rely on 
the stability the secondary market has provided to purchase loans at origination, and to repay 
the bank monies to use for future mortgage loan originations. 
 
MORTGAGE BROKERS 
Historically, mortgage loans were originated by the loan officer at the bank. Mortgage 
lenders, however, started relying on third-party originators (TPOs) to broker their loan 
products. Brokers could be paid a commission rather than a salary, an option that worked 
well for minimally capitalized mortgage lenders.  
 
As a result, the industry has seen the evolution of mortgage brokers.  
 
As markets for mortgages became more competitive, banks with their own retail loan 
officers also started employing these third-party wholesale originators. Today, mortgage 
brokers are the largest distributors of mortgage products for mortgage lenders and banks. It 
is estimated that two-thirds of all originations are from wholesale TPO mortgage brokers 
rather than retail loan officers. 
 
Legislation and Regulation in the Mortgage Industry 
The increase in the incidence, cost, and victims of mortgage fraud has spurred the 
government and the mortgage industry to respond. Lawmakers have introduced additional 
legislation at the federal and state levels to curb mortgage fraud and other high-risk products 
and practices, such as predatory and subprime lending. Industry professionals and regulators 
are also reacting with ways to combat mortgage fraud. 
 
  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.304  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FEDERAL LEGISLATION ADDRESSING MORTGAGE FRAUD 
The following federal statutes are commonly used to prosecute mortgage fraud:  
 
18 U.S.C. § 1341 Mail fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1342 Use of fictitious name or address in fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1343 Wire fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1344 Bank fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1014 False statements on a loan or credit application 
18 U.S.C. § 1028 Fraud and related activities in connection with identity theft 
18 U.S.C. § 1029 Credit card fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1349 Conspiracy 
18 U.S.C. § 1519 Obstruction of justice 
18 U.S.C. § 1956 Money laundering 
18 U.S.C. § 1957 Monetary transactions with illegal proceeds 
18 U.S.C. § 1001 False statements or entries (generally) 
18 U.S.C. § 1005 False entries to federally insured institutions 
18 U.S.C. § 1010 False statements in HUD transactions 
18 U.S.C. § 408 Fraud in connection with Social Security identification documents 
18 U.S.C. § 1961 Criminal RICO 
18 U.S.C. § 215 Receipt of commissions or gifts for procuring loans 
18 U.S.C. § 371 Conspiracy to commit offense or to defraud the United States 
18 U.S.C. § 656 Theft, embezzlement, or  misapplication by a bank officer or 
employee 
18 U.S.C. § 2314 Transportation of stolen goods or securities 
18 U.S.C. § 1341 Mail fraud 
 
In addition, on May 20, 2009, President Obama signed the Fraud Enforcement and 
Recovery Act of 2009 (FERA) into law. This comprehensive legislation expands the reach of 
federal law and increases funding for federal agencies to investigate and prosecute mortgage, 
corporate, and other financial frauds.  
 
Concerning its application to mortgage fraud, FERA makes a number of important changes 
to federal law. Most importantly, FERA expands the definition of financial institution in the 
criminal code (18 U.S.C. § 20 ), thereby extending federal fraud laws to mortgage-lending 
businesses not directly regulated or insured by the federal government. By amending the 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.305 
definition of financial institution, FERA expands the Department of Justice’s authority to 
prosecute mortgage fraud cases as bank fraud and to seek enhanced penalties under the mail 
and wire fraud statutes. As a result, convictions for mortgage fraud can now carry a 30-year 
maximum prison sentence, a maximum $1 million fine, or both.  
 
FERA also amends the false statement in mortgage applications statute (18 U.S.C. § 1014) to 
make it a crime to make a materially false statement or to willfully overvalue a property to 
influence any action by a mortgage-lending business. 
 
PREDATORY LENDING LEGISLATION  
Predatory lending is a term generally used to characterize a range of abusive and aggressive 
lending practices, including deception and fraud, without any benefit to the borrower. 
Although a few federal laws implicate predatory mortgage-lending practices, the only act 
Congress enacted specifically to address predatory lending was section 32 of the Truth in 
Lending Act, entitled the Home Ownership Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA) (5 U.S.C. § 1639).  
 
Note: The rules of HOEPA protect refinancing and home equity installment loans; they do 
not protect loans to buy or build a home, reverse mortgages, or home equity credit lines.  
 
HOEPA attempts to regulate certain high-cost, potentially predatory mortgage loans, and its 
protections are triggered by home loans that 1) have an annual percentage rate (APR) that is 
eight percent higher than an index tied to Treasury securities or 2) have fees that exceed 
eight percent of the loan total or $583, whichever is greater. However, predatory lenders 
easily evade HOEPA’s protections by imposing charges and fees just below the threshold. 
Thus, very few predatory loans are subject to HOEPA’s regulations. 
 
On July 18, 2008, the Federal Reserve Board approved a rule under HOEPA to protect 
consumers from unfair or deceptive home mortgage lending and advertising practices. The 
rule will take effect on October 1, 2009, and will specifically: 
• Prohibit creditors from extending credit without considering the borrowers’ ability to 
repay; 
• Require creditors to verify income and assets they rely upon in making a loan; 
• Restrict the circumstances under which prepayment penalties are permitted; and  
• Require creditors to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance.  
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.306  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SUBPRIME LENDING LEGISLATION  
Subprime lending  is the practice of extending credit to borrowers who have certain credit 
characteristics — such as a lower credit score or poor payment history—that disqualify them 
from loans at the prime rate. Currently, there is no federal legislation governing subprime 
lending. But Congress has recently introduced a variety of legislative proposals designed to 
address the problems faced by subprime borrowers. For instance, the rules under HOEPA 
issued by the Federal Reserve Board are designed to increase borrower protections from 
abusive lending practices. The regulations would, among other things, limit various acts and 
practices in mortgage loans with annual percentage of rates exceeding a lower trigger. 
 
STATE LEGISLATION 
As with federal law, many states have enacted legislation related to mortgage fraud and 
predatory lending practices. 
 
MORTGAGE FRAUD STATUTES  
In May 2005, Georgia became the first state to make mortgage fraud a crime. Since then, 
Alabama, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, 
Utah, and Washington have also passed mortgage fraud laws.3 
 
PREDATORY LENDING LAWS  
In the past five years, more than half the states in the United States have taken steps to limit 
predatory lending practices, and seven have placed a ban on prepayment penalties. Localities 
in some states have also passed ordinances dealing with predatory lending practices. 
 
Victims of predatory lending practices should contact their state Attorney General’s office. 
The U.S. Office of the Attorney General consolidates individual states’ actions against 
predatory lending practices. Two additional predatory lending resources are: 
• The National Association of Attorneys General (www.naag.org) 
• The Center for Responsible Lending ( www.responsiblelending.org)  
 
MORTGAGE INDUSTRY REGULATION  
The mortgage industry used to be highly regulated. However, current non-depository 
mortgage lenders are not federally regulated or insured; instead, they are regulated at the 
                                                 
3 National Conference of State Legislatures, “Mortgage Fraud.” http://www.ncsl.org. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.307 
state level. As a result, some mortgage lenders are federally regulated while others are 
regulated by the state in which they are chartered.  
 
FEDERAL REGULATION  
Banks, or depository institutions, that maintain a mortgage-lending function or subsidiary fall 
under regulation from one of the following federal regulators: 
• The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which charters, regulates, and 
supervises more than 2,500 national banks and their subsidiaries, as well as the federal 
branches and agencies of foreign banks 
• The Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), a bureau of the U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, which regulates all federally chartered and some state-charted thrift 
institutions, including federally chartered savings and loan associations and savings banks 
and their subsidiaries 
• The National Credit Union Association (NCUA), which regulates federally chartered 
credit unions and all credit unions chartered in Delaware, South Dakota, Wyoming, and 
the District of Columbia 
• The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, which regulates its state-
 chartered member banks, their subsidiaries, and holding companies, as well as the 
activities of foreign banks that operate within the United States 
 
NATIONAL LICENSING SYSTEM FOR MORTGAGE LOAN OFFICERS  
In 2005, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) and the American Association of 
Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), along with state mortgage regulators, began 
creating a tool that would turn the table on criminals who exploit the complex mortgage 
origination system. State regulators agreed to a single set of uniform applications, including 
assigning a unique identifying number that tracks the entity or individual from state to state 
and over time. The resulting system—the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System 
(NMLS) — offers the industry a single location for ascertaining license status and finding any 
enforcement actions. The system began operating on January 2, 2008; by the end of 2010, 49 
of the U.S. states, as well as Puerto Rico, will have implemented use of the NMLS for 
mortgage licensing. 
 
STATE REGULATION  
New mortgage lenders that are non-depository are regulated by the state of their charter. 
State-chartered mortgage lenders are exempt from federal regulation, and regulation varies 
from state to state. In 1993, only 18 states directly regulated their mortgage lending industry; 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.308  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
however, today, all 50 states have statutes directly regulating the mortgage-lending industry 
in some capacity. 
 
Until recently, there were no national standards for the licensing and oversight of mortgage 
brokers. But on July 30, 2008, President Bush signed into law the Secure and Fair 
Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act), which is part of the Housing 
and Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Designed to provide uniform licensing standards 
nationwide, the SAFE Act requires all states to have in place a system of licensure meeting 
minimum standards for mortgage loan originators (i.e., anyone who takes a residential 
mortgage loan application or who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan 
application for compensation or gain) by July 31, 2009.  
 
At a minimum, the state’s licensing system must meet all of the following requirements: 
• Screen individuals for felonies in the last seven years 
• Screen individuals for previous license revocations 
• Require proof of financial responsibility using a credit report 
• Require pre-license testing and education 
• Require continuing education 
• Provide for license renewals on an annual basis 
• Include a bond, net worth, or recovery fund 
 
Federal Laws Relating to Credit Reports 
The loan approval process begins with the credit of the borrower. Lenders rely on a credit 
report to assess the creditworthiness of a borrower and establish whether he will repay a 
loan. A credit report is typically one of the first things that a loan officer will obtain when 
qualifying a borrower. Typically, a borrower’s credit is highly related to the probability that 
the loan will go into default. Because higher credit scores tend to raise fewer red flags, 
perpetrators prey on borrowers with high credit scores. 
 
Credit reports are provided by credit bureaus, also known as credit reporting agencies. Credit 
bureaus are local or national institutions that collect data on individual consumer 
creditworthiness and report that data to their members or subscribers; however, their 
members or subscribers may only request and use the information provided for those 
purposes allowed by law.  
 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the Fair Credit Reporting Act 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.309 
(15 U.S.C. § 1681b). This Act provides the permissible purposes for obtaining a credit 
report, such as credit evaluation, insurance, employment, or similar purposes. More 
specifically, it regulates the type of information that can be contained in a consumer credit 
report, it restricts credit bureaus from releasing an individual’s credit information to any 
third parties without authorization, and it sets forth the circumstances under which a third-
 party can obtain a copy of the report. For more information about this Act, see the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act section in the “Individual Rights” chapter.  
 
In addition, privacy rules implemented as part of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (16 C.F.R. 
Part 313) have been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information (including 
names, addresses, phone numbers, and Social Security numbers). This prevents credit 
bureaus from selling such information to private investigators, direct marketers, or other 
information brokers.  
 
Telemarketing Fraud 
Telemarketing fraud refers to any type of scheme that is perpetrated over the telephone, and 
these schemes may be prosecuted under sections 2325–2327 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code. 
For purposes of this statute, telemarketing  is defined as: 
 
[A] plan, program, promotion or campaign that is conducted to induce — 
(A) purchases of goods or services; or 
(B) participation in a contest or sweepstakes, 
by use of 1 or more interstate telephone calls initiated either by a person who is conducting the 
plan, program, promotion, or campaign or by a prospective purchaser or contest or sweepstakes 
participant … 
 
The definition contains an exclusion for the solicitation of sales through direct mail catalogs 
when the calls are initiated by the customer. 
 
The statute does not specifically outlaw telemarketing fraud. Instead, the statute provides 
enhanced penalties for persons convicted of identity fraud, fraud in connection with access 
devices, mail fraud, or wire fraud if that offense was committed in connection with the 
conduct of “telemarketing.” If a person is c onvicted of one of the listed offenses through 
the use of telemarketing, then the statute provides that up to five years shall be added to the 
person’s sentence. It also provides that if the victims were over the age of 55, then the 
person shall be sentenced to up to 10 additional years. Section 2327 directs the judge to 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.310  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
order mandatory restitution in all cases. The courts are also allowed to seize any property 
used to commit the crime, as well as any proceeds of the crime. 
 
In addition to charges brought under these provisions, federal prosecutors often use other 
fraud-related laws to prosecute telemarketing fraud, including charges of money-laundering 
(18 U.S.C. §§ 1956 and 1957); credit card fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1029); and bank fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1344). 
 
Access Device Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1029) 
This statute criminalizes the production, use, trafficking, or possession of unauthorized or 
counterfeit access devices. Access devices are devices that allow access to account funds. 
Most importantly, section 1029 prohibits the fraudulent use of credit cards. However, 
because Congress broadly defined the term access devices, section 1029 also applies to crimes 
using other access device numbers, including debit cards, ATM cards, personal identification 
numbers (PINs), computer passwords, “or any other thing of value, or that can be used to 
initiate a transfer of funds (other than a transfer originated solely by paper instrument).”  
 
Section 1029 includes penalties of up to 15 years (up to 20 years for subsequent offenses) 
and/or fines. Additionally, forfeiture of personal property is available in many instances.  
 
Computer Crime  
Computer crime is a relatively new and somewhat amorphous term referring to both cases in 
which a computer is the instrument of a crime and those in which it is the object. As the 
instrument, for example, a computer might be used to direct calls in a scheme to sell shares 
in a nonexistent gold mine or might be used to steal funds from a bank account. As the 
object of a crime, the information contained in a computer might be stolen or destroyed. 
(The Financial Transactions section contains further information on computer crime.) 
 
Most computer crimes are prosecuted under traditional fraud, theft, and embezzlement 
statutes, but section 1030 of Title 18, U.S. Code, makes certain computer-related activity a 
specific federal offense.  
 
Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Computers (18 U.S.C. § 1030) 
Originally enacted in 1986, this section, know n as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, was 
amended by the Computer Abuse Amendments Act of 1994. Most relevant to fraud 
examiners is subsection (a), which prohibits seven acts involving “protected computers.”  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.311 
A protected computer, under this section, includes: 
• A computer that is used exclusively by a financial institution or the U.S. government 
• Any computer whose use affects a computer used by a financial institution or the federal 
government 
• A computer that is used in interstate or foreign commerce or communication, including 
a computer located outside the United States that is used in a manner that affects 
interstate or foreign commerce of the United States 
 
Briefly put, section 1030(a) prohibits using a protected computer: 
• To commit espionage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(1)) 
• To obtain, without authorization, certain government, financial institution, or 
commercial information (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(2)) 
• To access, without authorization, a government computer (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(3)) 
• To commit fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(4)) 
• To transmit a program, code, or command to damage a protected computer or to access 
a protected computer that results in damage (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(5)) 
• For trafficking in passwords (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(6)) 
• To transmit extortionate threats (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(7)) 
 
Section 1030(a)(4) and section 1030(a)(5), are discussed in further detail below. 
 
Federal and state legislatures are moving quickly to make criminal all manner of computer 
fraud and abuses, such as hardware theft and destruction, misappropriation of software, 
unauthorized accessing of computers and data communications facilities to steal data or 
money or to cause mischief. 
 
COMPUTER FRAUD (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(4)) 
Section 1030(a)(4) outlaws fraud involving protected computers. There are three elements of 
the crime, which include: 
• Knowingly accessing a protected computer without authorization (or exceeding 
authorization) 
• With the intent to defraud 
• And thereby obtaining anything of value (more than $5,000 over the course of a year) 
 
Furthermore, violations of section 1030(a)(4) may implicate other related federal laws, 
including, but not limited to:  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.312  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Wire fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1343) 
• Theft of trade secrets (18 U.S.C. § 1832) 
• Fraud involving credit cards and access devices (18 U.S.C. § 1029) 
• False statements on a matter within the jurisdiction of a federal agency or department (18 U.S.C. § 1001) 
• False statements on federally insured loan and credit applications (18 U.S.C. § 1014) 
• False claims against the United States (18 U.S.C. § 287) 
• Bank fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1344) 
• Theft or embezzlement by officer or employee of lending, credit, and insurance 
institutions (18 U.S.C. § 657) 
• False entries by bank officers or employees (18 U.S.C. § 1005) 
• False entries by officers or employees of federal credit institutions (18 U.S.C. § 1006) 
• Copyright infringement (18 U.S.C. § 2319) 
• Money laundering (18 U.S.C. §§ 1956–1957) 
• Racketeering (18 U.S.C. § 1962) 
 
CAUSING COMPUTER DAMAGE (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(5)) 
Section 1030(a)(5) outlaws causing computer damage, but it contains two categories of 
offense, depending on intent. The first category provides that it is illegal to knowingly 
transmit a program, code, or command that intentionally causes damage to a protected 
computer. This offense applies even if the individual had authorization to access the 
computer.  
 
The second category provides that it is illegal to access a protected computer, without 
authorization, that results in damage. Unlike the first category, this offense does not require 
intent to damage — only the intent to access the information.  
 
Unlawful actions under the first category of section 1030(a)(5) violations include 
imprisonment up to one year and/or a fine. Violators under the second category of section 
1030(a)(5) may receive up to five years of imprisonment (not more than 10 years for repeat 
offenders) and/or a fine. Both categories provide a civil remedy for any person who suffers 
damage as a result of a violation of section 1030(a)(5).  
 
To apply, section 1030(a)(5) requires that the defendant’s conduct “cause” damage to a 
computer. Due to its broadness, the definition allows section 1030(a)(5) to apply in various 
situations, including instances where an act causes information to be deleted or changed, 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.313 
where an intruder alters the way a computer operates, or where an act makes information 
unavailable. Even if an intruder did not make any alterations and the computer system works 
as it did before, some courts have ruled that accessing and copying private data from 
protected computers may cause damage to the data under section 1035(a)(5). For example, in 
the case of Shurgard Storage v. Safeguard Self Storage, 119 F. Supp. 2d 1121 (W.D. Wash. 2000), a 
U.S. District Court held that the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act could be used against an 
employee who, without permission, copied information from his employer’s computer and 
sent it by e-mail to a company that subsequently employed him. 
 
CIVIL REMEDIES AVAILABLE UNDER THE COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE ACT 
Section 1030(g) provides a civil remedy for any person who suffers “damage or loss” under 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Under section 1030(g), an “individual” may “obtain 
compensatory damages and injunctive relief or other equitable relief,” including all costs, 
consequential damages, and lost revenue. For purposes of establishing loss, the Patriot Act 
made it clear that the term individual includes any individual, firm, corporation, educational 
institution, financial institution, governmental entity, legal entity, or other entity. Damages 
under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act are defined as “any impairment to the integrity or 
availability of data, a program, a system, or information.” 
 
Employers have been “increasingly taking advantage of … [the Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act’s] civil remedies to sue former employees and their new companies who seek a 
competitive edge through wrongful use of information from the former employer’s 
computer system” ( Pacific Aerospace and Elec tronics Inc. v. Taylor, 295 F. Supp. 2d 1188, 1196 
(E.D. Wash. 2003)). To recover under section 1030(g), the employer must show that the 
employee’s access to the company computers was “without authorization” or exceeded 
authorized access.  
 
The leading case for using this Act against employees who steal company data is Int’l Airport 
Centers LLC v. Citrin, 440 F.3d 418 (7th Circ. 2006). Based on agency principles, the 7th 
Circuit held that when the defendant breaches his duty of loyalty (i.e., accesses his 
employer’s computer to steal data), he terminates his agency relationship and loses all rights 
and authority to access the computer.  
 
At the time of this writing, however, there are several reported district courts that refuse to 
apply the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act to employee data thieves. These courts hold that 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.314  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the Act does not apply in these situations because employees have permission to access the 
company computers.  
 
Despite the split among federal courts, a method to avert relying only on agency principles in 
filing a section 1030(g) action is to establish unauthorized access through employee 
agreements and company policies.   
 
COMMON CRIMES PROSECUTED UNDER THE COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE ACT 
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act is the most notable federal law used to prosecute 
computer-related crimes. Most commonly, federal prosecutors use the Act to prosecute the 
following crimes: 
• Instances in which a computer is the subject of a crime, including computer viruses, time 
bombs, Trojans, malicious code, spam, botnets, logic bombs, rootkits, hacking, 
vandalism, WiFi mooching, extortion, and so forth. 
• Crimes that target computer networks (e.g., hacks, worms, and DDoS) 
• Computer fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)(4)) 
• Identity theft (18 U.S.C. § 1028) 
• Money laundering (18 U.S.C. §§ 1956-1957) 
• Intellectual property crimes 
 
State Laws 
At the state level, statutes that might be of use in prosecuting computer crimes would 
include the penal code violations of larceny (in its many forms), false pretenses, forgery, 
fraud, embezzlement, vandalism, property destruction, malicious mischief, proprietary 
information, theft, commercial bribery, and extortion. However, most states now expressly 
provide penalties for crimes perpetrated by use of computers or perpetrated against 
computers. 
 
COMPUTER CRIME LAWS — SPECIFIC STATE STATUTES 
Alabama: Ala. Code 13A-8-101, 102-107 
Alaska: Alaska Stat. §§ 11.46.200(a)(3), 11.4 6.484(a)(5), 11.46.740, 11.46.985, 11.46.990, 
11.81.900(a)(46) & (52)  
Arizona: Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.  §§ 13-2301(E), 13-2316  
Arkansas: Ark. Stat. sec 5-41-102, 5-41 -106; Ark. Code §§ 5-41-101 to 107 
California: Cal. Penal Code §§ 484j, 499c, 50 2, 502.01, 502.7(h), 503, 1203.047, 2702  
Colorado: Colo. Rev. Stat. Ann. Sec. 18-5.5-101, 102 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.315 
Connecticut: Conn. Gen. Stat. A nn. sec. 53a-250, 251-261 
Delaware: Del. Code tit. 11, sec. 931 to 939 
Florida: Fla. Stat. Ann. sec. 815.01 
Georgia: GA. Code Ann. Sec.  16-9-90 and sec. 16-14-3 
Hawaii: Haw. Rev. Stat. 708-890 
Idaho: Idaho Code sec. 18-2201 
Illinois: Ill Stat. Ann. ch. 38, sec. 16D-1, 16D-7 
Indiana: Ind. Code 35-43-1-4 and 35-43-2-3 
Kansas: Kans. Stat. sec. 21-3755 
Kentucky: Ky. Rev. Stat. Ann 434.840–434.860 
Iowa: Iowa Code Ann. sec. 716A 
Louisiana: La. Rev. Stat. 14:73.1–14:73.5 
Maine: Me. Rev. Stat. Ann. Tit. 17A. ch. 18 sec. 367, 431-433 
Maryland: Md. Code Ann. Art. 27, sec. 14.6, Crim. Law 27-45 A, 27-145, 27-340 
Massachusetts: Mass. Gen. L. ch. 266, sec. 30, 33A, 60A, 120F 
Michigan: Mich. Comp. Laws Ann. Sec. 752.791–797 
Minnesota: Minn. Stat. Ann. sec. 609.87 
Mississippi: Miss. Code Ann. sec. 97-45-1 
Montana: Mont. Code Ann. 45-6-310  
Nebraska: Neb. Rev. Stat. 28-1341, 1343 
Nevada: Nev. Rev. Stat. 205-473 
New Hampshire: N.H. Rev. Stat. Ann. 638:16 
New Jersey: NJ Rev. Stat. sec. 2A :38A-1, 2C:20–23, and 52:17B–193 
New Mexico: N.M. Stat. Ann. 30-45-1, 30-16A-1 
New York: NY Penal Law Art. 156 
North Carolina: NC Gen Stat. 14-453 
North Dakota: ND Cent. Code sec. 12.1-06.1-08 
Ohio: Ohio Rev. Code Ann. 2901.01(J), (M); 2901 .1(I); 2901.12; 2912.0 1(F), (L)-(R), (T); 
Oklahoma: Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 21, sec. 1952-1956 
Oregon: Or. Rev. Stat. 164.377 
Pennsylvania: PA Title 18, Chap. 76 
Rhode Island: RI Gen Laws sec. 11-52-1 
South Carolina: SC Code sec. 16-16-10 
South Dakota: SD Codified Laws 43-43B-1  
Texas: Tex. Penal Code sec. 33.01-33.05 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.316  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Utah: Utah Code Ann. sec. 76-6-701 through 705 
Virginia: VA Code Ann. sec. 18.2-152.1 
Washington: Wash. Rev. Code 9A.52.110, 120, 130, Rev. Code Wash. 9.26A.100 
West Virginia: W. Va. Code 61-3C-1 through 61-3C-21  
Wisconsin: Wis. Stat. 943.70 
Wyoming: Wyo. Stat. sec. 6-3-501 through 504 
 
Internet Crime 
At the current time, there are no federal laws aimed specifically at fraud or other illegal 
activities conducted over the Internet. Many of the existing laws, however, can be used to 
prosecute Internet fraud as well as more traditional fraud schemes. The table below 
summarizes how existing laws apply to common crimes perpetrated over the Internet: 
 
Types of Unlawful 
Conduct 
 
Examples of Potentially Applicable Federal Laws  
Internet Fraud  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 U.S.C. §§ 45, 52 (unfair or deceptive acts or practices; false advertisements) 
15 U.S.C. § 1644 (credit card fraud)  
18 U.S.C. §§ 1028, 1029, 1030 (fraud in connection with identification 
documents and information; fraud in connection with access devices; and 
fraud in connection with computers)  
18 U.S.C. § 1341 et seq.  (mail, wire, and bank fraud)  
18 U.S.C. § 1345 (injunctions against fraud)  
18 U.S.C. § 1956, 1957 (money laundering) 
18 U.S.C. § 1037 (spam and phishing) 
Online Child 
Pornography, Child 
Luring, and Related 
Activities  
18 U.S.C. § 2251 et seq.  (sexual exploitation and other abuse of children)  
18 U.S.C. § 2421 et seq.  (transportation for illegal sexual activity) 
Internet Sale of 
Prescription Drugs and 
Controlled Substances  
 
 
15 U.S.C. § 45 et seq.  (unfair or deceptive acts or practices; false advertisements) 
18 U.S.C. § 545 (smuggling goods into the United States)  
18 U.S.C. § 1341 et seq. (mail, wire, and bank fraud; injunctions against fraud) 
21 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.  (Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act)  
21 U.S.C. §§ 822, 829, 841, 863, 951-971 (Drug Abuse Prevention and Control) 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.317 
Internet Sale of 
Firearms 
18 U.S.C. § 921 et seq.  (firearms) 
Internet Gambling  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 U.S.C. § 3001 et seq.  (Interstate Horseracing Act)  
18 U.S.C. § 1084 (transmission of wagering information)  
18 U.S.C. §§ 1301 et seq.  (lotteries)  
18 U.S.C. § 1952 (interstate and foreign travel or transportation in aid of 
racketeering enterprises)  
18 U.S.C. § 1953 (interstate transportation of wagering paraphernalia)  
18 U.S.C. § 1955 (prohibition of illegal gambling businesses)  
28 U.S.C. §§ 3701-3704 (professional and amateur sports protection) 
Internet Sale of Alcohol  
 
18 U.S.C. § 1261 et seq.  (liquor traffic)  
27 U.S.C. §§ 122, 204 (shipments into states for possession or sale in violation 
of state law) 
Online Securities Fraud  15 U.S.C. § 77e, 77j, 77q, 77x, 78i, 78j, 78l, 78o, 78ff (securities fraud) 
Software Piracy and 
Intellectual Property 
Theft  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17 U.S.C. § 506 (criminal copyright infringement)  
17 U.S.C. § 1201 et seq.  (copyright protection and management systems)  
18 U.S.C. § 545 (smuggling goods into the United States)  
18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343 (frauds and swindles)  
18 U.S.C. § 1831 et seq.  (protection of trade secrets)  
18 U.S.C. §§ 2318-2320 (trafficking in counterfeit labels for phonorecords, 
copies of computer programs or computer program documentation or 
packaging, and copies of motion pictures or other audio visual works) 
 
Can-Spam Act (18 U.S.C. § 1037) 
The Can-Spam Act, or the Controlling the Assault of Non-Solicited Pornography and 
Marketing Act, attempts to reduce the amount of unsolicited commercial e-mail, which is 
also known as spam, by establishing national standards for sending e-mail solicitations. To 
reduce the amount of spam, the Can-Spam Act provides several provisions that apply to 
individuals or companies sending spam. More specifically, the Act prohibits several 
deceptive and/or fraudulent practices commonly used in spam, including the prohibition of 
using deceptive subject lines, using deceptive header information, and requiring sender 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.318  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
identification. Penalties under the Can-Spam Act include punishment by a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than five years.  
 
In addition to prosecuting deceptive spam, federal prosecutors have used the Can-Spam Act 
to prosecute individuals engaged in phishing. Phishing occurs when a sender dupes 
individuals or businesses into providing sensitive data by falsely claiming to be from an 
actual business, bank, ISP, or other entity with whom the victim does business. 
 
Mail and Wire Fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
As noted above, a computer may be the tool used to commit traditional crimes, including 
mail and wire fraud. Due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statutes, prosecutors 
may use these traditional criminal statutes to prosecute computer fraud. In basic terms, the 
laws prohibit the use of mail or wires, including the Internet, in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property. In fact, several cases have held that the 
federal mail and wire fraud statues apply to computer fraud.  
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986   
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, governs the illegal interception of electronic 
communication and the unauthorized access of electronically stored data.  
 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, which governs the interception of 
electronic communications; the Stored Communications Act, which covers access to stored 
communications and records; and the Pen Register Act, which regulates pen registers and 
trap and trace devices. This section focuses on the Wiretap Act and the Stored 
Communications Act. 
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (18 U.S.C. §§ 2510–2521) 
In response to an increase in privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, which 
prohibits anyone from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, oral, or 
electronic communication. Under the ECPA, electronic communications are defined as “any 
transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature 
transmitted in whole or in part by a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photoelectronic, or photo 
optical system that affects interstate or foreign commerce.” 
 
Focusing on its applicability to computer fraud, section 2511 prohibits covert spying on 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.319 
voice and data communications, extending protection from eavesdropping on mail and 
telephone communications to include digital data communications, such as e-mail and 
remote computing; it does not govern stored communications. But because most courts 
agree that interception does not occur when an individual obtains access to an electronically 
stored copy of the communication, the Wiretap Act is often inadequate to protect electronic 
communications sent over the Internet. For example, the Wiretap Act is often unsuccessful 
in combating spyware. Although spyware’s main function is to make unauthorized 
interceptions of electronic communication, spyware developers typically design spyware to 
evade the Wiretap Act’s reach by engineering the software to record electronic information 
while it is temporarily stored before, after, or during transmission.  
 
The Wiretap Act is discussed in more detail in the “Individual Rights” chapter below. 
 
THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701) 
As part of the ECPA, Congress enacted the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to protect 
stored electronic communications, such as e-mail and voicemail, by prohibiting the 
unauthorized access of such communications that are in storage. More specifically, the SCA 
prohibits unlawful access to a facility, which provides an electronic communication service, 
and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is electronically stored in such a system. An electronic 
communication falls under the SCA once a system receives and stores it.   
 
The SCA is discussed in more detail in the “Individual Rights” chapter below. 
 
Identifying and Protecting Trade Secrets 
In addition to recognizing ownership rights in material possessions, U.S. law grants rights in 
intangible property. Intellectual property rights create incentives for individuals, companies, 
and investors to allocate the requisite resources to research, develop, and market original 
technology and creative works. Federal law protects intellectual property in four specific 
areas: copyright, trademark, patent, and trades ecrets. Trade secrets will be the focus of this 
section.  
 
Protection against trade secret theft, also known as economic and corporate espionage, 
involves implementing and increasing controls, as well as establishing defenses to trade 
secret intrusion. Trade secrets include, but are not limited to, customer lists, vendor 
contracts, blueprints and construction plans, bidding systems, computer programs, test data, 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.320  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
pricing information, recipes, marketing plans, manufacturing processes, and business forms. 
Essentially, any idea or information that gives its owner an advantage over its competitors 
can be classified as a trade secret, as long as it generally meets the two criteria set forth 
below. 
 
To qualify as a trade secret, information must generally meet two criteria. First, it must 
actually be a “secret.” In other words, a company cannot sue an employee or competitor for 
releasing information that was already well known and readily available. Second, 
organizations are required to take reasonable steps to protect their trade secrets from 
disclosure. Trade secret protection for a piece of information will not exist where the 
information has been publicly disclosed or where the organization that owns the secret has 
not taken adequate steps to protect it from disclosure. 
 
Organizations and individuals can maintain legal protection over trade secrets by taking 
reasonable steps to keep all proprietary information secret. It is imperative that plans are 
developed to reasonably guard trade secrets from disclosure. The use of nondisclosure and 
noncompetition agreements can provide employers with legal recourse against those who 
misappropriate proprietary information.  
 
Nondisclosure agreements typically stipulate that all trade secrets and other proprietary or 
confidential information shall be kept confidential without disclosure to anyone. These 
agreements should be signed at the outset and upon termination of employment. 
Noncompetition agreements generally forbid a current employee from working for 
competing companies within a certain period from termination. Many state courts void such 
agreements as against “public policy” because they limit future employment of a person. 
Those states that do allow noncompetition agreements require the agreement to be part of 
an otherwise valid employment agreement. However, in cases where an employee is hired “at 
will,” noncompetition agreements are unenforceable. 
 
Congress has recognized the sanctity of trade secrets in numerous statutes. This section will 
provide an overview of the most relevant legal instruments developed to combat this form 
of white-collar crime. Specifically, this section will examine the following federal legislation: 
• Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1831–1839) 
• Disclosing government trade secrets (18 U.S.C. § 1905) 
• Interstate transportation and receipt of stolen property or goods (18 U.S.C. § 2314) 
• Mail or wire fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.321 
• Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1030(a)) 
 
In addition, this section will examine the Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA).  
 
Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. §§ 1831–1839) 
The Economic Espionage Act of 1996 (EEA) made the theft of trade secrets a federal 
criminal offense. The Department of Justice now has sweeping authority to prosecute trade 
secret theft whether it is in the United States, via the Internet, or outside the United States. 
 
Section 1839 defines trade secrets as any secret “patterns, plans, compilations, program 
devices, formulas, designs, prototypes, methods, techniques, processes, procedures, 
programs, or codes” that have some independ ent economic value and are used to obtain an 
economic advantage over competitors or customers. Furthermore, the EEA applies to 
anyone who, without authorization, copies, duplicates, “downloads, uploads, alters, destroys 
... replicates, transmits, delivers, sends, mails, communicates, or conveys a trade secret.” 
 
The EEA outlaws two types of trade secret misappropriation: economic espionage and theft 
of commercial trade secrets. Section 1831 criminalizes the theft of a trade secret to benefit a 
foreign government, instrumentality, or agent. Section 1832, however, criminalizes the theft 
of commercial trade secrets to obtain an economic advantage. Both sections are examined in 
more detail below.  
 
Prosecutors can apply the EEA to a wide variety of misconduct because it criminalizes 
attempts and conspiracies to violate the EEA. The same penalties apply to these offenses 
with increased penalties if the trade secret misappropriation benefits a foreign government, 
foreign instrumentality, or a foreign agent.  
 
Section 1834 of the EEA allows criminal forfeiture to the United States of (1) any property 
constituting or derived from the proceeds of violations of the Act, and (2) the forfeiture of 
any property used or intended to be used, in any manner or part, to commit or facilitate a 
violation of the Act. (See 18 U.S.C. § 1834.) The criminal forfeiture provisions enable federal 
prosecutors to dismantle entire Internet networks and seek criminal forfeiture of all the 
computers, printers and other devices used to commit or facilitate the offenses proscribed by 
the Act.  
 
The EEA also authorizes the attorney general, deputy attorney general, or assistant attorney 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.322  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
general in the Criminal Division of the Justice Department to apply for a federal court order 
authorizing or approving the interception of wire or oral communications by the FBI or 
other federal agencies having responsibility for the investigation of the offense. These are the 
same investigative tools available in other federal criminal prosecutions. 
 
The EEA also applies to offenses committed outside the United States if (1) the offender is 
a citizen or permanent resident alien of the United States, (2) if the corporation or other 
organization was incorporated or organized in the United States, or (3) an act in furtherance 
of the offense was committed in the United States. See  18 U.S.C. § 1837. These 
extraterritorial provisions in the Act will provide the Justice Department with broad 
authority to prosecute the international theft of trade secrets and will prevent the willful 
evasion of liability for trade secret misappropriation by using the Internet or other means to 
transfer the trade secret information outside the United States. 
 
Moreover, the EEA authorizes the attorney general to commence a civil action seeking 
injunctive relief to prevent further disclosure of a trade secret by the defendant or third 
parties. See 18 U.S.C. § 1836. There is no requirement in  the Act that criminal indictments be 
issued first. Therefore, the Justice Department  may commence civil actions for injunctive 
relief at any stage of the investigation. In any prosecution or other proceeding under the Act, 
the Court is required to issue protective orders and to take such other action as be necessary 
to preserve the confidentiality of the trade secrets consistent with the Federal Rules of 
Criminal and Civil Procedure. See  18 U.S.C. § 1835. 
 
Finally, violations under the EEA may implicate other federal laws, including: 
• Disclosing government trade secrets (18 U.S.C. § 1905) 
• Interstate transportation and receipt of stolen property or goods (18 U.S.C. § 2314) 
• Mail or wire fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
• Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. 1030(a)) 
• Criminal copyright infringement (17 U.S.C. § 506 and 18 U.S.C. § 2319) 
 
ECONOMIC ESPIONAGE (18 U.S.C. § 1831) 
Section 1831 of the EEA is targeted at economic espionage conducted by or on behalf of 
foreign governments or instrumentalities. In addition to the three general elements of an 
espionage case — that (1) the defendant stole or, with or without the authorization of the 
owner, obtained, destroyed, or conveyed information; (2) the defendant knew the 
information was proprietary; and (3) the information was in fact a trade secret) — there is a 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.323 
fourth element that the government must prove to successfully prosecute under section 
1831. The government must show that the defendant intended or knew that the offense 
would benefit a foreign government, foreign instrumentality, or foreign agent. Attempts and 
conspiracies to commit these offenses are also punishable under section 1831.  
 
The maximum punishment under section 1831 is 15 years imprisonment and a fine of 
$500,000. If the offense is committed by an organization, the maximum fine is $10 million.  
 
THEFT OF TRADE SECRETS (18 U.S.C. § 1832) 
Section 1832 is concerned with conventional commercial theft and misappropriation of trade 
secrets. It principally covers domestic crimes. In addition to three standard elements of 
espionage, which were discussed above, a section 1832 action requires the government to 
prove the following three additional elements:  
• That the accused intended to convert the trade secret to the economic benefit of 
someone other than the rightful owner;  
• That the accused intended to injure the owner of the trade secret; and 
• That the trade secret was related to or included in a product that is produced for or 
placed in interstate or foreign commerce.  
 
As evidenced by the additional elements, the requirements for prosecution under section 
1832 are somewhat stricter than under section 1831. For example, section 1832 requires that 
the defendant have intended for someone to gain by the misappropriation, whereas section 
1831 prosecutions can succeed even when the benefits of a theft are noneconomic.  
 
The maximum punishments for an offense under section 1832 are 10 years imprisonment, a 
fine, or both. If the offense is committed by an organization, the fine can run as high as 
$5,000,000. Attempts and conspiracies to commit the domestic theft of trade secrets are also 
punishable under section 1832. 
   
ORDERS TO PRESERVE CONFIDENTIALITY (18 U.S.C. § 1835) 
Trade secret theft victims often feel conflicted about whether to report these crimes to the 
government. They want punishment but fear that their trade secrets will be disclosed during 
the trial process.  
 
Congress addressed this dilemma in section 1835, which gives the government procedures to 
preserve the confidentiality of trade secrets throughout the trial. Section 1835 authorizes the 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.324  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
court to enter orders and take actions “necessary and appropriate to preserve the 
confidentiality of trade secrets.” In addition, section 1835 gives the government the right to 
an interlocutory appeal from an order authorizing a trade secret’s disclosure. 
 
CONSTRUCTION WITH OTHER LAWS (18 U.S.C. § 1838) 
Section 1838 states that “[t]his chapter shall not be construed to preempt or displace any 
other remedies, whether civil or criminal, provided by United States Federal, State... or to 
affect the otherwise lawful disclosure of information by any government employees under 
section 552 of title 5 (commonly known as the Freedom of Information Act).” Therefore, 
the EEA does not bar the government from seeking any other remedies, whether civil or 
criminal.  
 
Disclosing Government Trade Secrets (18 U.S.C. § 1905) 
Section 1905 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code makes it a crime for a federal employee to disclose 
confidential government information, including trade secrets.  
 
Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property (ITSP) (18 U.S.C. § 2314) 
As noted above, the Interstate Transportation of Stolen Property (ITSP) statute prohibits 
the transportation, transmittal, or transfer of fraudulently received goods, wares, 
merchandise, securities, or money in interstate or foreign commerce, when valued at $5,000 
or more. Prosecutors may use the ITSP to prosecute theft of commercial trade secrets, 
proprietary information, or other types of intellectual property in certain situations. 
Generally, if the stolen items in question qualify as goods, wares, or merchandise, the courts 
agree that section 2314 applies when a defendant steals a tangible object that contains 
intellectual property. 
 
Mail or Wire Fraud (18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343) 
Theft of a trade secret may also be prosecuted as mail or wire fraud. As stated earlier, the 
mail and wire fraud laws prohibit the use of the mail or wires in furtherance of a fraudulent 
scheme designed to obtain money or property, which often cover the misappropriation of 
confidential and proprietary information. 
 
Computer Fraud (18 U.S.C. 1030(a)) 
Prosecutors may also consider bring computer fraud charges in addition to or in lieu of EEA 
charges. As previously discussed, section 1030 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code, commonly 
known as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, provides criminal sanctions and a civil action 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.325 
for misappropriation of trade secrets stored on protected computers (i.e., computers used 
by, or whose use affects, a financial institution or the U.S. government, or used for interstate 
or foreign commerce). 
 
Section 1030(a) includes seven types of criminal activity; however, only two sections of the 
Act are particularly relevant to trade secrets. Section 1030(a)(2) makes it illegal to access or 
attempt to access a protected computer to obtain information. Section 1030(a)(4) makes it 
illegal to access or attempt to access a protected computer to commit fraud.  
 
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act provides both criminal and civil liability. Criminal acts 
charged under the Act are punishable by up to 20 years in prison, a fine, or both. The Act 
also provides that any person who suffers “d amage or loss” under the Act may maintain a 
civil action against the violator to obtain compensatory damages and injunctive relief or 
other equitable relief. 
 
The Uniform Trade Secrets Act 
The Uniform Trade Secrets Act (UTSA) was promulgated by the National Conference of 
Commissioners on Uniform State Laws in 1979. The UTSA is not a federal law, but several 
states have adopted versions of it in an effort to protect trade secrets. The UTSA protects 
against the theft of “formulas, patterns, compilations, programs, devices, methods, 
techniques, and processes” of information.  
 
Companies attempting to show that a competitor has misappropriated a trade secret under 
the UTSA must satisfy a two-pronged test:  
• It must be demonstrated that the company owned a “trade secret.” 
• The company must prove that the defendant used the trade secret in breach of “an 
agreement, a confidential relationship or duty, or as a result of discovery by improper 
means.” 
 
For information to qualify as a trade secret under the UTSA, the owner of the information 
must show that:  
• The information derived independent economic value from its secrecy. 
• Efforts must have been taken to keep the information secret. The UTSA does not 
require the trade secret to have been used in business. 
 
The information does not have to derive actual independent value from its secrecy; it is 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.326  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
enough if there is potential economic value because of the information being kept secret. 
Thus, for plans or innovations that have not yet been put into effect by a company, the 
UTSA would still provide protection. The second prong of the definition once again 
mandates that organizations take reasonable steps to guard their secrets. If information is 
not treated as a secret by its owner, the organization cannot later seek protection under the UTSA.  
 
The UTSA defines a misappropriation of a trade secret as either:  
• The acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person who knows or has reason to 
know that the trade secret was acquired by improper means 
• Disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without express or implied consent by a 
person who used improper means to acquire knowledge of the trade secret or at the time 
of disclosure or use, knew or had reason to know that it was a protected trade secret 
 
The term improper means includes such things as theft, bribery, misrepresentation, breach of a 
duty to maintain secrecy, or espionage through electronic or other means. Note that the 
UTSA not only proscribes the stealing of a trade secret, but also the use of that trade secret 
by those who know it was stolen, whether they participated in the theft or not.  
 
Because the UTSA is not a federal law, it has fallen prey to certain difficulties. First, the fact 
that the UTSA was adopted in different versions by different states creates inconsistencies in 
the interpretation of its provisions. Second, the UTSA is not a criminal statute. The lack of 
criminal sanctions for violations of the UTSA takes some of the teeth out of its attempts to 
deter the theft of trade secrets. These are problems that Congress sought to rectify with the 
passage of the Economic Espionage Act. 
 
Money Laundering 
There are several federal statutes that apply to money laundering.  
 
The Bank Secrecy Act 
The Bank Secrecy Act (BSA), which went into effect in 1970, was the first major piece of 
legislation aimed at detecting and preventing money laundering. Congress enacted the BSA 
to monitor financial transactions, and the Act sets forth a system of reporting and 
recordkeeping requirements designed to help track large or unusual financial transactions. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.327 
The BSA, which is enforced by the Treasury Department, consists of two titles. Title I 
contains provisions requiring that financial institutions and securities brokers and dealers 
keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of their customers. It is codified in 
Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.), sections 1829b and 1951–1959. The penalties for 
failure to comply with these recordkeeping requirements are severe. Any insured depository 
institution and any director, officer, or employee who willfully or through gross negligence 
violates any regulation can be subject to a $10,000 civil penalty. The statute further provides 
that a separate violation occurs for each day the violation continues and at each office, branch, 
or place of business at which the violation occurs. If a violation is committed in furtherance 
of a felony crime, criminal penalties can be imposed of up to five years in prison and/or a 
fine of not more than $10,000. 
 
Title II of the BSA (originally entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act) 
requires banks, “financial institutions” (which in clude casinos, securities brokers and dealers, 
currency exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to report to the government 
certain transactions. Title II is codified at 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5333. Title II sets forth civil 
and criminal penalties for noncompliance.  
 
Title 18, U.S.C. §§ 1956–57 Money Laundering Statutes 
In addition to the BSA, Congress enacted sections 1956 and 1957 of Title 18, which emanate 
from the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, to combat money laundering. These complex 
statutes forbid money laundering  in connection criminal activity, including but not limited to 
narcotics trafficking.  
 
LAUNDERING OF MONETARY INSTRUMENTS (18 U.S.C. § 1956) 
Section 1956 addresses financial transactions involving proceeds of criminal activity. It 
covers three types of money laundering, which are found in sections 1956(a)(1), 1956(a)(2), 
and 1956(a)(3).  
 
Section 1956(a)(1) concerns domestic money laundering. To establish an offense under 
section 1956(a)(1), the government must establish that “(1) the defendant took part in a 
financial transaction; (2) the defendant knew that the property involved in the transaction 
involved the proceeds of illegal activity; (3) that the property involved was in fact the 
proceeds of that illegal activity; and (4) the defendant knew that the transaction was designed 
in whole or in part to conceal or disguise the nature, source, location, ownership, or control 
of the illegal proceeds.” U.S. v. Ruiz-Castro, 92 F.3d 1519 (10th Cir. 1996). 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.328  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Individuals who violate Section 1956(a)(1) may be fined up to $500,000 or twice the value of 
the monetary instrument or funds (whichever is greater) and imprisoned for up to 20 years. 
Also, assets acquired because of violations of this provision are subject to forfeiture by the 
government. 
 
Section 1956(a)(2) pertains to international money laundering. Section 1956(a)(2) prohibits 
the transportation, transmission, or transfer of funds either into or out of the United States 
if the person knows the funds are the proceeds of unlawful activity and the transportation, 
transmission, or transfer is done with the intent to promote the carrying on of “specified 
unlawful conduct”; is done to conceal the natu re, location, source, ownership, or control of 
the funds; or is done to avoid reporting requirements. The penalties are the same as those set 
forth in section 1956(a)(1).  
 
Section 1956(a)(3) prohibits a person from engaging in financial transactions involving 
property the person believes to be the proceeds of illegal activity. This is intended to cover 
sting operations in which a suspect engages in money laundering activity with funds he 
believes to be illegally derived, even though the funds are actually supplied by government 
agents. A person who violates this provision can be imprisoned for up to 20 years and/or 
fined in accordance with 18, U.S.C., § 3571. 
 
Property qualifies as the proceeds of illegal activity if it is derived from a “specified unlawful 
activity,” which includes narcotics-related transactions, transactions related to bankruptcy 
fraud, bribery, false statements, embezzlement, mail or wire fraud, bank fraud, 
environmental violations, health care offenses, and a number of other crimes.  
 
Additionally, the USA PATRIOT Act of 2001 added terrorism activities, bribery of public 
officials, smuggling, and export control violations to the list of unlawful activities that give 
rise to violations of this law.  
 
On May 21, 2009, President Obama signed into law the Fraud Enforcement and Recovery 
Act of 2009 (FERA). Congress designed FERA to providing federal authorities additional 
tools and resources to prosecute fraudulent financial practices. Among other measures, the 
legislation amends section 1956(c) to broaden the term proceeds to include the gross receipts 
of unlawful activity, rather than merely its profits. This amendment addresses a recent 
Supreme Court ruling that proceeds of criminal activity, as treated by federal money 
laundering statutes, included only the defendant’s profits of such activity. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.329 
ENGAGING IN MONETARY TRANSACTIONS IN PROPERTY DERIVED FROM SPECIFIED UNLAWFUL ACTIVITY (18 U.S.C. § 1957) 
Section 1957 makes it illegal for any person to knowingly engage or attempt to engage in a 
monetary transaction with criminally derived property greater than $10,000 and is derived 
from “specified unlawful activity.” Section 1957 applies in situations where the offense takes 
place in the United States (or within its special maritime or territorial jurisdiction) or the 
offense takes place outside the United States, and the defendant is a U.S. citizen or legal 
alien. Violations of this statute are punished by fines, up to 10 years of imprisonment, and 
forfeiture of illegally obtained gains. 
 
USA PATRIOT Act 
Congress extended the reach of the BSA and the money laundering statutes when it enacted 
the USA PATRIOT Act in 2001. The Act was en acted in response to the tragedies of 
September 11, 2001, and reflected Congressional concern with the money laundering 
activities of the terrorists who committed those attacks.   
 
Conspiracy 
Criminal conspiracy punishes an agreement between two or more people to commit an 
illegal act. The crime of conspiracy is actually a separate criminal offense, meaning that the 
underlying crime (e.g., bank fraud, bribery, securities fraud, etc.) and the conspiracy to 
commit the underlying crime are two separate offenses. The U.S. Code contains numerous 
specific conspiracy statutes throughout its text, and this section examines some of the most 
relevant conspiracy statutes.  
 
Conspiracy to Defraud the United States (18 U.S.C. § 371) 
Although numerous federal statutes make conspiracy a crime, the most commonly used 
federal conspiracy statute is the general conspiracy statute under section 371 of Title 18, U.S. 
Code. This statute renders it illegal to agree with another person, or to take joint action, to 
defraud the government. Section 371 provides: 
 
If two or more persons conspire either to commit any offense against the United States, or to 
defraud the United States, or any agency thereof in any manner or for any purpose, and one or 
more of such persons do any act to effect the object of the conspiracy, each shall be fined under 
this title or imprisoned not more than five years, or both. 
 
If, however, the offense, the commission of which is the object of the conspiracy, is a misdemeanor 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.330  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
only, the punishment for such conspiracy shall not exceed the maximum punishment provided 
for such misdemeanor. 
 
The essential elements of this statute are: 
• Agreement to defraud 
• The defendant knew the purpose of the agreement and intentionally joined in the 
agreement 
• That at least one of the conspirators knowingly committed at least one overt act in 
furtherance of the conspiracy 
 
Under the first element, the government must prove that the defendant reached an 
agreement or understanding with at least one other person. The conspirators must agree 
about the precise fraud involved. An agreement to defraud the government, without further 
qualification about the nature of the fraud, is not sufficient to support a conviction under 
this statute.  
 
The government must also establish that the defendant knew of the conspiracy’s existence 
and its objective. The government, however, does not have to establish that the defendant 
knew all the details or objectives of the conspiracy, and they do not have to prove that the 
defendant knew the identity of all the participants in the conspiracy.  
 
Finally, the purpose of the conspiracy need not be accomplished for a violation to occur, but 
at least one of the co-conspirators must have carried out at least one overt act in furtherance 
of the conspiracy. The overt act need not be criminal and could be as innocuous as making a 
phone call or writing a letter. 
 
Conspiracy counts are favored by prosecutors because they provide evidentiary and pleading 
advantages. If a conspiracy is shown, the acts and statements of one co-conspirator may be 
admitted into evidence against all, and each co-conspirator may be convicted for the 
underlying substantive offense (e.g., destroying government property) committed by any one 
of its members.  
 
A corporation cannot conspire with one of its own employees to commit an offense because 
the employee and employer are legally viewed as one. A corporation, however, can conspire 
with other business entities or third parties to violate the statute. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.331 
The Sherman Antitrust Act (15 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.) 
The Sherman Antitrust Act is designed to combat anticompetitive practices that harm the 
public by undermining economic growth. Specifically, the Act prohibits competitors from 
entering into any agreement to restrain trade in interstate commerce, including price fixing, 
bid rigging, and bid rotation schemes. 
 
Under the Sherman Antitrust Act, every contract, combination in the form of trust or 
otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce among the several states, or with 
foreign nations, is declared to be illegal. Every person who shall make any contract or engage 
in any combination or conspiracy hereby declared to be illegal shall be deemed guilty of a 
felony, and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by fine not exceeding $10 million if a 
corporation, or if any other person, $350,000, or by imprisonment not exceeding three years, 
or by both said punishments, in the discretion of the court. However, these maximum 
Sherman Act penalties were increased in June 2004. For offenses committed on or after June 
22, 2004, the maximum corporate fine is $100 million, the maximum individual fine is $1 
million, and the maximum jail term is 10 years. 
 
The elements of a criminal antitrust violation include: 
• An agreement or combination 
• Of two or more entities 
• That unduly restrains trade 
• In interstate or foreign commerce 
 
Attempt and Conspiracy to Commit Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1349) 
As previously noted, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act added a statute that allows prosecutions of 
attempts and conspiracies under the fraud statutes in Title 18. This applies to mail fraud, 
wire fraud, securities fraud, bank fraud, and health care fraud. 
 
Conspiracy to Defraud Federal Government with False Claims (18 U.S.C. § 286) 
Section 286 of Title 18, U.S. Code, makes it a crime for two or more persons to agree or 
conspire to defraud the United States by obtaining or aiding in obtaining payment or 
allowance of any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim. Any person found guilty under this 
section may be fined, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both. 
 
Under section 286, the government must prove: 
• The defendant entered into an agreement to defraud the United States by obtaining or 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.332  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
aiding in obtaining payment or allowance of any false, fictitious or fraudulent claim 
• The defendant knew or was deliberately ignorant of the claim’s falsity, fictitiousness, or 
fraudulence 
• The defendant knew of the conspiracy, intended to join, and voluntarily participated in 
the conspiracy 
 
RICO Conspiracy (18 U.S.C. § 1962(d)) 
Section 1962(d) prohibits conspiring to violate any criminal provisions under the Racketeer 
Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO). Unlike the general conspiracy statute, a 
conspiracy under section 1962(d) does not require some overt act on the defendant’s part.  
 
Aiding and Abetting (18 U.S.C. § 2) 
The federal aiding and abetting statute provides that anyone who induces another to commit 
an offense or who aids in its commission may himself be charged and convicted of the 
underlying offense and subject to its penalties.  
 
Obstruction of Justice 
The obstruction of justice statutes punish efforts to impede or obstruct the investigation or 
trial of other substantive offenses. Prosecutors usually are pleased to discover such violations 
because they add a more sinister flavor to what might be colorless white-collar charges and 
help to prove underlying criminal intent. In many instances, these charges draw the stiffest 
penalties. 
 
There are several obstruction statutes in the federal code, including 18 U.S.C. §§ 1503 
(influencing or injuring officer or juror generally), 1504 (influencing a juror through a 
writing), 1506 (theft or alteration of a record or process), 1509 (obstruction relating to court 
orders), 1512 (tampering with a witness, victim, or an informant), 1516 (obstruction of a 
federal audit), and 1517 (obstructing the examination of a financial institution).  
 
In addition, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 set forth increasingly important obstruction of 
justice provisions concerning fraud examinations. The Act amended section 1512 to include 
document destruction by the accused and instituted two of the most significant criminal 
statutes addressing obstruction of justice: 18 U.S.C. § 1519 and 18 U.S.C. § 1520.  
 
An examination of every obstruction statute, however, is beyond the scope of this text. 
Therefore, this section focuses on the obstruction statutes most relevant to fraud 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.333 
examinations, including section 1516, section 1517, and those enacted or amended by the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act.  
 
Obstruction of Federal Audit (18 U.S.C. § 1516) 
This statute, originally passed in 1988, makes it a felony for anyone to influence, obstruct, or 
impede a federal auditor in the performance of his official duties. Although the “influence, 
obstruct, or impeded” language employed by the statute is broad, the government rarely 
employs this statute.  
 
Obstructing Examination of Financial Institution (18 U.S.C. § 1517) 
A similar statute, passed in 1990, makes it a felony to obstruct the examination of a financial 
institution. The statute provides: 
 
Whoever corruptly obstructs or attempts to obst ruct any examination of a financial institution 
by an agency of the United States with jurisdiction to conduct an examination of such financial 
institution shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both. 
 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
DOCUMENT DESTRUCTION BY THE ACCUSED (18 U.S.C. § 1512(C)) 
Sarbanes-Oxley amended section 1512 of the U.S. Code to make it a criminal offense to 
corruptly alter, destroy, mutilate, or conceal a record or document with the intent to impair 
its integrity or use in an official proceeding, or to otherwise obstruct, influence, or impede 
any official proceeding or attempt to do so. Until Congress amended section 1512, it was 
more narrowly focused on witness tampering. Violations of this section are punishable by 
fines up to $250,000 and imprisonment for up to 20 years. 
 
DESTRUCTION, ALTERATION, OR FALSIFICATION OF RECORDS IN FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS AND BANKRUPTCY (18 U.S.C. § 1519) 
Following the Enron scandal, section 1519 of Title 18, U.S. Code, was added to narrow the 
scope of when destruction under a document retention policy must cease. Unlike section 
1512(c), which uses the word corruptly, section 1519 uses the word knowingly.  
 
DESTRUCTION OF CORPORATE AUDIT RECORDS (18 U.S.C. § 1520) 
Section 802 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act added a statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1520, to govern the 
destruction of corporate audit records. Section 1520 makes it a crime for accountants to 
knowingly and willfully fail to maintain certain audit records and work papers for five years 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.334  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
from the end of the fiscal period in which the audit was concluded. In addition to providing 
for prosecution of those who obstruct justice, the statute is designed to ensure that 
important financial evidence is maintained so that government officials, regulators, and 
victims can determine whether a violation occurred.    
 
Perjury 
Perjury (18 U.S.C. §§ 1621 and 1623)  is an intentional false statement given under oath on a 
material point. Under a related federal statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1623, the government may allege 
and prove perjury if the defendant makes two irreconcilable contradictory statements 
without proving which is true and which is false. False and fraudulent statements — orally or 
in writing — made to a government agency on a material matter also may be punished as a 
felony under a variety of statutes even if not given under oath. 
 
 
Fines Under Title 18 
Several sections of Title 18 do not provide a specified maximum fine in the section setting 
forth the offense. Instead, these criminal statutes usually provide that the offender may “be 
fined under this title.” Unless a section sets fo rth another amount, the sections below should 
be used to determine the maximum sentence available. 
 
Sentence of Fine (18 U.S.C. § 3571) 
In general, the statutory provisions governing a sentence of a fine are set forth in section 
3571. It specifies the maximum fines that courts can impose against individuals and 
organizations. Section 3571 provides: 
 
(a) In general. — A defendant who has been found guilty of an offense may be sentenced to pay a 
fine. 
 
(b) Fines for individuals. — Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, an individual 
who has been found guilty of an offense may be fined not more than the greatest of — 
(1) The amount specified in the law setting forth the offense; 
(2) The applicable amount under subsection (d) of this section; 
 (3) For a felony, not more than $250,000; 
 (4) For a misdemeanor resulting in  death, not more than $250,000; 
 (5) For a Class A misdemeanor that does not result in death, not more than $100,000; 
(6) For a Class B or C misdemeanor that does not result in death, not more than $5,000; 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.335 
or 
(7) For an infraction, not more than $5,000. 
 
(c) Fines for organizations. — Except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, an 
organization that has been found guilty of an offense may be fined not more than the 
greatest of — 
(1) The amount specified in the law setting forth the offense; 
(2) The applicable amount under subsection (d) of this section; 
(3) For a felony, not more than $500,000; 
(4) For a misdemeanor resulting in death, not more than $500,000; 
(5) For a Class A misdemeanor that does not result in death, not more than $200,000; 
(6) For a Class B or C misdemeanor that does not result in death, not more than 
$10,000; and 
(7) For an infraction, not more than $10,000. 
 
(d) Alternative fine based on gain or loss. — If any person derives pecuniary gain from the 
offense, or if the offense results in pecuniary loss to a person other than the defendant, the 
defendant may be fined not more than the greater of twice the gross gain or twice the gross 
loss, unless imposition of a fine under this subsection would unduly complicate or prolong 
the sentencing process. 
 
(e) Special rule for lower fine specified in substantive provis ion. — If a law setting forth an 
offense specifies no fine or a fine that is lower than the fine otherwise applicable under this 
section and such law, by specific reference, exempts the offense from the applicability of the 
fine otherwise applicable under this section, the defendant may not be fined more than the 
amount specified in the law setting forth the offense. 
 
Imposition of a Sentence of Fine and Related Matters (18 U.S.C. § 3572) 
Section 3572 sets forth the factors courts should consider in imposing fines. It provides: 
 
(a) Factors to be considered. — In determining whether to impose a fine, and the amount, time 
for payment, and method of payment of a fine, the court shall consider, in addition to the 
factors set forth in section 3553(a) — 
(1)  The defendant's income, earning capacity, and financial resources; 
(2)  The burden that the fine will impose upon the defendant, any person who is financially 
dependent on the defendant, or any other person (including a government) that would 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.336  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
be responsible for the welfare of any person financially dependent on the defendant, 
relative to the burden that alternative punishments would impose; 
(3)  Any pecuniary loss inflicted upon others as a result of the offense; 
(4)  Whether restitution is ordered or made and the amount of such restitution; 
(5)  The need to deprive the defendant of illegally obtained gains from the offense; 
(6) The expected costs to the government of any imprisonment, supervised release, or 
probation component of the sentence; 
(7) Whether the defendant can pass on to consumers or other persons the expense of the 
fine; and 
(8) If the defendant is an organization, the size of the organization and any measure taken 
by the organization to discipline any officer, director, employee, or agent of the 
organization responsible for the offense and to prevent a recurrence of such an offense. 
 
(b) Fine not to impair ability to make restitution. — If, as a result of a conviction, the defendant 
has the obligation to make restitution to a victim of the offense, the court shall impose a fine 
or other monetary penalty only to the extent that such fine or penalty will not impair the 
ability of the defendant to make restitution. 
 
(c)   Effect of finality of judgment. Notwithstanding the fact that a sentence to pay a fine can 
subsequently be — 
(1) Modified or remitted under section 3573; 
(2) Corrected under rule 35 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure and section 3742; 
or 
(3) Appealed and modified under section 3742; 
a judgment that includes such a sentence is a final judgment for all other purposes 
 
(d)   Time, method of payment, and related items 
(1) A person sentenced to pay a fine or other monetary penalty, including restitution, shall 
make such payment immediately, unless, in the interest of justice, the court provides for 
payment on a date certain or in installments. If the court provides for payment in 
installments, the installments shall be in equal monthly payments over the period 
provided by the court, unless the court establishes another schedule. 
(2) If the judgment, or, in the case of a restitution order, the order, permits other than 
immediate payment, the length of time over which scheduled payments will be made 
shall be set by the court, but shall be the shortest time in which full payment can 
reasonably be made. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.337 
(3) A judgment for a fine which permits payments in installments shall include a 
requirement that the defendant will notify the court of any material change in the 
defendant's economic circumstances that might affect the defendant’s ability to pay the 
fine. Upon receipt of such notice the court may, on its own motion or the motion of any 
party, adjust the payment schedule, or require immediate payment in full, as the 
interests of justice require. 
 
(e)   Alternative sentence precluded. At the time a defendant is sentenced to pay a fine, the court 
may not impose an alternative sentence to be carried out if the fine is not paid. 
(f)   Responsibility for payment of monetary obligation relating to organization. If a sentence 
includes a fine, special assessment, restitution or other monetary obligation (including 
interest) with respect to an organization, each individual authorized to make disbursements 
for the organization has a duty to pay the obligation from assets of the organization. If such 
an obligation is imposed on a director, officer, shareholder, employee, or agent of an 
organization, payments may not be made, di rectly or indirectly, from assets of the 
organization, unless the court finds that such payment is expressly permissible under 
applicable State law. 
 
(g)   Security for stayed fine. If a sentence imposing a fine is stayed, the court shall, absent 
exceptional circumstances (as determined by the court) - 
(1) Require the defendant to deposit, in the registry of the district court, any amount of the 
fine that is due; 
(2) Require the defendant to provide a bond or other security to ensure payment of the fine; 
or 
(3) Restrain the defendant from transferring or dissipating assets. 
 
 (h)  Delinquency. A fine or payment of restitut ion is delinquent if a payment is more than 30 
days late. 
 
(i)   Default. A fine or payment of restitution is in default if a payment is delinquent for more 
than 90 days. Notwithstanding any installment schedule, when a fine or payment of 
restitution is in default, the entire amount of the fine or restitution is due within 30 days 
after notification of the default, subject to the provisions of section 3613A. 
 
Mandatory Victims Restitution Act of 1996 (18 U.S.C. § 3663A) 
The Mandatory Victims Restitution Act (MVRA) expands the scope of mandatory 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.338  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
restitution on the federal level. It requires federal courts to order restitution for each 
defendant, without consideration of the defendant’s economic circumstances, who has been 
convicted or plead guilty to charges for certain categories of offenses, including fraud under 
Title 18, U.S. Code. Thus, victim corporations may be entitled to victim compensation, just 
like natural persons.  
 
Recently, courts have held that the MVRA third parties have the right to recover not only 
the losses suffered as a result of the wrongdoing, but also the costs associated with 
investigating the offense. Specifically, the Second Circuit and the Ninth Circuit agree that 
section 3663A(b)(4) of the MVRA provides for restitution of attorneys’ fees and certain out-of-pocket 
investigative expenses a victim company incurs as part of an internal investigation 
of suspected fraud. 
 
 
Qui Tam Suits and the Civil False Claims Act 
A qui tam suit is one in which a private individual sues on behalf of the government to 
recover damages for criminal or fraudulent actions committed against the government. It is a 
civil not a criminal suit. Most qui tam actions are brought under the False Claims Act, 31 
U.S.C. § 3729 et seq. This statute provides, in part, that anyone who commits the following 
acts is liable to the government for three times the amount of damages it sustains, plus a civil 
penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 per false claim: 
• Knowingly presents or causes to be presented a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval (§ 3729(a)(1)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement to get 
a false or fraudulent claim paid or approved (§ 3729(a)(2)) 
• Conspires to defraud the government by getting a false or fraudulent claim allowed or 
paid (§ 3729(a)(3)) 
• Making or delivering a document certifying receipt of property to be used by the 
government without completely knowing that the information on the receipt is true (§ 
3729(a)(5)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made  or used, a false record or statement to 
conceal, avoid, or decrease an obligation to pay or transmit money or property to the 
government (§ 3729(a)(7)) 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.339 
Most qui tam actions seek to recover damages and statutory penalties for false claims made 
to the government by government contractors such as defense contractors and health care 
providers. 
 
Since 1986, when Congress substantially strengthened the civil False Claims Act, the United 
States has secured more than $24 billion in settlements and judgments ($2.4 billion in the 
2009 fiscal year alone). 
 
Filing an Action 
If an individual has knowledge that a false claim was submitted to the government, the 
individual should first retain an attorney. The attorney will then draft a complaint and a 
disclosure statement. The whistleblower can file the complaint and the disclosure statement 
under seal in U.S. District Court and copies are served upon the Department of Justice. 
After the filing of the complaint, the Justice Department has 60 days to investigate the 
allegations and determine whether it will join the lawsuit. If the department decides not to 
participate in the lawsuit, the individual has the right to continue to pursue the claim on 
behalf of the United States. If the department does not participate, the whistleblower will 
receive a higher portion of any recovery received. 
 
If the Justice Department elects to join the lawsuit, it has the primary responsibility for 
prosecuting the case and can limit the whistleblower’s participation in the action. If the 
government successfully prosecutes the suit, the private party may recover from 15–25 
percent of the recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. If the government does 
not take over the prosecution, and the qui tam plaintiff successfully wins the case on his 
own, the court may award the plaintiff 25–30 percent of the recovery, plus reasonable 
attorneys’ fees and costs.  The judge normally determines the percentage. 
 
Who Can Bring a Qui Tam Action 
The False Claims Act provides that any “person” can file a qui tam action as long as they 
have direct and independent knowledge of the fraud and such knowledge was not obtained 
from a “public disclosure.” The definition of person includes not only individuals, but also 
businesses and state or local government entities. The most common plaintiffs in qui tam 
actions are employees of government contractors, health care employees, and employees of 
local, state, or federal government. 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed this definition in an opinion handed down May 22, 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.340  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
2000. In the case of Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v. U.S. ex rel. Stevens, 120 S.Ct. 1858, 
the court resolved a conflict among some of the courts of appeal by stating firmly that 
private citizens do have the right to sue under the False Claims Act. However, the Court also 
held that states and state agencies are not subject to liability under the False Claims Act. 
Therefore, if a state or state agency submits false claims to the federal government, they 
cannot be sued by a private individual under the provisions of the False Claims Act. The 
Court did not address the issue of whether the U.S. government could file suit against a state 
under the FCA. 
 
The requirement that a person’s knowledge of the fraud was not obtained from a public 
disclosure does, however, have one exception. Even if based on public disclosure, a qui tam 
suit may proceed if the plaintiff is “an original  source of the information,” which requires the 
plaintiff to have “direct and independent knowledge of the information on which the 
allegations are based” and have “voluntarily provided the information to the government 
before filing [a suit] which is  based on the information.”  
 
At the present time, a controversy still exists over whether federal employees can file qui tam 
actions under the False Claims Act when knowledge of the fraud was obtained through their 
official duties. At least two federal circuit courts that have addressed the issue have 
concluded that employees who are required and paid by the government to disclose fraud 
cannot bring qui tam actions since their knowledge of fraud was not obtained independently. 
In contrast, two federal circuits have held that federal employees may bring a qui tam suit, 
even if the action is based on information obtained during the course of their employment. 
Thus, federal employees may be prohibited from filing qui tam actions, particularly if 
detecting fraud is part of their job duties. 
 
Protections for Whistleblowers 
Many whistleblowers are employees of the government contractor on which they are 
blowing the whistle. Obviously, employees might be reluctant to report their employer to the 
government for fear of retaliation. To address this concern, Congress provided substantial 
protections to whistleblowers. Title 31 U.S.C. section 3730(h) prohibits an employer from 
taking any adverse action (including discharge, demotion, or harassment) against an 
employee “because of lawful acts done by the employee on behalf of the employee or others 
in furtherance of an action under this section, including the investigation or initiation of, 
testimony for, or assistance in an action filed or to be filed under this section.” 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.341 
If an employer takes adverse action against the employee, the employee can seek relief 
against the employer including reinstatement at the same seniority status, an award of two 
times the employee’s back pay plus interest, and any other special damages required to make 
the employee whole. The employee also can receive reimbursement for all the costs of the 
litigation, including attorneys’ fees. 
 
Although these provisions provide necessary and justifiable protection for employees, in 
some cases they have the unintended effect of preventing an employer from firing or taking 
any other action against a whistleblower, even if there is adequate cause. Employers often are 
unwilling to implement any negative employment decision (no matter how justifiable) against 
a whistleblower for fear that the employee will add a claim of retaliation to the suit. 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act (FERA), which was signed into law on May 20, 
2009, enhanced the whistleblower protections under the False Claims Act by making these 
retaliation claims available to government contractors and agents. 
 
 
Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes 
There are numerous federal laws protecting whistleblowers or employees from retaliation or 
illegal treatment. This section organizes those whistleblower protection laws, which are more 
applicable to CFEs, under specific industries and various areas of law. Even though every 
state has some form of anti-retaliation legislation protecting whistleblowers, this discussion 
will primarily focus on federal law. Therefore, before taking action under any 
whistleblower/anti-retaliation law, a fraud examiner is always well advised to consult an 
attorney for the law of a specific jurisdiction. 
 
In focusing on federal whistleblower/anti-retaliation laws that are more applicable to CFEs, 
this discussion excludes protection laws concerning asbestos, aviation, environmental and 
nuclear laws, federal grants, maritime law, migrant workers, mining, pipeline safety, railroads, 
and transportation and shipping. In addition, this section organizes the applicable laws under 
the following headings:  
• The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
• The Whistleblower Protection Act 
• Banking and Financial Institutions 
• Civil Rights Act of 1871 
• Federal Government Contracting  
• Employees and Members of the Armed Forces 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.342  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
Although the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, passed in 2002, is primarily an accounting reform statute, 
most people do not realize that it made some extremely significant changes to the 
whistleblower laws.  
 
Civil Liability for Reports of Securities Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1514A) 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 806 creates 18 U.S.C. § 1514A, a statute that creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it only protects employees of publicly traded  
companies. Section 1514A makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. However, the statute requires that the employee must report 
the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a member of 
Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also protected against 
retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a proceeding filed 
or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections not only cover retaliatory acts by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
To assert a section 806 retaliation claim, an employee must file a complaint with either the 
secretary of labor or the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) area 
director within 90 days of the alleged retaliatory action, which generally occurs when the 
complainant receives notice of the adverse action. The Act further provides that if a final 
decision has not been issued within 180 days of the complaint filing and there is no showing 
that the delay is due to the claimant’s bad faith, the complaining party may bring a private 
claim in an appropriate federal district court.  
 
Whether a complainant’s 806 claim is heard through the administrative channel or by a 
district court, the elements of proof are the same. The complainant must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that (1) the employee engaged in a protected activity or 
conduct; (2) the employer knew that the employee engaged in protected activity; (3) the 
employee suffered an unfavorable personal action; and (4) the protected activity was a 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.343 
contributing factor in the unfavorable personal action. However, even if the complainant 
proves each of these elements, the employer may avoid liability by demonstrating by clear 
and convincing evidence that it would have taken the same unfavorable personnel action 
even in the absence of such protected activity. 
 
If a public company is found to have violated section 1514A, the Act provides for an award 
of compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties include 
reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages including 
litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
Criminal Sanctions for Reports to Law Enforcement (18 U.S.C. § 1513) 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107 also amended section 1513 of Title 18, U.S. Code, to make it a 
crime to knowingly, with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for 
providing truthful information relating to the commission or possible commission of any  
federal offense, not just securities fraud. This protection is only triggered, however, when 
information is provided to a law enforcement officer.  
 
Violations of section 1513 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and up to 10 years in 
prison for individuals. Corporations that violate the act can be fined up to $500,000.  
 
The Whistleblower Protection Act (5 U.S.C. §§ 1211–1215, 1218–1219, 1221–1222, 7703) 
Two pieces of U.S. legislation, the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 and the Whistleblower 
Protection Act of 1989, define the character of whistleblower protection for federal 
employees. The Civil Service Reform Act protected federal employees who disclosed 
information about the government’s misconduct or waste. In 1989, the Whistleblower 
Protection Act (WPA) strengthened the protections provided in the Civil Reform Act to 
protect federal employees from workplace retaliation when disclosing illegal or improper 
government activities. Specifically, the act prevents a federal agency from taking any adverse 
“personnel action” against a civil servant w ho has reported wrongdoing by the agency.  
 
To receive protection under the WPA, employees must first file a complaint with the U.S. 
Office of Special Counselor (OSC), an independent federal investigative and prosecutorial 
agency that investigates whistleblower complaints. There is no statute of limitations for 
initially filing a complaint with the OSC. In addition, the WPA provides federal employees 
an independent right of action; however, this right is only available if the OSC has closed the 
matter at issue or has not notified the employee within 120 days that it will pursue corrective 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.344  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
action. This right of action, which is filed with the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), 
must be filed within 60 days of an adverse OSC decision. Appeals under the WPA fall under 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit’s exclusive jurisdiction. Remedies that may 
be awarded to employees under the WPA include reinstatement, back pay, and attorneys’ 
fees. 
 
But it is important to note that there are several circumstances that do not afford employees 
protection under the WPA. For example, the WPA does not protect employees who make 
disclosures during the course of performing their job duties. In addition, employees cannot 
claim protection under the WPA if they make disclosures of wrongdoing directly to the 
wrongdoer, or if they make disclosures of publicly known information. 
 
Banking and Financial Institutions   
In 1989, Congress passed three laws that contained anti-retaliation provisions to protect 
both federal and private sector employees within the banking system. The three primary laws 
covering the banking sector are contained within Title 31 of the U.S. Code, the Federal 
Credit Union Act, and the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act.  
 
Monetary Transactions (31 U.S.C. § 5328) 
Title 31 of the U.S. Code outlines the role of money and finance in the U.S. Code. Section 
5328 contains an anti-retaliation provision, prohibiting financial and nondepository financial 
institutions from discharging or otherwise discriminating against any employees who provide 
information to the secretary of the treasury, the attorney general, or any federal supervisory 
agency about possible violations of Title 31 or its regulations, or of specific anti-money 
laundering laws and transactions by unlicensed money transmitting businesses. To bring a 
claim under section 5328, an individual should file a civil action in federal court within two 
years of the retaliation. If an employee brings a successful claim, courts may grant relief, 
including reinstatement, compensatory damages, and “other appropriate actions to remedy 
any past discrimination.”  
 
Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1790b) 
The Federal Credit Union Act (FCUA) established the federal credit unions system and 
provides for the supervision of federal credit unions. The FCUA contains anti-retaliation 
and anti-discrimination provisions that protect credit union and National Credit Union 
Administration employees who provide information to a government body about possible 
legal violations by credit unions or by the directors, officers, or employees of credit unions. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.345 
To bring an anti-retaliation claim under the FCUA, an employee should file a civil action in 
federal court within two years of the retaliation. However, when initiating such action, the 
employee must also file a copy of the complaint with the National Credit Union 
Administration Board. If successful, employees are entitled to reinstatement, compensatory 
damages, and “other appropriate actions to remedy any past discrimination.”  
 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. § 1831j) 
Following the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, Congress passed the Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) to enhance the safety of savings 
institutions. Among other things, FIRREA provides anti-retaliation protection for 
employees of depository institutions and federal banks. FIRREA protects such employees 
from discharge or discriminatory actions with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or 
privileges of employment if the employee reports certain conduct (including possible 
violation of any law or regulation, gross mismanagement, gross waste of funds, abuse of 
authority, or a substantial or specific danger to public health) to a regulatory agency, bank, or 
the attorney general. To file an anti-retaliation claim under FIRREA, an employee should file 
a civil action in federal court within two years of the retaliation. 
 
If successful in bringing an anti-retaliation claim, employees are entitled to reinstatement, 
compensatory damages, and “other appropriate actions to remedy any past discrimination.” 
Courts have also held that in appropriate cases, punitive damages are permitted. 
 
There are also a number of statutes that provide protections to employees who expose 
violations of environmental laws. The provisions of these acts are substantially similar to the 
anti-retaliation provisions under FIRREA. They include the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the 
Water Pollution Control Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Safe Water Drinking 
Act, and the Clean Air Act.  
 
Civil Rights Act of 1871 
Civil rights are rights that the U.S. government has guaranteed and protected. Although the 
Civil Rights Acts refer to several federal statutes that allow individuals whose civil rights 
have been violated to sue their violator(s), this section will examine the anti-retaliation 
protections under section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code.  
 
Where state action is involved, a whistleblower may be able to bring a claim under section 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.346  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
1983, which allows individuals to bring a claim against state actors, acting under color of 
state or local law, alleging a depravation of civil rights guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution or 
federal law. Section 1983 actions may be brought in either federal or state court. States also 
have jurisdiction to hear section 1983 cases. However, if the plaintiff does bring suit in state 
court, the defendant has the right to remove the case to federal court. In a related matter, the 
statute of limitations for claims brought under section 1983 is selected from the law of the 
forum state.  
 
Damages under section 1983 are generally determined according to damages awarded in 
common law tort actions; therefore, the damages that courts may award under section 1983 
include actual or compensatory damages, nominal damages, and punitive damages.  
 
Generally, section 1983 claims brought by public employees concerning whistleblower 
protections allege retaliation in violation of the First Amendment, which provides 
whistleblower protection for public employees that comment on matters of public concern 
that trump an employer’s interest in an efficient workplace. However, in Garcetti v. Ceballos, 
547 U.S. 410 (2006), the Supreme Court limited the extent of First Amendment 
whistleblower protections for government employees, ruling that there is no protection for 
government employees that make disclosures of wrongdoing while in the course of their 
normal job duties. 
 
Federal Government Contracting 
Employees of Defense Contractors (10 U.S.C. § 2409) 
Section 2409 of Title 10, U. S. Code, provides a measure of protection to employees of 
Defense contractors who report violations of laws or regulations relating to defense 
contracts. Under section 2409, an employee of a contractor may not be discharged, demoted, 
or discriminated against for reporting violations of law related to a contract awarded by the 
head of certain federal agencies (i.e., Department of Defense or Department of the Army). A 
person may submit a complaint to the Inspector General (IG) of the contracting agency. If 
an employee does not receive relief through the IG/agency head route, which is generally 
required within 180 days, the employee may bring a claim in federal court. Section 2409 does 
not contain any statute of limitations, and under a successful section 2409 claim, employees 
are entitled to reinstatement, compensatory damages, including back pay, and all costs and 
expenses, including attorneys’ fees, reasonably incurred by the employee in bringing the 
complaint. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.347 
False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §§ 3729–3732) 
To counteract fraudulent billings turned in to the federal government, the False Claims Act 
(FCA) allows private individuals, on behalf of the federal government, to bring claims 
against federal contractors for committing fraud against the government. The FCA contains 
an anti-retaliation provision under Title 31 U.S.C. section 3730(h), which prohibits an 
employer from taking any adverse action (including discharge, demotion, or harassment) 
against an employee “because of lawful acts done by the employee on behalf of the 
employee or others in furtherance of an action under this section, including the investigation 
or initiation of, testimony for, or assistance in an action filed or to be filed under this 
section.” Federal courts have jurisdiction for section 3730(h) claims, and since section 
3730(h) does not contain any statute of limitations, courts generally borrow the most closely 
analogous state limitations period, which begins tolling when the cause of action accrued. 
 
If an employer takes adverse action against the employee, the employee can seek relief 
against the employer, including reinstatement at the same seniority status, an award of two 
times the employee’s back pay plus interest, and any other special damages required to make 
the employee whole. The employee also can receive reimbursement for all the costs of the 
litigation, including attorneys’ fees. 
 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act (FERA), a recently enacted law designed to 
combat fraud, makes significant changes to the False Claims Act. Among other significant 
changes, FERA expanded the anti-retaliation protections under the False Claims Act by 
making these retaliation claims available to government contractors and agents. 
 
Contractor Employees of Civilian Agencies (41 U.S.C. § 265) 
Section 265(a) of Title 41, U.S. Code, provides whistleblower protections for employees of 
civilian contractors with federal agencies by prohibiting government contractors from 
discharging or otherwise retaliating against an employee for reporting employer contract 
violations “to a Member of Congress or an authorized official of an executive agency or the 
Department of Justice.” Section 265(b) provides that such complaints are to be filed with the 
Inspector General of the executive agency or, if the agency does not have an Inspector 
General, to the official designated by the head of the executive agency. However, the statute 
does not include any right to private action for individuals who believe they have been 
aggrieved and, in fact, indicates that no private right exists under the section.  
 
Under this law, an employee who brings a successful claim is entitled to reinstatement and 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.348  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
compensatory damages, including back pay. Additionally, section 265 “permits any aggrieved 
party to appeal the agency head’s order to the appropriate United States Court of Appeals 
within 60 days.” 
 
Major Fraud Act (18 U.S.C. § 1031) 
Congress enacted the Major Fraud Act to provide federal prosecutors with an additional 
criminal statute that targeted major procurement fraud committed against the United States. 
The Act contains a whistleblower protection clause in section 1031(h), providing that any 
individual who is discharged, demoted, harassed, or otherwise mistreated by their employer 
as a result of the individual’s cooperation in the prosecution of offenses under the Act may 
obtain reinstatement, two times the amount of back pay due, and other damages, including 
litigation costs and attorneys’ fees. There is no federal statute of limitations expressly 
applicable to a federal cause of action under section 1031(h), and in such instances, courts 
generally apply the most closely analogous statute of limitations under state law. Section 
1031(g)(1) of the Major Fraud Act authorizes the attorney general to pay up to $250,000 in 
certain circumstances for information regarding possible prosecutions under this section.  
 
Employees and Members of the Armed Forces 
Non-Appropriated Fund Employees (10 U.S.C. § 1587) 
Section 1587 of Title 10, U.S. Code, prohibits persons subject to this regulation from taking 
retaliatory action against a civilian employee, paid from non-appropriated funds, of the 
Armed Forces for disclosing information of a violation or “mismanagement, a gross waste of 
funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety.”  
 
Employees who believe they were subject to retaliatory action should file their section 1587 
complaint with the inspector general of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), which will 
then determine whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant an investigation. If 
investigation is warranted, the IG DoD conducts the investigation of reprisal allegations. 
Upon completing the investigation, the IG DoD reports its findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations to the Director of Administration and Management, who is responsible 
for adjudicating reprisal complaints and directing appropriate corrective action.  
 
Military Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (10 U.S.C. § 1034) 
The Military Whistleblower Protection Act, which provides whistleblower protection for 
members of the armed forces, prohibits any individual from retaliating against a service 
member for making or preparing communications concerning illegal conduct to certain 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.349 
statutorily defined recipients. To receive protection under section 1034, service members 
should submit a complaint to the Department of Defense Inspector General or to the 
Department of the Army Inspector General within 60 days of learning of the adverse action. 
A service member who brings a successful claim is entitled to administrative remedy only; 
there is no private right of action under section 1034.  
 
State Statutes 
Every state has some form of legislation protecting whistleblowers. Many are very specific as 
to the manner with which a report must be filed, as well as the particular agencies that must 
receive the report. A particular state also may require that the first report made by an 
employee be directed to the employer under the notion that the employer be given an 
opportunity to correct the circumstances that give rise to a potential violation. 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.401 
INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS DURING EXAMINATIONS 
 
Employees involved in investigations of suspected fraud have certain rights and obligations, 
whether the employee is merely a bystander to the fraud who may have some information 
relevant to the investigation or is the person actually suspected of committing the fraud. 
Many of these rights and obligations, however, are not perfectly clear, and they typically vary 
from case to case, generally depending on the employee’s contractual rights, applicable laws, 
and business policies. Therefore, fraud examiners conducting investigations into suspected 
misconduct must be flexible enough to adapt quickly to the unique situations they 
encounter. 
 
 
Employee’s Duty to Cooperate 
A duty to cooperate exits in every employer/employee relationship. Some states have 
statutes defining the scope of this duty, while in others, the duty is found to be implied from 
the basic nature of the employment relationship. For instance, California Labor Code section 
2856 states that an employee “shall substantially comply with all directions of his employer 
concerning the service on which he is engaged” unless compliance is impossible, unlawful, 
or would impose unreasonable burdens on the employee.  
 
The duty to cooperate extends to workplace investigations; therefore, employees have a duty 
to cooperate during an internal investigation as long as what is requested from them is 
reasonable. 
 
What is reasonable will be determined by the facts and circumstances of the particular case 
and by the duties for which the employee was hired. For example, if inventory items were 
missing, it would probably be reasonable to request that a warehouse supervisor review 
inventory records because this falls within the scope of his work duties. It might not be 
reasonable to ask the same supervisor to review detail tapes from the company’s cash 
registers. It almost certainly would not be reasonable to ask the warehouse supervisor to let 
company investigators search his personal residence.  
 
The issue of whether an employee has a duty to cooperate often comes up when 
investigators seek to interview employees about suspected workplace misconduct. In general, 
interviews should be considered reasonable if the interview addresses matters within the 
scope of the employee’s actions or duties.  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.402  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employee’s Rights During the Investigation 
While the employee has a duty to cooperate, the employee also has certain other rights that 
define the scope of that duty. Employee rights, however, vary from case to case, generally 
depending on the employee’s contractual rights, applicable federal and state statutes, and 
constitutional protections. Thus, before beginning any fraud examination, it is important for 
the fraud examiner to determine the employee’s rights.  
 
Contractual Rights 
An employee may have contractual rights that limit the ability of the employer to compel full 
cooperation in a fraud examination. For example, if the employee is a member of a union, 
the union contract or collective bargaining agreement might contain certain restrictions on 
the company’s investigatory procedures. For instance, the company might be required to 
notify the union before the interview, and the employee may have the right to have a union 
representative present. (See NLRB v. Weingarten, Inc., 420 U.S. 251 [1975]). Other employees 
might have a written employment agreement, which might contain provisions concerning 
the employee’s rights during an investigation. 
 
Other employees might have a written employment agreement, which may contain 
provisions concerning the employee’s rights during an investigation. In addition, many 
courts have held that company policies, employee manuals, and past practices can create 
“implied” contractual relationships between the employer and the employee. Therefore, if 
the company deviates from these historical practices, the target of the investigation may 
claim that they were singled out and investigated differently than others in similar 
circumstances.  
 
Whistleblowers 
Federal law and many state laws provide protection to employees who report improper or 
illegal acts to government authorities. Most of these laws protect the employee from any 
adverse employment action or retaliatory action from the employer. For more information 
on whistleblower laws, see the Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes section in the “The Law 
Related to Fraud (Part 2)” chapter above.  
 
Employee’s Constitutional Rights 
The United States Constitution protects individuals from abuse of governmental power, and 
several Constitutional provisions can come into play in the course of a fraud investigation. 
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibits unreasonable searches and 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.403 
seizures. The Fifth Amendment provides that a person cannot be compelled to give 
information that might incriminate him. The Sixth Amendment provides that a person has 
the right to an attorney and to confront the witnesses against him. Additionally, while the 
Constitution contains no express guarantee of privacy, courts have found that individual 
privacy rights are implied from many of the express protections in the Bill of Rights. 
 
The general rule is that the United States Constitution only limits government action; it does 
not limit the powers of private employers in conducting a corporate investigation. That rule, 
however, is subject to several limitations, and, although a private employer usually cannot be 
sued for a violation of the Fourth, Fifth, or Sixth Amendments, these provisions still have 
important implications for the fraud investigator. 
 
Private Action Versus State Action 
For an employee to sue an employer for the violation of a constitutional right, there must be 
some form of “state action” involved. State acti on is involved during any investigation by a 
state or federal entity, including investigations of their own employees. 
 
There are no bright-line rules regarding when an investigation can be considered to involve 
state action. The following examples, however, could be considered to involve state action: 
• Investigations conducted by a private company but at the suggestion of the state or 
federal authorities 
• Investigations begun by a private company that later are taken over or expanded by state 
or federal authorities 
• Joint investigations with or aided by state or federal authorities 
• Investigations conducted by a private company that are required by state or federal law 
• Searches or interrogations conducted by outside investigators who are off-duty state, 
local, or federal authorities 
 
Investigation by a Private Company Pursuant to a Federal Statute 
If an investigation is conducted by a private company in accordance with federal laws, an 
issue is raised as to whether the corporation’s internal investigation could be considered state 
action.  
 
For example, in the case of Skinner v. Railway Labor Executives Ass’n, 489 U.S. 602 (1989), the 
U.S. Supreme Court found that a private railroad acted as an agent for the government when 
it complied with the provisions of the Federal Railroad Administration Act in administering 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.404  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
drug tests to its employees. Under the regulation at issue, the railroad was required by law to 
conduct the test and the Federal Railroad Administration was authorized to receive the test 
results. 
 
If a company is conducting an investigation pursuant to such federal laws as the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934 or the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977, the company should be 
aware of the possible implications of state action. Therefore, before any adverse action is 
taken against an employee, legal advice should be obtained. 
 
Employee Protection from Polygraph Examinations 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act prohibits the use of polygraphs by most private 
employers, unless the employer is engaged in an ongoing investigation involving economic 
loss or injury to the employer in the employer’s business and has a reasonable suspicion that 
the employee is involved in the incident. 
 
Employers subject to this Act cannot use polygraphs to screen applicants for employment, 
and they cannot discharge an employee for refusing to take an exam. This Act, however, 
does not protect government employees.  
 
In addition, some courts have found the use of polygraphs actionable on common law 
grounds under certain circumstances. For example, some state courts have held that 
polygraph tests can constitute an invasion of privacy. 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA applies to the gathering 
of many other types of information about an individual through third parties. 
 
The FCRA regulates the type of information that can be contained in a consumer credit 
report; it restricts credit bureaus from releasing an individual’s credit information to any 
third parties without authorization, and it sets forth the circumstances under which a third-
 party can obtain a copy of the report. 
 
If the FCRA does apply, it means that an examiner cannot obtain certain information about 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.405 
a person unless that person has received certain notices and signed a consent form. The 
failure to do so can mean civil penalties. Also, if an examiner obtains a copy of a credit 
report, that fact will be noted on the report. 
 
Often, fraud examiners will need to obtain consumer reports for pre-employment purposes 
and workplace investigations of fraud an misconduct.  
 
For more information about the FCRA, see the Obtaining Information About Employees 
section below. 
 
 
Interviews 
 
Introduction 
Interviews, and especially admission-seeking interviews, may expose the company and the 
fraud examiner to certain legal risks. Thus, before engaging in an interview, the examiner 
must understand the ramifications of their actions, which requires an understanding of 
certain legal issues and how they limit or affect the ways in which an interview may be 
conducted. The following is an overview of some of the most common legal issues that may 
affect interview situations.   
 
And since employee rights vary from case to case, fraud examiners should always consult 
with an attorney regarding the specific laws and regulations for their state or locality. 
 
Restrictions on Employee Interviews 
In the context of an internal investigation, employees of private entities generally do not 
enjoy constitutional protections. However, they may possess contractual rights that must be 
respected during the course of an interview. For example, an employee covered by a 
collective-bargaining agreement may have the right to have a representative present during 
the interview.  
 
Thus, it is in the company’s best interest to review all aspects of the employer-employee 
relationship, including company policies, contractual relationships, and prevailing law before 
conducting the interview.   
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.406  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employee’s Right Against Self-Incrimination 
The Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution provides that a person cannot be 
compelled to give information that may incriminate him in a criminal case. It provides:  
 
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a 
presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or 
in the militia, when in actual service in time of war and public danger; nor shall any person be 
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall be compelled in 
any criminal case to be a witness ag ainst himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use without just 
compensation. 
 
The Fifth Amendment’s right against self-incrimination contains two basic protections: it 
protects a person from being forced to give information that could be used to convict him 
of a criminal offense, and it prevents the state from punishing an employee for his silence or 
otherwise using his exercise of that right against him. 
 
Public Employers 
As stated above, constitutional protections generally only apply to public employees. This 
means that employees of federal, state, and local governments must be afforded protection 
under the Fifth Amendment. A public employer cannot fire employees for refusing to 
answer questions that might incriminate them. The leading case on this issue is Garrity v. New 
Jersey, 385 U.S. 493 (1967). In Garrity, several New Jersey police officers were threatened with 
dismissal from their jobs if they refused to answer questions relating to a conspiracy to 
obstruct traffic laws. The officers, faced with termination, answered the questions and were 
subsequently prosecuted. The U.S. Supreme Court found that the statements had been 
improperly coerced and thus they were not admissible at trial.  
 
The Fifth Amendment only protects persons against compelled  testimony. Thus, if an 
employee voluntarily confesses to a crime, they can be fired without violating their 
constitutional rights. The confession, however, must be truly voluntary; the employee cannot 
be coerced in any way to give self-incriminating evidence during an interview.  
 
If a public employer or government official wants to compel an employee to provide 
answers with potential criminal liability and administrative consequences, they may get 
written approval to offer the employee a Kalkines warning. Kalkines warnings are a form of 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.407 
immunity that precludes prosecution against the employee for statements derived from the 
compelled testimony. However, this immunity does not prevent prosecution against the 
employee where the government received evidence from a legitimate independent source, 
and it does not prevent prosecution of an employee for providing the government with false 
statements or answers. Additionally, if an employee refuses to answer questions after 
receiving a proper Kalkines warning, the public employer may take disciplinary actions, 
including dismissal.  
 
It should also be noted that the right against self-incrimination only applies in criminal cases. 
Thus, an employee — public or private — can be fired for refusing to answer a question when 
the answer will only lead to an administrative punishment or a civil suit, but not to criminal 
conviction. Furthermore, in a civil lawsuit, it is permissible to draw an adverse inference 
from the fact that an employee refused to answer an incriminating question; it is not 
permissible to draw a negative inference in a criminal case from refusal to answer such a 
question.  
 
In practice, however, it may be very difficult to draw the distinction between questions that 
will lead to criminal prosecution and those that will only lead to civil or administrative 
punishments. If an employee is compelled to answer a question and the answer provides 
evidence of criminal wrongdoing that was previously unknown, that evidence could be 
inadmissible in a subsequent criminal case. It is a better practice not to compel answers from 
public employees in any setting so that constitutional issues can be avoided.  
 
Even if a setting is deemed noncustodial and Miranda warnings are not required, this does not 
eliminate the public employee’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
Regardless of the setting, a public employer cannot compel its employees to choose between 
their constitutional rights and their job.  
 
Private Employers 
The Fifth Amendment generally does not apply to private employers because, in the absence 
of a state action, there is no constitutional protection against self-incrimination. Therefore, 
an employee might be subject to dismissal by a private company if he fails to cooperate in an 
investigation. However, there are situations, as discussed above, where private companies 
may be held liable for violating their employees’ constitutional rights. When there is a 
sufficient nexus between a regulated company and the government such that the private 
company essentially acts as an agent of the government, then that private company’s actions 
will be treated as actions of the government itself. In such a case, constitutional protections 
for the private company’s employees are triggered.  
 
The key to the determination is whether the private company is acting on behalf of the 
government as an agent of the government. For example, if a private entity were directed by the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.408  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
police to interview its employees in connection with a crime, this entity would be acting as 
an agent of the police. In this situation, the private company’s employees could not be 
terminated for refusing to answer questions that might incriminate them.  
 
It should also be noted that some states have expanded the rights of private employees to 
include protections for certain constitutional rights. Thus, an interviewer should consult with 
an attorney before taking any adverse action against an employee who refuses to answer 
potentially incriminating questions.  
 
Miranda Warnings 
Designed to protect an individual’s Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination, 
Miranda warnings advice suspects that they have the right not to answer questions and the 
right to legal counsel during interrogations. Miranda warnings are required only if a person is 
being interrogated by public authorities in a custodial setting. Custodial setting refers to 
questioning initiated by law enforcement officers after a person has been taken into custody, 
or otherwise deprived of his freedom or action in any significant way. As a result, both 
private and public employers might interview employees in noncustodial settings without 
giving Miranda warnings. 
 
In subsequent civil proceedings, an adverse inference might be drawn from silence in 
response to questioning. 
 
Presence of Corporate Attorney 
Although Miranda warnings might not be required, a company’s attorney may conduct or be 
present during the interview of company employees. Because the company’s lawyer 
represents only the interests of the company and not those of the individual employee, an 
employee who is being interviewed must not be permitted — or misled — to believe that the 
company’s lawyer represents his interests during an interview. For this reason, if a corporate 
attorney is present during the interview, it is good policy to inform the employee of several 
things before the interview begins. Counsel should inform the employee of the following: 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.409 
• Counsel represents the company, not the employee. 
• The purpose of the interview is to obtain information to provide legal advice to the 
company. 
• Information provided by the employee initially will be treated as confidential, but the 
company ultimately will determine whether to disclose the information to law 
enforcement agencies. 
• The employee is expected to answer the questions fully and truthfully. 
 
The employee should not discuss the interview with anyone (either inside or outside the 
company) except his attorney. 
 
Depending on the circumstances, the attorney might also wish to advise the employee that 
he is free to retain an attorney. Factors to include in determining whether to give such advice 
include the degree of evidence of the employee’s culpability, whether the evidence is such to 
draw a conclusion concerning a violation of the law, the likelihood of criminal prosecution if 
the results of the investigation are disclosed, the existence of a conflict of interest between 
the employee and the company, and state ethical codes. 
 
Employee’s Right to Counsel 
The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right to counsel. The 
relevant text provides:  
 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right … to be confronted with witnesses 
against him, to have compulsory process for obta ining witnesses in his favor, and to have the 
assistance of counsel for his defense. 
 
Applicability 
If no state action is involved, a private employer can interview an employee without the 
presence of his attorney. However, the employee, an individual, always has the right to 
consult an attorney, but there is typically no legal obligation to consult the employee’s lawyer 
prior to the interview or allow the employee’s lawyer to sit in during an interview. 
 
Whether an employee will be permitted to be accompanied by a representative during an 
interview generally depends on the particular circumstances. If the employee is covered by a 
collective-bargaining agreement, for example, the terms of the agreement will generally 
control whether a representative can be present. In the absence of such circumstances, the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.410  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
general rule is that it is at the company’s discretion whether it will allow the employee to be 
represented during an interview. 
 
Employee’s Right to Due Process 
The Fourteenth Amendment guarantees the right to due process: 
 
All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of  the state wherein they reside. No state shall make or enforce 
any law, which shall abridge the privileges and immunities of citizens of the United States; nor 
shall any state deprive any person of life, libert y, or property without due process of law; nor 
deny to any person within its jurisdict ion the equal protection of the laws … 
 
In the context of a fraud investigation, the constitutional right to due process usually refers 
to procedural rights that must be observed before the employee suffers any adverse 
consequence. Again, the right to due process usually is not applicable to employees of 
private companies. State or federal employers, however, might be required to provide the 
wrongdoing employee with the following: 
• Written notice of the charges 
• Adequate opportunity to rebut any charges brought prior to any disciplinary action being 
taken, which might include the right to call witnesses and the right to be represented by 
an attorney 
 
Even in the absence of constitutional due process protections, similar procedures to ensure 
fundamental fairness may be required even of private employers because of contractual 
provisions, collective bargaining agreements, established company policies, or applicable 
labor or employment statutes. Thus, private employers might also wish to employ the above 
procedures to avoid a possible civil suit by the employee. 
 
State Constitutions 
Many states have constitutional provisions concerning self-incrimination, right to counsel, 
and due process. The law of your particular state should be examined closely. In some 
instances, state constitutions provide broader protections than the U.S. Constitution. 
 
Federal Statutes 
National Labor Relations Act 
The National Labor Relations Act prohibits any form of interrogation by employers that 
Law Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.411 
interferes with the rights of the employee to organize, bargain, or otherwise engage in 
concerted activities for the purpose of bargaining or other mutual aid or protection. An 
employer might not question an employee about any of these protected activities, either his 
own or that of other employees. 
 
RULES REGARDING NON-UNION REPRESENTATION DURING INTERVIEWS 
In June 2004, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) overruled a controversial 
decision regarding the rights of non-union employees to have a “representative” present 
during interviews, and reinstated the former 1975 ruling that non-union employees are not 
entitled to representation during investigatory interviews (I BM Corp., 341 NLRB No. 148 
(2004)). The NLRB reasoned that allowing co-workers to sit in as representatives during 
investigatory interviews would compromise the requisite confidentiality, sensitivity, and 
thoroughness of the interview. Accordingly, non-union employers no longer have a legal 
obligation to accept an employee’s request for such representation.  
 
UNION EMPLOYEES  
Since 1975 and the U.S. Supreme Court decision of NLRB v. Weingarten, 420 U.S. 251 (1975), 
union employees have had the right to union representation during an investigatory 
interview, provided that the employee “reasonably believes” the interview “might result in 
disciplinary action.” This right derived from the National Labor Relations Act, which 
provides that employees have the right “to act in concert for mutual aid and protection.” In 
the years since Weingarten, this right has only been applied in cases where the employee under 
investigation was covered by a collective-bargaining agreement. 
 
FORMER LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
In the case of Epilepsy Foundation of Northeast Ohio (331 NLRB No. 92; decided July 10, 2000), 
the NLRB extended the so-called Weingarten rights to non-union employees. The case involved 
two workers who were fired from the Epilepsy Foundation. Prior to their discharge, the two 
employees wrote a memo that was critical of their supervisor. Later, the executive director 
requested to meet with one of the employees and the supervisor. The employee requested to 
meet with the executive director alone, but the request was denied. The employee then asked 
if the co-author of the memo could be present at the meeting. This request was also denied. 
When the employee still expressed apprehension about the meeting, he was told to go home, 
and he was fired the next day for insubordination. 
 
The NLRB ruled that discharging the employee for refusing to attend the meeting violated 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.412  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the National Labor Relations Act. A majority of the board felt that the rights set forth in 
Weingarten should apply equally in circumstances in which employees are not represented by 
a union. They reasoned that the right to have a co-worker present at an investigatory 
interview “greatly enhances the employees’ opportunities to act in concert to address the 
concern that the employer does not initiate or continue a practice of imposing punishment 
unjustly.” 
 
CURRENT LAW: NON-UNION EMPLOYEES  
A representative may be present where the employer allows for such. 
 
No longer must an employer allow a representative to be present where an employee 
specifically requests representation. However, an employer is not precluded from allowing 
the employee to have representation upon request. 
 
Employers can always decide not to conduct an interview, but refusing to do so may cause 
problems of its own. If the company administers disciplinary action without first hearing the 
employee’s side of the story, then the company may be handing the employee a lawsuit for 
wrongful discharge or a discrimination claim. As a general rule, it is difficult to defend a 
termination action if the employer did not at least listen to the employee’s version of events 
prior to taking action. 
 
Where the employer allows for employee representation, the employer need not “bargain 
with” the employee’s representative.  
 
Presumably, the ruling in Weingarten will continue to control this issue. In Weingarten, the 
Supreme Court stated that the representative’s role is to assist the employee, and he “may do 
so by attempting to clarify facts or suggest other employees who may have knowledge of 
them.” The Court made it clear that the employer may insist on hearing the subject’s version 
of events, and the representative is not allowed to direct the subject not to answer a question 
or to tell the subject to answer questions only once. Therefore, the employer is allowed to 
conduct the interview without interference by the representative. 
 
Employees do not have a right to be represented at an interview by a private attorney.  
 
Under Epilepsy, where an employer failed to comply with the rules requiring representation 
upon employee request, it could have been subjected to an administrative cease-and-desist 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.413 
order and/or reinstatement of the employee with back pay. Due to the overturning of 
Epilepsy and reinstatement of Weingarten, however, these penalties will probably not apply 
unless the non-union employer agrees to allow employee representation. 
 
If an employee requests any type of representation at an interview, you should immediately 
consult your legal counsel. You should also consult counsel to review your existing policies 
and procedures to ensure that you are aware of the legal duties, ramifications, and remedies 
surrounding employee representation. 
 
Nondiscrimination Statutes 
Included in the Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871, Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 
and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1970, is the prohibition of singling out 
employees for interviews based on their race, national origin, religion, sex, or age. 
 
Fair Labor Standards 
The Fair Labor Standards require an employer to pay an employee for time spent in an 
interview. 
 
Common Law Protection in Connection with Interviews  
Even though employees of private organizations do not, in most cases, enjoy constitutional 
protections in connection with interviews, they do have certain protections that arise out of 
common law. These protections also apply to employees of public organizations. Fraud 
examiners must be aware of the relevant common-law protections that relate to internal 
interviews and must be careful not to expose themselves to legal liability. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
While modern tort law includes four categories of invasion of privacy, this discussion only 
addresses the two most common forms of invasion of privacy applicable to fraud 
examinations: intrusion upon seclusion and public disclosure of private facts. 
 
INTRUSION INTO SECLUSION 
Intrusion upon seclusion occurs when an individual intentionally intrudes “upon the solitude 
or seclusion of another or his private affairs or concerns” and “the intrusion would be highly 
offensive to a reasonable person.” Questioning employees about activities not related to job 
performance might constitute an invasion of privacy. 
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.414  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The elements of this tort include:  
• An intentional intrusion 
• Into an area where an individual has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
• The intrusion would be highly offensive or objectionable to a reasonable person  
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE FACTS 
The tort of public disclosure of private facts occurs when one party makes public statements 
about another party’s private life that are not of public concern. For instance, disclosing 
information obtained in an interview to individuals not involved in the investigation. 
 
Unlike defamation claims, which are discussed below, this cause of action can arise even if 
the statements are true. The key is that the information is private in nature and it is not a 
matter of public interest. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Intentional infliction of emotional distress refers to any unprivileged conduct that is so 
outrageous and egregious that it exceeds all bounds usually tolerated by civilized society and 
that is intended to cause injury (or was committed with reckless disregard for the likelihood 
of its causing injury) to another.  
 
For an employee to state a claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress, he must 
establish all of the following elements: 
• The employer engaged in extreme and outrageous conduct 
• The employer’s conduct was intended to cause severe emotional distress (or, if not 
intended, would cause severe emotional distress in a reasonable person) 
• The employee actually did suffer emotional or mental distress as a result of the 
employer’s conduct 
 
It is not enough that the employee is merely “upset” by the conduct. For example, 
questioning alone, even coupled with accusations and raised voices, probably will not give 
rise to such a claim. 
 
Defamation 
Defamation is an unprivileged publication of a falsehood about a person that tends to harm 
the reputation of that person. The law of defamation actually consists of two torts: libel and 
slander. Libel is basically defamation that appears in written form, while slander involves 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.415 
defamatory remarks that are only spoken. 
 
In general, the elements of these two causes of action are essentially the same. To recover 
for defamation, the plaintiff must prove the following elements:  
• The defendant made an untrue statement of fact 
• The statement was communicated (published) to third parties 
• The statement was made on an unprivileged occasion 
• The statement damaged the subject’s reputation 
 
The threat of a defamation lawsuit is always present when allegations of wrongdoing are 
made against certain employees. For example, a claim of defamation might arise in the 
context of an interview as a result of unfounded accusations or statements made by the 
interviewer, where someone in addition to the employee and the interviewer is present. 
 
Assuming that an employee can establish that defamatory statements were made and 
communicated to a third-party, the most important defense to a defamation action for fraud 
examiners is that of qualified business privilege. If this privilege applies, then no liability can 
attach to the speaker.  
 
The qualified business privilege generally applies if a person makes a statement (1) in good 
faith; (2) regarding a subject in which the person making the statement has a legitimate 
interest or duty; and (3) to those who have an interest in the matter.  
 
The privilege, however, might be lost if the defamatory statements are communicated with 
“malice.” This usually means that the person communicating the statements knew they were 
false or made them without regard to whether they were false. 
 
Some courts have held that there can be no defamation arising from an employer’s inquiries 
of its employees concerning their possible involvement in a violation of company policy. 
The employer might even have duty to investigate, arising from its duty to protect its 
business, its employees, and the public from wrongdoing employees. 
 
Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
Several states recognize a duty on the part of employers to deal with their employees fairly 
and in good faith. This duty might include abiding by all provisions in an employee 
handbook. For example, it might contain a provision that interviews will be conducted in a 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.416  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
professional manner and only concerning job related matters. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
Employers and employees may enter into contracts that govern the length and terms of 
employment, and if the employer violates the contract, the employee can sue for breach of 
contract. 
 
Moreover, employment contracts can be express or implied. Just because the company has 
not signed a written, formalized contract with an employee, this does not mean that there is 
no employment contract. Collective-bargaining agreements, employee handbooks, and even 
oral promises can establish an employment contract and limit the company’s ability to 
discipline or fire an employee. Before taking any disciplinary action against an employee, 
make sure you are aware of the true status of the employment relationship.  
 
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment is restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another without consent 
or legal justification. A claim of false imprisonment might be made if an employee is 
detained in any way during a search either of the employee or of the employee’s desk, locker, 
etc. Generally, an employer is entitled to question an employee at work about a violation of 
company policy without incurring liability as long as the employee submits to the 
questioning voluntarily; that is, not as a result of threats or force. However, the length, 
nature, and manner of the interview will determine whether liability arises. 
 
False imprisonment factors include: 
• Size and nature of the room where an interview takes place (small, windowless, not easily 
accessible is a negative) 
• Lighting in room—soft versus severe 
• Requiring the employee’s presence or continued presence by any amount of force, 
including holding the employee’s arm to escort him 
• Violent behavior of any kind during the in terview, including yelling, pounding on desks, 
or kicking furniture or walls 
• Refusing to allow the employee to leave the room, such as by pushing the employee into 
a chair or locking the door 
• The number of people involved in the interview 
 
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.417 
Searches and Surveillance 
Workplace privacy is a rapidly evolving area of law that can arise in numerous contexts 
involving the employer-employee relationship, such as surveillance and monitoring, searches, 
and polygraph testing. In most cases, an employer might investigate its workplace for 
wrongdoing by means of workplace searches and surveillance of workplace areas or 
employees. However, an employee’s privacy may be protected by the Constitution, state 
constitutions, federal and state statutes, or common law limitations. 
 
Employee Rights Under the Fourth Amendment  
The Fourth Amendment is the principal constitutional limitation on searches and seizures by 
public authorities. It states: 
 
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against 
unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched, and the persons or things to be seized. 
 
In short, the Fourth Amendment prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures. That is, it 
prohibits public employers from unreasonably invading their employees’ privacy to conduct 
a workplace search, and it prohibits unreasonable surveillance of employees (such as 
videotaping or wiretapping) where they would reasonably expect privacy. 
 
The Warrant Requirement 
All searches and seizures must be reasonable. Whether it is reasonable to conduct a search 
and whether the activities were conducted in a reasonable manner is determined by the 
totality of the circumstances. A reasonable search is one carried out pursuant to a warrant 
(i.e., a court order that grants authorities the right to take a particular action) issued upon a 
showing of probable cause. Thus, in some circumstances, the Fourth Amendment requires 
that the government obtain a warrant before they conduct a search.  
 
Moreover, in Katz v. United States, 389 U.S. 347 (1967), the Supreme Court held that the 
Fourth Amendment “protects people, not places” (meaning that its provisions extend 
beyond the property line of the citizen), that the amendment applies wherever there is a 
“reasonable expectation of privacy,” and that a search without a warrant is “per se  
unreasonable,” in the absence of exigent circumstances. Thus, the police normally need to 
obtain a warrant not only to search a house, but also to intercept calls from a public 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.418  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
telephone booth, or inspect the contents of a safe deposit box, or to otherwise intrude into 
matters that the courts would reasonably consider to be private. 
 
In Johnson v. United States, 333 U.S. 10 (1948), the Supreme Court ruled that all warrants must 
be issued by a judge or magistrate (the latter a federal judicial officer empowered to hear 
misdemeanor cases), explaining that “the point  of the Fourth Amendment … is not that it 
denies law enforcement the support of the usual inferences which reasonable men draw 
from evidence. Its protection consists in requiring that those inferences be drawn by a 
neutral and detached magistrate instead of being judged by the officer engaged in the often 
competitive enterprise of ferreting out crime.” 
 
Additionally, all warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That 
is, all warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” 
and they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. 
 
The “probable cause” requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the central restraint on the 
power of the police to search. Probable cause has been defined as those facts and 
circumstances sufficient to cause a person of reasonable caution to believe that a crime has 
been committed and that the accused committed it. It requires more than mere suspicion or 
hunch, but less than virtual certainty. “Reasonable grounds to believe” is probably as good a 
definition as any. 
 
Furthermore, all warrants must particularly describe the place to be searched or the person 
or things to be seized. The particularity requirement was intended to prevent prevents “the 
issuance of warrants on loose, vague or doubtful bases of facts,”  an abuse that outraged the 
constitutional drafters. Go-Bart Importing Co. v. United States, 282 US 344, 357 (1931). In 
today’s terms, the clause would prohibit a search warrant in a white-collar investigation or a 
subpoena that commanded the production of all the defendant’s books and records whether 
or not relevant to the investigation or trial. 
 
But even if a warrant is technically required, there are a number of recognized exceptions to 
the warrant requirement, principally: 
• Workplace searches by government employers 
• Searches incident to arrest 
• Searches of motor vehicles 
• Exigent or emergency circumstances, to prevent the destruction of evidence, or while in 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.419 
“hot pursuit” of a suspect 
• When the search is conducted pursuant to a valid, voluntary consent 
• When the evidence is in “plain view” 
• Border, customs, and prison searches 
 
WORKPLACE SEARCHES BY GOVERNMENT EMPLOYERS 
Public employers are not generally required to obtain a warrant when they conduct searches 
for investigations of workplace misconduct. In O’Connor v. Ortega, 480 U.S. 709 (1987), the 
Supreme Court held that requiring warrants for all forms of public workplace searches 
would be unworkable and would impose intolerable burdens on public employers. 
Therefore, the Court ruled that workplace searches should be held to a lower standard.  
 
In reaching this decision, the Court stated that when public employers conduct a workplace 
investigation, their interest is substantially different from the normal interests of law 
enforcement. The goal of public employers is to ensure that their offices run efficiently, not 
to enforce the law. Requiring these employers to obtain a warrant for every workplace search 
would impede the effective administration of the government’s work.  
 
The Court also found that while public employees have some legitimate privacy interests in 
the workplace, these interests are less than in other places, such as their homes. Government 
offices are provided to public employees for the purpose of doing government work, and 
employees can avoid exposing truly personal belongings at work by simply leaving them at 
home. Thus, by balancing the strong government interest in maintaining an efficient 
workplace against the diminished privacy interests of government employees, the court 
justified the use of a lower standard for workplace searches by government employers. 
Instead of a warrant requirement based on probable cause, government employers are 
generally held to a standard of reasonableness under all the circumstances.  
 
THE REASONABLENESS STANDARD  
Workplace searches by government employers are subject to the reasonableness standard in 
two circumstances:  
• For noninvestigatory, work-related purposes, which are wholly unrelated to illegal 
conduct (such as retrieving a file from someone’s desk) 
• For investigations of work-related misconduct 
 
When a public employer conducts an investigation of work-related misconduct, and when 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.420  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that investigation necessitates a search of an employee’s workspace, the employer is not 
generally required to obtain a warrant to perform the search, nor is the employer required to 
make a showing of probable cause that the suspect has committed a crime. This does not 
mean, however, that there are no restrictions on the employer’s ability to conduct the search; 
it still must meet the test for “reasonableness under all the circumstances.”  
 
There is a two-part test to determine if a workplace search is reasonable:  
• The search must be justified at its inception 
• The search must be conducted in a way that is reasonably related in scope to the 
circumstances that justified the interference in the first place 
 
A search is justified at its inception if there are reasonable grounds for suspecting that the 
search will turn up evidence that the employee is guilty of work-related misconduct, or if the 
search is necessary for a noninvestigatory purpose such as to retrieve a file. A search is not 
justified at its inception simply because an employer thinks that the suspect might be 
engaged in workplace misconduct. The employer must be able to demonstrate a reasonable, 
clear suspicion, based on factual information, that the area to be searched contains evidence 
of misconduct.  
 
The second part of the test requires that the search be reasonable in scope. The fact that a 
search is justified at its inception does not give the employer carte blanche  authority to intrude 
upon the suspect’s privacy in all areas. The search must be no broader than is necessary to 
serve the organization’s legitimate, work-related purposes.  
 
REASONABLE EXPECTATIONS OF PRIVACY  
The Fourth Amendment only applies to workplace searches by government employers 
where an employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy. Thus, to determine if a 
workplace search will violate an employee’s Fourth Amendment rights, an employer must 
first determine if the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. There is no bright-line rule for determining whether an employee has a reasonable 
privacy expectation in a particular area. Such a privacy interest can exist for a desk drawer, a 
file cabinet, a locker, or even an entire office, depending on the circumstances. The issue is 
whether a reasonable person would expect the area to be free from intrusion. The employee 
does not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the area. Thus, even though a public employer may own the office where an 
employee works, that employee can still have a privacy interest in the office that prohibits 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.421 
the employer from conducting a search.  
 
The key factor to consider is whether the employee has exclusive control over the area in 
question. If so, this tends to show that the employee has a reasonable expectation of privacy 
in that area. For instance, assume that an employee has a file cabinet in his office; that he is 
the only person who uses that file cabinet; that the cabinet has a lock on it; that the 
employee is the only person with a key; and that the cabinet remains locked when the 
employee is not using it. These facts indicate that the employee has exclusive control over 
the contents of the file cabinet, and thus has a reasonable expectation of privacy in its 
contents. In other words, based on the circumstances, the employee would be justified in 
believing that others cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without his consent. The 
employee in this scenario has a constitutionally protected privacy interest in the contents of 
the file cabinet. A search of this file cabinet by the public employer would have to comport 
with the reasonableness  standard as discussed above.  
 
But if the file cabinet does not have a lock, if several employees store and retrieve files from 
that cabinet, and if it is generally understood that they can do so without employees’ 
consent, then the employee cannot reasonably expect that the contents of the file cabinet 
will be private. Under these facts, the employee would not have a reasonable expectation of 
privacy in the file cabinet; therefore, a search of that file cabinet would not violate the 
employee’s Fourth Amendment rights.  
 
Reasonable privacy expectations can also attach to communications. Employees might 
reasonably expect personal phone conversations or e-mail messages to be private and free 
from monitoring.  
 
In terms of surveillance, employees are likely to have reasonable privacy expectations in 
bathrooms, changing rooms, and other personal areas within the workplace.  
 
Obviously, there are a lot of factors that go into determining whether an employee has a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Before conducting a search or surveillance, employers 
should consult legal counsel to make sure they are not intruding upon an employee’s privacy 
interests. 
 
SEARCHES INCIDENT TO ARREST 
Police officers may, without a warrant, conduct a limited search incident to an a lawful arrest. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.422  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The search, however, must be limited to the arrestee’s body and the area within his 
immediate control. This exception is designed to protect the officers and to prevent the 
destruction of evidence. For the search to be valid, the arrest must be valid (i.e., based on 
probable cause, and not merely a pretext to justify a search). If the arrest is unlawful when 
made, it cannot be justified by the fruits of the subsequent search, and all evidence obtained 
must be suppressed. 
 
SEARCHES OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
An automobile, airplane, or vessel may be searched without a warrant if there is probable 
cause to believe it contains contraband or other evidence of a crime. This is because of the 
mobility of the vehicles (hence the risk that evidence may be lost or destroyed while a 
warrant is being obtained) and the lower expectation of privacy associated with vehicles. If 
there is probable cause to believe that the vehicle contains contraband, the police are also 
permitted to remove the vehicle from the scene to a stationhouse to conduct a search 
without obtaining a warrant. Furthermore, the police also may conduct warrantless 
“inventory” searches of impounded vehicles  to secure and protect the owner’s personal 
property, and they may seize contraband or other evidence discovered as a result.  
 
It may also be permissible for law enforcement to make warrantless searches of containers 
and luggage found within a vehicle. This applies if the police have probable cause to believe 
there is contraband in the containers, or if they have probable cause to believe there is 
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the containers.  
 
The search incident to arrest exception also applies in the motor vehicle context. However, 
the boundaries of this search have changed with time. Most recently, on April 21, 2009, the 
Supreme Court imposed new restrictions on the exception in Arizona v. Gant, 556 U.S. ___ 
(2009). For many years, the rule had been that the police may search the entire passenger 
compartment of a vehicle incident to the custodial arrest of an occupant of the car. In Gant, 
however, the Supreme Court added a new limitation: Vehicle searches following an 
occupant’s arrest are legal “only when the arrestee is unsecured and within reaching distance 
of the passenger compartment at the time of the search” or when the officer has reason to 
believe the vehicle has evidence of the crime that forms the basis for the arrest.  
 
The motor vehicle exception to the warrant requirement does not extend to passengers in 
the car. Once a passenger has been arrested, however, the police are permitted to make a 
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within his control pursuant to the exception 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.423 
for searches incident to arrest, as discussed above.  
 
EXIGENT OR EMERGENCY CIRCUMSTANCES 
There is also an exception to the warrant requirement for exigent circumstances, which 
means where the officers must act quickly.  
 
CONSENT SEARCHES 
Individuals are always free to waive their Fourth Amendment rights. If a suspect consents to 
a search by police, this eliminates the need for a warrant. The courts, however, will closely 
scrutinize any such “consent” to make sure it was truly voluntary, particularly when it leads 
to the seizure of incriminating evidence. Consents obtained by deceit, bribery, or 
misrepresentations are generally held to be involuntary and invalid. (However, when an 
undercover police officer conceals his identity and, as a result, an individual allows the 
officer to enter an area, this amounts to consent, even though the person did not know 
permission was being granted to a police officer.) Consent might not be voluntary if it requires 
a choice between exercising constitutional rights and continued employment. There is also 
no requirement that suspects be informed of their right to refuse consent.  
 
Consent may be implied in circumstances in which the individual can choose between 
entering an area and submitting to a search or not entering, as when one enters a secured 
courthouse, boards an airplane, or crosses an international border. Consent may be given by 
third parties to searches of property over which the third parties have authority, such as a co-
 tenant in a leased apartment. 
 
EVIDENCE IN “PLAIN VIEW” 
Evidence in “plain view” of an officer who has a right to be in a position to observe it also 
may be seized without a warrant. This situation usually occurs when contraband or evidence 
of another crime is inadvertently discovered during a search or arrest for another offense. 
The discovery must be truly inadvertent; however, if discovery of the evidence is anticipated 
and no other exception applies, a warrant must first be obtained. 
 
BORDER, CUSTOMS, AND PRISON SEARCHES 
Border and customs searches are a long-standing exception to the Fourth Amendment and 
may be conducted without probable cause or a warrant. Searches of prison cells and the 
monitoring of inmates’ telephone conversations also may be conducted without a warrant or  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.424  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
probable cause because of security concerns and the absence of a realistic expectation of 
privacy in prison. 
 
Searching an Employee's Mail 
An employer may not conduct searches of an employee’s mail before it has been delivered. 
Under federal law, any person who takes a letter, postcard, or package from the mail before 
it has been delivered to the person to whom it was directed, with design to obstruct the 
correspondence, faces up to five years imprisonment, a fine, or both. See 18 U.S.C. § 1702. 
Once the mail has been delivered, however, then ordinary rules regarding searches apply. 
 
Surveillance 
An employer, in certain circumstances, can use monitoring and surveillance methods to 
uncover employee wrongdoing. Various federal and state laws govern the availability and 
methods of surveillance techniques. Because of the complexity of these laws and the 
differing interpretations of them by state and federal courts, counsel should always be 
consulted beforehand. For example, if an employer monitors employees’ phone calls without 
following the proper legal procedure, the employer might violate federal or state wiretap 
laws. The employer might also expose itself to substantial legal liability for invasion of 
privacy. 
 
To lower the expectation of privacy and to preserve the right to search any and all areas and 
to monitor and survey employee conduct, the employer should adopt a written policy which 
provides that to maintain the security of its operations, the company might gain access to 
and search all work areas and personal belongings, including desks, file drawers, lockers, 
briefcases, handbags, pockets, and personal effects. Include in the policy that workplace 
areas are subject to surveillance and that business phone calls might be monitored. In 
addition, as discussed below, the policy also should state that the employer could monitor all 
electronic communications, such as e-mail, as well as monitor what sites are visited over the 
Internet. 
 
Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986   
The Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 (ECPA), codified at 18 U.S.C. §§ 
2510–2521, 2701–2710, 3121–3126, is the primary federal statute that offers workers 
protections in communications privacy. 
 
Under the ECPA, electronic communications are defined as “any transfer of signs, signals, 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.425 
writing, images, sounds, data, or intelligence of any nature transmitted in whole or in part by 
a wire, radio, electromagnetic, photolectronic, or photooptical system that affects 
interstate or foreign commerce.” 
 
The ECPA is divided into three parts: the Wiretap Act, which governs the interception of 
electronic communications, the Stored Communications Act, which covers access to stored 
communications and records; and the Pen Regis ter Act, which regulates pen registers and 
trap and trace devices.  
 
THE WIRETAP ACT (18 U.S.C. §§ 2510–2521) 
In response to an increasing number of privacy breaches, Congress enacted the Wiretap Act, 
which prohibits anyone from intentionally intercepting or attempting to intercept any wire, 
oral, or electronic communication.  
 
Section 2511 prohibits covert spying on voice and data communications, extending 
protection from eavesdropping on mail and telephone communications to include digital 
data communications, such as e-mail and remote computing; it does not govern stored 
communications. Under the Wiretap Act, an interception occurs by the acquisition of the 
contents of any electronic communication through the use of any device. Most courts have 
held that interception occurs only when the protected communications are obtained 
contemporaneously with their transmission.  
 
Remedies for violating the Wiretap Act include criminal sanctions and civil relief. A criminal 
violation under the Act is a felony and is punishable by up to five years imprisonment 
and/or fines. Under a private cause of action, a court may award the plaintiff equitable relief, 
actual damages, punitive damages, and attorneys’ fees. 
 
THE STORED COMMUNICATIONS ACT (18 U.S.C. § 2701) 
As part of the ECPA, Congress enacted the Stored Communications Act (SCA) to protect 
stored electronic communications, such as e-mail and voicemail, by prohibiting the 
unauthorized access of such communications that are in storage. More specifically, the SCA 
prohibits unlawful access to a facility that provides an electronic communication service, 
and, then, obtaining, altering, or preventing authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is electronically stored in such a system. An electronic 
communication falls under the SCA once a system receives and stores it.  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.426  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The SCA includes both civil and criminal penalties. Concerning civil penalties, the SCA 
provides a private right of action and allows appropriate relief, including equitable relief, 
damages, and attorneys fees. Regarding criminal penalties, the SCA provides that if the first 
offense is committed for purposes of commercial advantage, malicious destruction, or 
damage or private commercial gain, punishment may include a fine and/or imprisonment 
for up to five years. For any subsequent offense, penalties include a fine and/or 
imprisonment for not more than ten years. In any other case, where it is a first offense, 
courts may impose a fine or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. For all 
subsequent convictions, courts may impose a fine and/or imprisonment for up to ten years. 
 
THE PEN REGISTERS ACT 
Pen registers are devices that can detect the telephone number from which an incoming call 
has been made. Title 18, section 3121, of the U.S. Code generally prohibits the installation of 
pen registers without a court order.  
 
EXCEPTIONS 
Although the ECPA imposes several rules about electronic communications, it also contains 
several exceptions to these rules. The exceptions most relevant to the workplace are:  
• The ordinary course of business exception 
• The provider exception 
• The consent exception 
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION  
The ECPA’s definition of “electronic device” specifically excludes devices that are used by 
an employer in the “ordinary course of busi ness.” Therefore, employers are permitted to 
monitor their employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done 
for a legitimate business purpose.  
 
THE PROVIDER EXCEPTION  
The provider exception allows suppliers of wire or electronic communications services (e.g., 
telephone, voice mail, e-mail, or Internet services) to intercept or access electronic 
communications in the normal course of business. For example, telephone providers can 
monitor phone calls when it is necessary to maintain and protect the system, run quality 
control checks, or to protect the service against theft or harassment. Most courts hold that 
employers qualify as providers with respect to their internal e-mail and voice mail systems.   
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.427 
CONSENT EXCEPTION  
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept or access an electronic communication if one of the 
parties to the communication has given prior consent. This exception does not apply if the 
communication is intercepted for the purpose of committing a crime. 
 
Monitoring Employee Phone Calls 
To review, the Wiretap Act provisions of the ECPA limit an employer’s ability to monitor 
employee phone calls. In addition to the ECPA, a company’s right to monitor employee 
phone calls is also limited by employees’ constitutional and common law privacy rights, as 
discussed above. 
 
Although interception is generally forbidden under the Wiretap Act, employers may lawfully 
monitor phone calls if they fall under one of the statutory exceptions, including the ordinary 
course of business exception and the consent exception.  
 
ORDINARY COURSE OF BUSINESS EXCEPTION 
Under the ordinary course of business exception, employers are permitted to monitor their 
employees’ wire or electronic communications, including phone calls, if done for a legitimate 
business purpose.  
 
This exception could apply in various scenarios. For example, it would apply where the 
employer routinely monitors phone communications for purposes of quality control (e.g., 
monitoring the phone calls of operators, telemarketers, customer service personnel, etc.). It 
may also apply where there is a legitimate business purpose for the monitoring, such as 
preventing business losses or employee misconduct. Keep in mind, however, that there must 
be a specific, legitimate business purpose for the interception. Blanket monitoring probably 
will be found to violate the act. In Sanders v. Robert Bosch, 38 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 1994), an 
employer who used a “voice logger” to record all telephone conversations on certain 
company lines did not fall within the ordinary course of business exception because the 
employer was unable to state a legitimate business purpose for the interceptions.  
 
Even if a company has a legitimate business purpose for monitoring a phone call, the 
method used to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrusive than necessary to 
achieve the purpose. In Deal v. Spears, 980 F.2d 1153 (8th Cir. 1992), an employer who tape-
 recorded and listened to all calls, including personal calls, was found to have violated the 
statute even though the employer had legitimate suspicions of theft. Once it becomes 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.428  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
apparent that a communication is personal and not otherwise unauthorized, the employer 
must immediately stop listening to the call. Overly broad efforts to monitor employee calls 
may give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy.  
 
CONSENT EXCEPTION 
The ECPA allows an entity to intercept an electronic communication if that entity is a party 
to the communication, or if one of the parties to the communication has given prior consent 
to the interception.  
 
For an employer to monitor an employee under this exception, the employee must expressly 
consent to the monitoring. Generally, employers must obtain written consent (e.g., an 
employer provides its employees with a written policy explaining that phone calls may be 
monitored and the employees sign the policy). It is important to note that providing a 
notification that employees might be monitored (as opposed to being notified that the phone 
calls or e-mail will be monitored) may not satisfy the consent exception. For example, in one 
case, notification to an employee that her phone calls might be monitored was not enough to 
establish that she consented to the recording of her phone calls. Even when an employee 
consents to monitoring, this does not give the employer unlimited access to the employee’s 
communications. Monitoring still should be c onducted only for legitimate business purposes 
and should be no more broad than necessary.  
 
Using Pen Registers to Monitor Employees 
In general, section 3121 prohibits the installation of pen registers without a court order, but 
there are a number of exceptions under which employers can use pen registers to track their 
employees’ phone activity. Those exceptions include: 
• Phone service providers can use pen registers to protect users (employers) from abuse of 
service or unlawful use of service.  
• Phone service providers can use a pen register to record the fact that a phone call was 
initiated or completed to protect users of the service (employers) from fraudulent, 
unlawful, or abusive use of the service.  
• Phone service providers can use a pen register where consent of the user of the service 
has been obtained.  
 
Monitoring Employees’ E-Mail and Voicemail 
The ECPA regulates access to stored e-mail and voicemail; it prohibits the unauthorized 
access of electronic communications that are in storage.   
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.429 
Although the SCA generally prohibits third parties from accessing stored communications, 
there are two key exceptions: the provider exception and the consent exception. The provider 
exception  exempts providers of electronic communications services from the restrictions of 
the SCA. In other words, if a message is stored on an e-mail or voice mail system that the 
company provides, then the employer can access those messages as it sees fit without 
violating the ECPA. Note, however, that this exception does not allow the employer to 
access messages stored with an outside provider such as Yahoo!, Google, or AOL.  
 
The consent exception permits access of stored messages if such access is authorized by the 
intended recipient of the communication. This means that employers will be free to access 
employee e-mail and voice mail (including messages stored with outside providers) as long as 
the employees have given their consent. This exception provides the safest haven for 
employers who want to monitor their employees’ stored messages. To make sure the 
consent exception will apply, companies should obtain express written consent from all 
employees for such monitoring as a condition of employment.  
 
In addition to the ECPA, employers must also be aware of employees’ constitutional and 
common law privacy rights in the contents of their e-mail. As was discussed above, it is a 
good idea for all employers to establish a written policy which notifies employees that their 
stored messages are the property of the employer, and that they are subject to monitoring by 
the employer at any time.  
 
Also, keep in mind that, as with other forms of searches and surveillance, the courts will not 
look kindly on overly broad monitoring of stored communications. Employers should only 
access their employees’ stored voice mail or e-mail when there is a legitimate business 
purpose for doing so, and the access should be no more intrusive than necessary to achieve 
the purpose. 
 
Monitoring Employees’ Blogging Activity 
Because the blogging trend is growing, it is important for employers and employees to 
understand their rights and obligations with respect to such online activity. As a general rule, 
employers can monitor employee blogging because employees have a limited expectation of 
privacy with respect to their blog posts, which are posted publicly. However, the extent of an 
employer’s rights to monitor largely depend on whether the employee blogged while on-duty 
using the employer’s computer system.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.430  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Employees have no reasonable expectation of privacy when blogging on the employer’s 
system because the system was set up to provide business communications. If there is no 
reasonable expectation of privacy, then there is no constitutional or common law restriction 
on monitoring such activity. Therefore, an employee who uses an employer’s system to blog 
about violating company policy or illegal activity, or who engages in other unacceptable 
conduct, can generally be disciplined for such posts. However, employers should formalize 
their computer/Internet use policies to cover blogging and to effectively maintain control 
over such use.  
 
Concerning an employee’s off-duty blogging, employers should carefully examine the legal 
consequences of using such conduct when discharging or disciplining an employee, including 
those that are at will, because such action implicates state and federal law. In fact, some 
states (California, New York, Colorado, Montana, and North Dakota) enacted laws that limit 
an employer’s power to discharge an employee for off-duty conduct. Furthermore, an 
employee who blogs about certain topics related to status in a protected class may also be 
protected from discharge (i.e., when employee reveals personal information about his 
disability or religious beliefs, or writes about harassment or discrimination in the workplace). 
Therefore, companies should enact and apply Internet-use policies consistently and 
uniformly.  
 
Monitoring Employees’ Internet Activity 
As with monitoring employees’ e-mail and blogging activity, employers should be aware of 
federal protections against monitoring employees’ Internet use, including an employee’s 
instant messages, website postings, etc. This is true even though federal law provides 
employees little protection from an employer’s electronic monitoring. For example, although 
the ECPA prohibits the intentional interception of electronic communications when 
employees have a reasonable expectation of privacy, an employer may monitor Internet use 
when there is employee consent, when there are legitimate business purposes, or when an 
employer has reason to believe that the company’s interests are at risk. In addition, the 
common law right to privacy also extends to employees in the workplace; however, the 
public nature of the workplace has led many courts to reject most invasion claims on the 
basis that there was no reasonable expectation of privacy.  
 
Video Surveillance of Employees 
In some scenarios, investigators may consider the use of video surveillance equipment as 
part of an internal investigation. In general, video surveillance is not permissible in areas 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.431 
where employees have a legitimate expectation of privacy. For instance, an employer is not 
allowed to install video cameras in a restroom or dressing room unless there are special 
circumstances to justify this intrusion on employees’ privacy. Conversely, an employer is 
much more likely to be allowed to use video surveillance in open areas, such as around cash 
registers or in public hallways. These areas are open to the public and an employee could not 
reasonably expect privacy there. It is advisable to provide written notice to employees 
informing them that their activities are subject to monitoring in advance of any surveillance. 
Again, the scope of the surveillance should be no greater than necessary to fulfill the 
employer’s legitimate business purposes.  
 
If video surveillance were accompanied by audio recording, then this type of surveillance 
would be covered by Wiretap Act provisions of the Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 
which prohibit the interception of wire, electronic, or oral communication  except in limited 
circumstances. However, the ECPA does not cover silent video monitoring. The question in 
this type of surveillance is whether the surveillance violates the employee’s constitutional or 
common law privacy rights. 
 
Effect of Violation of Employee’s Rights 
Illegally seized evidence will be excluded in criminal proceedings. A public employer cannot 
use illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee. There is no Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against a private employer using illegally seized evidence to discipline an 
employee; however, the employer might be exposing itself to litigation for invasion of 
privacy, trespass, or other common law causes of action described below. 
 
The Exclusionary Rule 
Under the exclusionary rule, which is in effect in all federal and state courts, evidence seized in 
violation of the Fourth Amendment will be suppressed — that is, it becomes inadmissible in 
any prosecution against the suspect except under a few limited exceptions. In addition, all 
evidence that is obtained as a result of the illegally obtained evidence will also be excluded. 
An unlawful search and seizure does not mean the suspect cannot be prosecuted, and it does 
not invalidate a conviction based on other evidence. But it does prevent the wrongfully 
obtained evidence and all evidence derived from it from being presented at trial. 
 
Generally, this rule applies only in criminal cases and does not apply to private individuals 
acting for their own purposes. However, the Fourth Amendment does apply to government  
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.432  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employers. Therefore, a public employer cannot use illegally seized evidence to discipline an 
employee.  
 
There is, however, no Fourth Amendment prohibition against a private employer using 
illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee. Thus, evidence illegally obtained by a 
private employer may be admitted in court, but the employer might be exposing itself to 
litigation for invasion of privacy, trespass or other common law causes of action described 
below. 
 
Furthermore, evidence that has been suppressed under the exclusionary rule might still be 
admissible in a civil trial or an administrative proceeding such as an employee disciplinary 
hearing. The primary goal of the exclusionary rule is to deter police  misconduct. If the 
deterrent effect of excluding the evidence from a civil or administrative proceeding is 
outweighed by the costs that would result from excluding the evidence, and if the party 
whose rights were violated has other forms of redress for the violation, then evidence that 
was suppressed in a criminal trial may be admissible in a noncriminal proceeding. However, 
there are some circumstances in which wrongfully obtained evidence will be excluded from 
civil proceedings, so public employers should not feel free to disregard their employees’ 
constitutional rights under the assumption that any illegally obtained evidence can still be 
used against an employee in a noncriminal matter. 
 
Civil Liability for Damages (42 U.S.C. § 1983) 
Section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code, provides a remedy for violation of federally protected 
rights where state action is involved. To prevail in a claim under section 1983, the plaintiff 
must prove two critical issues: (1) that he  has been denied a right guaranteed by the 
Constitution and the laws of the United States, and (2) that the defendant(s) deprived him of 
that right while acting under the color of state law.  
 
The defendant, however, can raise certain defenses to a section 1983 claim, including 
qualified immunity and consent. For public employers, there might be a qualified immunity 
from liability if they act in good faith on the basis of unsettled law. Qualified immunity 
shields government officials from both suit and liability if their conduct did not violate any 
clearly established right which a reasonable person would have known.  
 
In addition, valid consent is a well-recognized exception to the Fourth Amendment 
prohibition against warrantless searches. Consent to search can be voluntary, involuntary, or 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.433 
“informed.” Consent is not voluntary if it requires a choice between constitutional rights. 
Consent might not be voluntary if it requires a choice between exercising constitutional 
rights and continued employment. Courts are split on this issue. (Published “search” policy 
as a barrier to expectation of privacy is used to diminish or eliminate the expectation 
altogether.) 
 
State Constitutions and Statutes 
Most states have enacted  constitutional provisions similar to the Fourth Amendment, and 
many of the same issues arise under the state constitutions as under the federal Constitution. 
In most states, standards similar to those applied under the federal Constitution apply. Most 
states have enacted laws governing an employee’s right to privacy in the workplace. Many 
states have enacted statutes that restrict surveillance, including wiretapping or electronic 
surveillance, cameras, pen registers, two-way mirrors, or surveillance in particular areas, such 
as locker rooms, lounges, and rest areas. 
 
Surreptitious Recording 
All but 12 states allow you to record a conversation to which you are a party without 
informing the other parties to the conversation that you are recording it. Federal wiretap 
statutes also permit one-party consent of telephone conversations in most circumstances 
(employees being the most notable exception; see the material on the Electronic 
Communication Privacy Act discussed previously in this chapter). 
 
The 38 states that allow such recordings are generally referred to as “one-party” states. The 
District of Columbia is also a “one-party” jurisdiction. The other 12 states are incorrectly 
referred to as “two-party” states. Be aware, however, that this is a misnomer because consent 
of all parties to the conversation is required. Currently, the following states require the 
consent of all parties to a conversation in most circumstances: 
• California 
• Connecticut 
• Delaware 
• Florida 
• Illinois 
• Maryland 
• Massachusetts 
• Michigan 
• Montana 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.434  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• New Hampshire 
• Pennsylvania 
• Washington 
 
There are, however, variations among states regarding the details of such recordings and 
their admissibility in court. Before you record a conversation, make sure you consult an 
attorney or check the laws for your jurisdiction. 
 
Additionally, there are a number of different laws regarding videotaping. At least fifteen 
states have outlawed the use of hidden cameras in private places. In some states, however, 
there is no prohibition on videotaping anyone as long as there is no audio recording. Due to 
privacy concerns, a number of states have proposed legislation to outlaw surreptitious 
videotaping in certain circumstances. Since this area of the law is changing constantly, make 
sure you check the law in your jurisdiction. 
 
Federal and State Nondiscrimination Statutes  
Nondiscrimination statutes such as the federal Civil Rights Acts of 1866 and 1871, Title VII 
of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1970, as 
well as similar state statutes, protect employees from being singled out for searches on the 
basis of such characteristics as race, national origin, sex, religion, and age. These laws also 
protect employees against disparate discipline assessed as a result of a search. 
 
Common Law Protections in Connection with Searches and Surveillance 
Employees also enjoy common law privacy protections that limit an employer’s right to 
search and use surveillance techniques. These common law rights apply to private as well as 
government employers; no state action is required to trigger their protections. 
 
Some of the common law protections that applied in the interview setting also apply to an 
employer’s right to search and use surveillance techniques. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
Employees also have common law privacy interests that limit an employer’s right to search. 
These common law protections, which are similar in nature and scope to the Fourth 
Amendment protections discussed above, cover both public and private employees. As long 
as an employee does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in an area, the employer 
can search that area without violating an employee’s common law right to privacy. 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.435 
While modern tort law includes four categories of invasion of privacy, this discussion only 
addresses two of those torts: publicity of private facts and intrusion upon seclusion. 
 
INTRUSION INTO SECLUSION 
Intrusion upon seclusion is the cause of action that is most frequently raised with regard to 
workplace searches. As stated before, intrusion upon seclusion occurs when an individual 
intentionally intrudes “upon the solitude or secl usion of another or his private affairs or 
concerns” and “the intrusion would be highly offensive to a reasonable person.” Thus, 
where there is an expectation of privacy on the part of the employee, a search without cause 
might give rise to a claim of invasion of privacy. The mere gathering of information is not a 
tort; however, the gathering of confidential information where the intrusion is unreasonable 
might be a tort. There is no invasion of privacy if the information is open to public view or 
has been disclosed to others. 
 
As with constitutional actions, an intrusion upon seclusion claim can be based not only on 
physical intrusions, but also on wiretapping, eavesdropping and other forms of surveillance. 
 
An employer can eliminate the potential for claim of invasion of privacy by publishing and 
following a “search” policy. In addition, the following measures can be taken: 
• Having a written policy regarding searches, surveillance, and telephone monitoring 
• Retaining a key to all desks, lockers, etc. 
• Requiring employees to provide keys to all personal locks 
• Obtaining consent to search 
 
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF PRIVATE FACTS 
The tort of public disclosure of private facts occurs when one party makes public statements 
about another party’s private life that are not of public concern. The disclosure of those facts 
must be highly offensive to a reasonable person. This tort can exist even if the statements 
are true. Because giving unreasonable publicity to true, but private, information about an 
employee can give rise to a claim for invasion of privacy, the need to communicate 
information about the employee must be balanced against the intrusion into the employee’s 
privacy. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Again, intentional infliction of emotional distress refers to any unprivileged conduct which is 
so outrageous and egregious that it exceeds all bounds usually tolerated by civilized society 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.436  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and which is intended to cause injury (or was committed with reckless disregard for the 
likelihood of its causing injury) to another.  
 
This tort is significant particularly to private employers whose searches might not be subject 
to the Fourth Amendment or similar state constitutional provisions because damages for 
pain and suffering and punitive damages might be awarded. 
 
Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
To review, several states recognize a duty on the part of employers to deal with their 
employees fairly and in good faith. This duty might include abiding by all company policies 
and provisions in an employee handbook, including those relating to searches (e.g., how and 
when they can be conducted) and expectations of privacy on the part of employees. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
As noted above, many states now recognize an implied contract between employers and 
employees arising out of employee handbooks or oral promises. For example, an employer 
with an employee handbook containing provisions relating to searches or employee 
expectations of privacy might find itself contractually bound by those provisions and in 
breach of contract if the provisions are not followed to the letter. 
 
False Imprisonment 
Again, false imprisonment is the restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another 
without consent or legal justification. A claim of false imprisonment might be made if an 
employee is detained in any way during a search, either of the employee himself or of the 
employee’s desk, locker, and so on. For more information on false imprisonment, see the 
Interviews section in this chapter. 
 
Trespass 
Trespass is the unauthorized, intentional, or negligent entry upon the property of others. A 
claim of trespass might arise from a search of an employee’s locker, but it is particularly 
applicable to surveillance at an employee’s home. 
 
Reducing Employees’ Expectation of Privacy  
The single most effective method of eliminating potential problems involving employees’ 
right of privacy, including workplace searches and the monitoring or reading of electronic 
communications, is for a company to adopt a written policy which provides that to maintain 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.437 
the security of its operations, the company may gain access to and search all work areas and 
personal belongings, including desks, file drawers, lockers, briefcases, handbags, pockets, and 
personal effects. 
 
The policy should also notify employees that computer systems (including the Internet, e-
 mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use, and that the company 
reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the system or 
placed in storage. Include in the policy that workplace areas are subject to surveillance and 
that business phone calls may be monitored. 
 
 
Polygraph Examinations 
 
Employee Polygraph Protection Act 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act prohibits the use of polygraphs by most private 
employers unless the employer is engaged in an ongoing investigation involving economic 
loss or injury to the employer in the employer’s business, and has a reasonable suspicion that 
the employee is involved in the incident. Reasonable suspicion is an observable, articulated basis 
in fact; it is similar to predication.  
 
Employers subject to this Act cannot use polygraphs to screen applicants for employment, 
and they cannot discharge an employee for refusing to take a polygraph exam.  
 
The Employee Polygraph Protection Act, however, does not protect government employees. 
 
Other Federal Statutes 
Other statu tes do not address the use of polygraphs directly, but nonetheless might give rise 
to liability if a polygraph test is administered in a discriminatory fashion (e.g., based on race, 
sex, or some other prohibited factor), or used to ferret out union sympathies in connection 
with a union organizing campaign. 
 
State Statutes 
Several states have enacted laws addressing the use of polygraph examinations, and some are 
more restrictive than the federal statute. Courts have recognized claims arising from 
unlawful administration of polygraph exams and wrongful discharge for refusal to take an 
exam after having been accused of fraud. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.438  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Common Law Liability from Polygraph Exams 
In addition to the statutory restrictions discussed above, some courts have found the use of 
polygraphs actionable on common law grounds under certain circumstances. 
 
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress 
Most courts have found that the circumstances surrounding the giving of a polygraph exam 
do not, in and of themselves, rise to the level of outrageous conduct, as required to state a 
common law claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress. 
 
Invasion of Privacy 
In some states, courts have defined polygraph tests as invasions of privacy. Questions 
directly related to job performance or the incident under investigation generally are held not 
to be invasions of privacy. Control questions might be an invasion of privacy, though 
circumstances might warrant the intrusion. Check with counsel. 
 
Wrongful Discharge 
Polygraph exams may also give rise to claims of wrongful discharge. For example, a former 
employee may bring a wrongful discharge claim if he is terminated for refusing to take a 
polygraph exam after having been accused of fraud.  
 
 
Obtaining Information About Employees 
 
Introduction 
There is a surprising amount of information about individuals that can be accessed without 
legal process (e.g., a subpoena). In fact, the government is bound by law to facilitate the 
public’s access to government information and to  encourage a diversity of sources to acquire 
and use this information. But despite the public’s broad right of access, there are numerous 
laws that limit access to certain types of information, and a number of risks to privacy are 
raised by the collection of information. Therefore, fraud examiners must be certain that 
information obtained is done so legally.  
 
Federal Statutes 
Privacy Act of 1974 
The Privacy Act of 1974 establishes a code of information practices that regulates the 
collection, maintenance, consumption, and diffusion of personally identifiable information 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.439 
that is maintained by federal agencies. It restricts information about individuals, both 
employees and nonemployees, and it applies to government agencies and government 
contractors running a system of records on behalf of the government. The Privacy Act 
prohibits an agency from disclosing such information without the written consent of the 
subject individual. 
 
An agency, for example, might maintain records about a person containing information that 
is relevant and necessary to accomplish a purpose of the agency. This information might 
include a person’s education, finances, medical history, criminal history, employment history, 
and identifying information (fingerprint, voiceprint, or photograph). An agency employee 
might have access to the information unless it is investigatory material compiled for law 
enforcement purposes, statistical records, or material compiled solely for determining 
suitability, eligibility, or qualification for federal service or promotion. 
 
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA now applies to the 
gathering of many other types of information about an individual through third parties.  
 
The FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing personal information 
about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, general reputation, 
personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without authorization, and limits 
disclosure of credit information to third parties with a purpose permitted by the statute. 
 
The FCRA applies in the employment context when an employer contracts with a third party 
(e.g., a private investigator or an online public records service) to collect credit information 
on current or potential employees. The FCRA, however, does not apply if the person or 
organization seeking the information gathers it directly from the source.  
 
If the FCRA does apply, it generally means that an examiner cannot use a third party to 
obtain certain information about a person unless that person has received certain notices and 
signed a consent form. The failure to do so can mean civil penalties.  
 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.440  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
COVERAGE UNDER THE FCRA 
Coverage of the FCRA, however, turns largely on three terms: consumer, consumer reports, 
and consumer reporting agency.  
 
CONSUMER  
At its core, the FCRA protects those that fall within its definition of consumer. The Act 
defines a consumer as “an individual.” That is, only individuals have rights under the FCRA.   
 
CONSUMER REPORTS  
For the FCRA to apply, the information that is being obtained must be a “consumer report.” 
A consumer report  is defined as any written, oral, or other communication by a consumer-reporting 
agency bearing on a customer’s cred it worthiness, credit standing, character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living. 
 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the FCRA, has interpreted this to mean basically any information collected 
on a person. It does not refer to just credit reports. It would also apply to public records 
such as criminal records and DMV searches. 
 
But in general, when faced with the question of whether a specific report is a consumer 
report, courts have focused on the purpose for which the person or organization collected 
the consumer information. 
 
CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCY  
Also, for the FCRA to apply, the information must be gathered from a “consumer reporting 
agency” (CRA). A CRA is defined as anyone who sells in formation about people. It could be 
an online service such as ChoicePoint or LexisNex is, or it could be a private investigator. 
 
COMPLYING WITH THE FCRA 
Before employers can get a consumer report about a current or prospective employee, they 
must comply with certain requirements; however, employers that are gathering such 
information in connection with a workplace investigation of misconduct may be excluded 
from the FCRA (see the section “Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct” 
below).  
 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.441 
If the FCRA applies, the party seeking the information must comply with the following 
requirements:  
• Inform the consumer reporting agency that it will follow the FCRA. 
• Provide the individual with a separate written disclosure.  
• Obtain the individual’s written authorization.  
 
The disclosure and the authorization can be contained in the same document. 
 
If, however, an employer relies on a consumer report for an “adverse action” (e.g., denying a 
job application, reassigning or terminating an employee, or denying a promotion), it must 
provide the individual with a pre-adverse action disclosure before taking the adverse action. 
This disclosure must include a copy of the individual’s consumer report and a copy of “A 
Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,” which is available from the FTC. 
 
After adverse action is taken, the employer must notify the individual via an adverse action 
notice that the action has been taken. That notice must include the following: 
• Name, address, and phone number of the consumer reporting agency (CRA) that 
supplied the report 
• A statement that the CRA did not make the adverse action decision and cannot explain 
why the adverse action was taken 
• A notice of the individual’s right to di spute the accuracy or completeness of the 
information furnished, and his right to an additional free consumer report from the 
agency upon request within 60 days 
 
WORKPLACE INVESTIGATIONS OF FRAUD AND MISCONDUCT 
Furthermore, the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 amended the FCRA to 
exempt certain reports involving employee misconduct investigations. As a result of these 
amendments, an employer who uses a third party to conduct a workplace investigation no 
longer has to obtain the prior consent of an employee if the investigation involves suspected: 
• Misconduct 
• Violation of law or regulations 
• Violation of any pre-existing policy of the employer 
 
To qualify for this exception, the report from the third party must not be communicated to 
anyone other than the employer, an agent of the employer, or the government. 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.442  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If, however, adverse action is taken against the employee based on the results of the 
investigation, the FCRA still requires that the employer provide the employee with a 
summary of the report. Adverse action is broadly defined as any employment decision that 
adversely affects the employee. The summary must “contain the nature and substance of the 
communication upon which the adverse action is based.” However, it does not have to 
identify the individuals interviewed or the sources of the information. 
 
INVESTIGATIVE CONSUMER REPORT 
The FCRA also covers “investigative consumer reports.” Under the FCRA, an investigative 
consumer report is a report containing information about an individual’s character, general 
reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living that is obtained through personal 
interviews with neighbors, friends, or associates. If such a report is made, then other notices 
and consents may need to be obtained from the individual. For example, a separate 
disclosure must be used to inform the employee that an investigative consumer report is 
being obtained. The form must also state what sort of information will be collected. 
 
In addition, the company must disclose to the individual the nature and scope of the 
investigation (if he requests). If any adverse action is to be taken against the person, he can 
ask to receive a copy of the report before such action is taken. Further, the report given to 
the individual must not be redacted, meaning that if the report contains names of the people 
providing the information and what they reported, such information could not be deleted 
from the report. The person must also be given an opportunity to dispute the findings in the 
report. 
 
CONTACT YOUR ATTORNEY 
Unfortunately, for fraud examiners, the FCRA has created several more hoops that 
examiners must jump through before they can obtain certain types of information. The 
FCRA is not clearly written, but the Federal Trade Commission has published several letters 
giving its interpretation of the statute. These letters and the text of the FCRA can be 
obtained through their website at www.ftc.gov.  
 
The most important thing for the fraud examiner to remember is to consult his in-house or 
outside counsel. Your attorney will help you determine what procedures you need to 
institute to comply with the FCRA. 
 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.443 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) was passed in 1999, and the rules implementing the 
Act became final in 2001. GLB was originally enacted to allow banks and other companies 
to offer previously forbidden services, such as insurance and securities brokerage services. 
Congress was worried that these “super banks” would share customers’ financial data with 
affiliates and other companies to hawk their new products. Therefore, Congress added a 
provision requiring a “financial intuition” to tell customers about its privacy policy, to notify 
them of private information the institution intends to share, and to give customers the 
chance to block such information-sharing. 
 
To implement the law, Congress ordered regulators to define financial institution in the 
broadest possible terms. Thus, financial institutions include not just banks, but also insurance 
companies, accountants, tax preparation and real estate settlement services, and investment 
advisors. The text of the rule can be found at 16 C.F.R. Part 313.1. Additional information 
about the rule can be found at the Federal Trade Commission’s website: www.ftc.gov. 
 
The problem for fraud examiners is that the privacy rules implemented as part of GLB have 
been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information. Under the FTC’s 
interpretation of the rule, credit header information cannot be sold except for the very 
limited purposes allowed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The agency reached this 
decision by concluding that such basic personal information, such as names and addresses, is 
“financial” information and therefore must be protected under GLB. Unfortunately, this 
prevents credit bureaus from selling credit header information (including names, addresses, 
phone numbers, and Social Security numbers) to private investigators, direct marketers, or 
other information brokers. 
 
GLB also made it a criminal offense to engage in “pretexting,” (i.e., the practice of obtaining 
or attempting to obtain, sell, or buy private information through the use of false pretenses). 
Some individuals used pretexting as a means to gather financial information about a subject. 
Pretexters would contact a financial institution and pretend to be the customer or someone 
else authorized to obtain financial information, thereby tricking the financial institution into 
providing information about the subject. 
 
Section 6821 of Title 15, U.S. Code, (added by GLB) makes it an offense to: 
• Use false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or documents to get customer information 
from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.444  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer information from a 
financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution 
• Ask another person to get someone else’s custom er information using false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements; using false, fictitious, or fraudulent documents; or using forged, 
counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents 
 
Violators can, under certain circumstances, be fined and/or imprisoned up to 10 years. 
 
Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 
The Telephone Records and Privacy Protection Act of 2006 (TRPPA) also criminalizes 
pretexting. In 2006, pretexting garnered much criticism after Hewlett-Packard admitted that 
to uncover board room leaks, its investigators obtained phone records of journalists and 
board members through pretexting. Within four months of the scandal’s public release, 
President Bush signed the TRPPA into law. 
 
Specifically, the TRPPA criminalizes the practice of obtaining and attempting to obtain, sell, 
or buy confidential phone records through the use of false statements, unless otherwise 
permitted by law. Violations of the Act are criminal, and, if convicted, a violator faces up to 
10 years in prison and up to $100,000 in fines. These fines and prison terms may be 
increased in case of violation compounded with other activities, or some egregious crimes. 
 
Before engaging in any type of pretexting activity, investigators should consult with an 
attorney to determine whether the information sought is protected by state or federal law, as 
well as whether the planned impersonation method is legally acceptable. 
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (Public Law 104–191, Partially Codified in 45 C.F.R. §§ 160, 164) 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) instituted several privacy 
rules concerning personal health information. While most of the rules do not directly affect 
investigations, fraud examiners should be aware of the rules because they may have an 
impact on the type of information that can be legally gathered on employees.  
 
The HIPAA privacy rules place restrictions on the availability and use of “protected health 
information.” The definition of this term is extremely broad and covers any information 
relating to an individual’s past, present, or future physical or mental health, payment for 
services, or health care operations. For example, a cancer center employee who stole a 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.445 
patient’s identification information to obtain credit cards violated HIPAA. This case marked 
a significant point in HIPAA legislation because it had more to do with identity theft than 
actual health information, yet it was still covered under the statute. 
 
If information about the health of an individual, or payments for services, becomes an issue 
during an investigation, the examiners should immediately contact the human resources 
(HR) department, which should have information about whether the entity is subject to the 
HIPAA rules and can assist you in compliance with those rules.  
 
The most important thing to note is that if the HIPAA rules apply, the party seeking the 
information is restricted as to the type of health information it can access without specific 
written authorization. Examiners should never contact the health care provider, the health 
plan administrator, or a medical billing services for copies of employee records without first 
consulting the employer’s legal counsel or HR department. 
 
Avoiding Liability for Obstruction of Justice and Witness Tampering 
It is assumed that no CFE would knowingly or intentionally suborn perjury, conceal 
evidence, or otherwise attempt to undermine a government investigation or a judicial 
proceeding. But it is important to understand the potential for liability for these offenses 
during a fraud examination. 
 
To understand what conduct could lead to accusations of impropriety or criminal liability, 
fraud examiners should be familiar with the following federal statutes. There may be 
additional state statutes that prohibit similar conduct in connection with state investigations 
or even state civil lawsuits. An attorney should be consulted for the law of a specific 
jurisdiction.  
 
Witness Tampering (18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq.) 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1512 et seq., makes it a felony to engage 
in “misleading conduct toward another person” with the intent to “influence, delay, or 
prevent” a witness’s testimony or to “cause or induce any person” to “withhold” testimony 
or documents.  
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) makes it a crime to (1) knowingly; (2) use intimidation or physical 
force, threats, or corrupt persuasion; (3) with the intent to induce another; (4) to withhold 
testimony, a record, document, or other object from an official proceeding; or (5) alter, 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.446  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
destroy, mutilate, or conceal; (6) an object; (7) with the intent to impair the object’s integrity 
or availability; (8) for use in an official proceeding. 
 
Section 1512(b)(2)(a) is the statute under which Arthur Andersen, LLP was charged 
following the Enron scandal. During the investigations into Enron misdeeds, it was found 
that Andersen directed its employees to destroy documents to prevent their retrieval by the 
SEC during the investigation of Enron. However, the Andersen conviction was overturned 
in 2005 because of errors in the jury instructions. 
 
Criminal sanctions have been added to section 1512 for the corrupt alteration or destruction 
of documents. Section 1512(c) makes it a crime to (1) corruptly; (2) alter, destroy, mutilate, 
conceal, or attempt thereto; (3) a record, document, or other object; (4) with the intent to 
impair the object’s integrity or availability for use; (5) in an official proceeding; or (6) 
otherwise obstruct, influence, impede, or attempt thereto, any official proceeding.  
 
Section 1512(c) originally criminalized those who knowingly and corruptly destroyed, or 
directed others to destroy, relevant evidence. However, the U.S. Supreme Court in Arthur 
Andersen LLP vs. United States narrowed the statute to exclude the term knowingly. 
 
Section 1515 provides definitions for certain provisions under obstruction of justice statutes. 
For example, it defines misleading conduct as including, among other things: 
• Knowingly making a false statement 
• Omitting or concealing information that renders a statement misleading 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a writing that is false, forged, altered, or otherwise lacking 
in authenticity with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly inviting reliance on a materia lly misleading sample, specimen, map, 
photograph, or other object with intent to mislead 
• Knowingly using a trick, scheme, or device with intent to mislead 
 
Unlike obstruction of justice (see below), the Victim and Witness Protection Act statute can 
be violated without any corrupt purpose to obstruct justice, even if there is no grand jury or 
other judicial proceeding pending. Section 1512 only requires proof that the defendant acted 
intentionally with intent to “influence, delay, or prevent” testimony or the withholding of 
evidence. The Act applies to witnesses in a prospective or anticipated proceeding as well as a 
pending one. 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.447 
In light of the Victim and Witness Protection Act, fraud examiners must take care as to how 
he instructs a witness with regard to the confidentiality of the investigation. Confidentiality is 
a legitimate concern, and the investigator needs to instruct a witness concerning how to 
preserve privileges and confidentiality. However, instructing a witness not to speak with 
government investigators or other parties to litigation — or giving instructions that could be 
misunderstood in that way — exposes the investigator and the company to potential witness 
tampering liability. 
 
The Victim and Witness Protection Act also makes it a misdemeanor to harass another 
person and thereby hinder, delay, prevent, or dissuade any person from attending or 
testifying in an official proceeding, reporting a federal offense, causing an arrest for a federal 
offense, or causing a criminal prosecution.  
 
Obstruction of Justice  
To review, obstruction of justice statutes punish efforts to impede or obstruct the 
investigation or trial of other substantive offenses. There are several federal criminal statutes 
that prohibit obstruction of justice. Many are specific to a particular setting or industry, or to 
a particular kind of proceeding such as the prohibition against obstructing a federal audit (18 
U.S.C. § 1516) or obstructing the examination of a financial institution by a federal agency (18 U.S.C. § 1517).   
 
These statutes are contained in Chapter 73 of the U.S. Code and prohibit impeding, 
influencing, or obstructing virtually any type of federal proceeding (including criminal 
investigations) through the destruction of documents, threats, bribes, or witness tampering. 
for more information, see the Obstruction of Justice section in “The Law Related to Fraud 
(Part 2)” chapter above. 
 
Spoliation of Evidence 
Spoliation of evidence is broadly defined as the act of destroying evidence or making it 
otherwise unavailable. The act of spoliation can surface in just about any type of case, 
criminal or civil, and by any party, plaintiff, or defendant. The theory behind spoliation of 
evidence presumes that the individual who makes evidence unavailable following the 
probable initiation of a lawsuit is aware of its detrimental effect upon a case. 
 
Although few jurisdictions have a separate cause of action for spoliation of evidence, almost 
every jurisdiction allows for sanctions resulting from such acts. Some courts require the 
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.448  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
spoliation to be intentional, though others merely require negligence or reckless spoliation.  
 
Intentional spoliation claims usually involve elements similar to the following: (1) the 
existence of a potential lawsuit; (2) the defend ant’s knowledge of the potential lawsuit; (3) 
the destruction, mutilation, or significant alteration of potential evidence; (4) intent on the 
part of the defendant to disrupt or defeat the lawsuit; (5) a causal relationship between the 
act of spoliation and the inability to prove the lawsuit; and (6) damages. 
 
Negligent spoliation claims generally occur when a party unintentionally loses evidence 
valuable to his claim, or a third party loses or destroys evidence in a suit. An example of the 
required elements for a negligent spoliation claim include: (1) existence of a potential civil 
action; (2) a legal or contractual duty to preser ve evidence which is relevant to the potential 
civil action; (3) destruction of that evidence; (4) significant impairment in the ability to prove 
the lawsuit; (5) a causal relationship between the evidence destruction and the inability to 
prove the lawsuit; and (6) damages. 
 
Perjury and Subornation of Perjury 
Perjury is the willful giving of false material testimony under oath, and includes falsely 
claiming that one cannot remember a material fact. There are three general federal perjury 
laws. First, section 1621 of Title 18, U.S. Code, is the general federal perjury statute; it makes 
it a crime to present material false statements under oath in federal proceedings. Section 
1621 applies “in any case in which a law of the United States authorizes an oath to be 
administered.” All states have similar statutes.  
 
Second, section 1623 of Title 18, U.S. Code, makes it a crime to present false testimony or 
produce other false information under oath before, or ancillary to, a federal court or grand 
jury. 
 
Third, section 1622 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes subornation of perjury; it makes it a 
federal crime to induce or cause another to commit perjury. A person violates section 1622 if 
he induces another to commit perjury in violation of either section 1621 or section 1623. 
The most obvious example of subornation of perjury is telling a prospective witness to lie or 
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investigation. Similarly, subornation also has 
been found to exist where a person counseled a witness to give testimony, the truth of which 
he recklessly disregarded, even though he did not know for certain that the information was  
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.449 
untrue. Subornation is only an offense when the perjury has in fact occurred — proof of 
subornation requires proof of the perjury. 
 
 
Discharging a Suspected Wrongdoer 
Many employers, when confronted with a possible wrongdoer or an employee who refuses 
to cooperate in the investigation, immediately want to fire the employee. Whether the 
employee can or should be discharged depends on the facts of the case and the law in the 
employer’s state. Public employers are governed by stricter standards than private employers. 
Constitutional and statutory laws govern the investigation and termination of public 
employees. For example, a public employee cannot be terminated for exercising his Fifth 
Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
Employers are generally permitted to discipline or terminate an employee who refuses to 
cooperate with a reasonable request to provide information. But if the employee has an 
employment contract for a specified term or is employed under a collective bargaining 
agreement that requires the employer to have good cause to terminate employment, then the 
question will be whether the refusal to cooperate amounted to good cause for the termination. 
This, in turn, depends on the nature and reasonableness of the request for information, the 
reasons for the refusal and the overall impact that the refusal has on the investigation. A 
good cause requirement can also arise if the company’s policies and practices create an 
implied employment contract. 
 
In contrast, employees who do not have an employment contract that imposes a good cause 
requirement — so-called at-will employees — can be discharged at any time and for any reason; 
that is, an employer does not need good cause to discharge an at-will employee. In some 
states, employment is considered at will in the absence of an employment contract.   
 
An employer, however, does not have a right to fire any employee — including an at-will 
employee — if the firing contravenes a fundamental public policy (for instance, firing an 
employee who refuses to commit an illegal act) or if it violates the company’s established or 
customary disciplinary practices and procedures. For more information, see the Discharge in 
Violation of Public Policy section below. 
 
  
Individual Rights During Examinations Law 
2.450  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Good Cause 
Before discharging an employee, it is best to document in the employee’s file that the 
employer has “good cause” to terminate employment. Although there is no exact definition 
of “good cause,” there are several questions that the company should ask before terminating 
an employee: 
• Did the employee know that the conduct would be subject to discipline? 
• Was the rule the employee violated reasonably related to the safe, efficient, or orderly 
operation of the business? 
• Did the company investigate to discover whether the employee violated the rule? 
• Did the company conduct a fair and objective investigation? 
• Did the company obtain significant evidence of a violation? 
• Was the decision nondiscriminatory? 
• Was the discipline related to the seriousness of the offense and the prior record of the 
employee? 
 
If the company feels that discharge of the employee is likely, it should make sure that the 
employee’s actions and the company’s actions  are well documented and placed in the 
employee’s personnel file. 
 
Negligent Discharge 
At least one state has recognized the right of an employee to sue for the employer’s failure to 
properly investigate charges against the employee before discharging him. Most of the courts 
that have addressed this issue have refused to recognize the claim. 
 
Breach of Implied Contract 
Even if there is no express employment contract between an employer and employee, many 
states recognize that an implied contract may be created under certain circumstances. An 
implied contract arises out of the conduct of the parties, even without any formal written or 
oral agreement. If a court finds that an implied contract exists, then the employee who is a 
party to the contract can usually only be fired for good cause.  
 
Implied contracts can be found to exist even when the employer was not aware that there 
was a contract. In fact, many states now recognize that an implied contract between 
employers and employees can arise out of employee handbooks. Handbook provisions 
might limit the right to discharge for “just cause,” and the issue might be whether the 
employer has enough evidence of wrongdoing to constitute “just cause.” 
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.451 
Breach of the Duty of Good Faith and Fair Dealing 
A few states recognize a duty on the part of the employer to deal with its employees fairly 
and in good faith. This duty is implied in most contracts, including contracts of employment. 
The scope of this duty might also be shaped from specific obligations found in the 
provisions of an employee handbook or from company personnel policies or practices. 
Documenting that the employer had good cause to terminate the employee should defeat 
this claim. 
 
Discharge in Violation of Public Policy 
Some states recognize a public policy exception to at-will employment. Under this exception, 
an employer does not have the right to discharge an at-will employee if it contravenes a 
fundamental public policy. To qualify under this exception, the employee must prove that 
his conduct is favored by a relevant public policy and that the employer retaliated against 
him for engaging in this “protected” activity. Agai n, to counter this claim, the employer will 
need to show that it had good cause to fire the employee and that it was not retaliating 
against the employee because of the protected conduct. 
 
For example, if an employee is fired because he supported a particular political candidate in 
the last election, a court or jury might find that his termination is in violation of the general 
public policy allowing people to vote for whomever they please. But if the employee was 
conducting fund-raising activities on company time, the company would likely have good 
cause to terminate the employee and such termination would not be in retaliation of the 
employee’s support of a particular candidate. 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.501 
CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS FOR FRAUD 
 
Basic Principles of Criminal Law 
Whereas civil law is that body of law that provides remedies for violations of private rights, 
criminal law deals with offenses of a public nature. A criminal defendant in a federal or state 
court is presumed innocent. He also has the right to remain silent, to confront accusers, to 
be advised by counsel, to have a speedy trial in front of peers, as well as other protections. 
And under the U.S. criminal justice system, the government bears the burden of proving the 
accused guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and it is expected to scrupulously observe the 
rights of the defendant.  
 
Also, in the criminal system, the government must adhere to the principal guarantees of 
individual rights, which are established by the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. These 
amendments are applied to the states under the “due process” clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment.  
 
The procedures described in this chapter primarily refer to federal rules. Individual state 
procedures might differ. 
 
Fourth Amendment 
To review, the Fourth Amendment guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from 
unreasonable searches and seizures; it provides the right of people to be: 
 
… secure in their persons, ho uses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and 
seizure, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported 
by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or 
things to be seized. 
 
Fifth Amendment 
The Fifth Amendment guarantees subjects of a criminal investigation the right to refuse to 
answer questions or to provide certain personal information that might be incriminating. 
The text of this amendments states: 
 
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on a 
presentment of indictment of a Grand Jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval forces, or 
in the Militia, when in actual service in time of War or public danger; nor shall any person be 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.502  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall he be compelled 
in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be deprived of life, liberty, or property, 
without due process of law; nor shall private property be taken for public use, without just 
compensation. 
 
Sixth Amendment 
The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right to counsel, the 
right to confront (cross-examine) the witnesses against them, and the right to a speedy trial: 
 
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to speedy and public trial, by an 
impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which 
district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause 
of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for 
obtaining witnesses in his favor; and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense. 
 
Fourteenth Amendment 
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment incorporates these federal rights 
and makes them applicable to the states. The Fourteenth Amendment provides: 
 
Section 1. All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction 
thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall 
make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the 
United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property without due 
process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws. 
 
 
Arrest and Interrogation 
The Fourth Amendment guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable 
searches and seizures. This means that the government cannot make an arrest unless there is 
probable cause to believe that the suspect committed an offense. The “probable cause” 
requirement of the Fourth Amendment is the standard by which a police officer is 
authorized to make an arrest to obtain an arrest warrant.  
 
An arrest occurs whenever a reasonable person would not feel free to leave. Although the 
Fourth Amendment does not necessitate warrants for all arrests, they are required under 
some circumstances: 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.503 
• Arrests in private homes 
• Arrests for minor offenses that are not committed in the arresting officer’s presence 
 
Although a warrant is required in some circumstances, the Supreme Court has identified 
situations in which warrants are not required. For example, a police officer or private citizen 
may make an arrest in public without a warrant if a felony is committed in his presence. This 
exception is designed to remove the “intoler able burdens” a uniform warrant requirement 
would create for law enforcement.  
 
In addition, the Supreme Court has held that a person arrested without a warrant is entitled 
to prompt judicial determination of probable cause before that person can be detained for 
any extended period. 
 
Not all police stops are arrests that require probable cause. In Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968), 
the Supreme Court held that the police may briefly detain and question a person for 
investigative purposes if there are specific “articulable” reasons to do so. A valid stop may 
yield evidence to effect an arrest. If the police arrest or detain unlawfully, any statements or 
evidence obtained as a result will be suppressed. The suspect may still be prosecuted, 
however, if other untainted evidence of wrongdoing exists. 
 
Interrogation of Suspects 
After the arrest, the suspect is placed in custody. While in custody, the police can interrogate 
the suspect to obtain information or a confession, but there are limits on such 
interrogations.  
 
The Fifth Amendment provides that a person cannot be compelled to give information that 
may incriminate him in a criminal case, but it applies only to: 
• Compelled “testimonial statements:” The Fifth Amendment applies only to testimonial 
statements (i.e., any testimony or communicative evidence that might tend to incriminate 
the individual, either directly or indirectly, by leading the government to incriminating 
evidence). Nontestimonial conduct, such as compelling a suspect to appear in a line-up, 
give handwriting samples, or submit to blood or alcohol tests, is not barred by the Fifth 
Amendment. 
• Individuals : The Fifth Amendment applies only to individuals; business entities, including 
sole proprietorships and other organizations, do not have a Fifth Amendment privilege. 
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.504  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Fifth Amendment protects an individual’s personal papers that are not voluntarily 
prepared, including tax returns, if incriminating. Documents such as appointment books, 
correspondence, and other records that the subject prepared without government 
compulsion are not covered by the Amendment and must be produced. 
 
To ensure that every citizen has the opportunity to exercise this fundamental right, the 
Supreme Court ruled in the landmark case of Miranda v. Arizona, 348 U.S. 436 (1966), that 
the police must give the following warnings (known as the Miranda  warnings) before 
interrogating any suspect held in custody: 
• That the suspect has the right to remain silent 
• That any statements can be used against him at trial 
• That the suspect has a right to the assistance of an attorney 
• That an attorney will be appointed to represent the suspect if he cannot afford to retain 
one 
 
Miranda warnings are required only if the suspect is (1) interrogated (2) while held in custody  
(3) by public authorities. Certain exceptions to the warning requirement apply, such as when 
immediate questioning is necessary to ensure public safety. The warnings generally are not 
required when a person is being questioned by private parties. 
 
Once a suspect asserts the right to remain silent, all questioning must cease until counsel is 
provided. If the defendant thereafter decides to make a statement, the government must 
show that it was the result of a voluntary, knowing waiver of his rights. 
 
The Supreme Court, however, made major revisions to the Miranda warnings in three 
separate cases decided in 2010. In one case, the Court upheld a version of the Miranda 
warnings that told a suspect of his right to a lawyer before, rather than during, 
interrogation. In a second case, the Court ruled that a suspect’s request for a lawyer is good 
for only 14 days after the suspect is released from custody. Finally, in a third case, the Court 
held that suspects must tell police that they are going to remain silent if they want to invoke 
their “right to remain silent” and stop an interrogation.  
 
                                                 
4 Florida v. Powell, 130 S. Ct. 1195 (Feb. 23, 2010).  
5 Maryland v. Shatzer, 130 S. Ct. 1213, 1223 (Feb. 24, 2010). 
6 Berghuis v. Thompkins, 130 S. Ct. 2250 (June 1, 2010).  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.505 
Apart from the Miranda requirements, a confession also must be voluntary, not coerced by 
physical or psychological means. Some inducement is permissible, such as informing the 
suspect that a confession might result in treatment that is more lenient. Using deceit and 
trickery to extract a confession, such as telling the suspect that an accomplice had confessed 
when in fact he had not, is treated differently by different courts, some permitting such 
confessions, others not. No confession will be admitted if the circumstances under which it 
was obtained render it unreliable. 
 
For more information on the applicability of the Fifth Amendment to investigations 
conducted by nongovernment personnel, please refer to the “Individual Rights” chapter.  
 
 
The Charging Process 
Once the government has arrested someone for a crime, the person under arrest must be 
brought before a magistrate without “unnecessary delay.” This is known as the “initial 
appearance.” At this time, the arresting officer must swear to a complaint, establishing 
probable cause, if the arrest was without a warrant. The defendant will then be advised of 
the nature of the complaint, of the right to retain counsel or to appointed counsel, and of 
the general circumstances under which pre-trial release may be obtained. 
 
For most offenses, individuals that are in police custody can post bail and be released 
pending trial. Bail is a money bond to ensure that defendants will show up for trial. If a 
defendant fails to show up, the bond is forfeited, and a warrant for the defendant’s arrest is 
issued. 
 
The Eighth Amendment, however, prohibits “excessive bail.” The Supreme Court has held 
that the Eighth Amendment does not absolutely require pre-trial release, only that if bail is 
appropriate, it be set no higher than necessary to assure the defendant’s presence at trial. If, 
under the circumstances, the presiding judge decides that release would pose a serious threat 
to the safety of the community or to a particular individual, or that no amount of bail or 
particular conditions of release would prevent the defendant from fleeing, the judge can 
deny bail to keep the defendant in custody. 
 
At the initial appearance, a defendant who has not yet been indicted also is informed of his 
right to a preliminary examination. This is a formal, adversary hearing before a judge where 
the defendant may be represented by counsel and can cross-examine witnesses. The purpose 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.506  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of the hearing is to determine whether there is probable cause to hold the defendant for 
further proceedings, not to establish guilt or innocence. Because of its limited purpose, 
hearsay and even illegally obtained evidence can be admissible. Motions to suppress must be 
made to the trial court. 
 
If the magistrate determines at the preliminary examination that there is no probable cause, 
the complaint will be dismissed and the defendant released. But the government may 
institute a subsequent prosecution for the same offense, presumably with better evidence. 
Preliminary examinations often are used by defense counsel as an opportunity to get free 
“discovery” of the details of the prosecution’s case.  
 
Because some defendants may use preliminary examinations to obtain information, some 
prosecutors prefer to obtain a grand jury indictment. A grand jury indictment is held to 
satisfy the probable cause requirements of the Fifth Amendment and precludes the need for 
the preliminary examination. (Every state in the U.S. has provisions for a grand jury, but not 
all use the option.) 
 
The Grand Jury 
The grand jury is an investigative body that is empowered to issue subpoenas for testimony 
and documents to determine whether a violation of the law has occurred. The grand jury 
consists of 16 to 23 people sworn as jurors who meet in secret deliberation, usually in 
biweekly or monthly sessions, to hear witnesses and other evidence presented by prosecutors 
and to vote on indictments. An indictment, or true bill, must be agreed upon by at least 12 
jurors voting without the prosecutor present. 
 
The hearing is a non-adversarial proceeding. The accused has no right to be informed of its 
deliberations, to know the evidence against him, or to confront the accusers. The accused 
also has no absolute right to appear, and if he does, may not be accompanied by counsel. 
However, the accused may periodically leave the grand jury to consult with the attorney. 
 
These severe limitations on the rights of the accused are thought by some to be justified on 
the grounds that they are necessary to investigate criminal activity effectively and that the 
grand jury has only the power to accuse, not to convict, the defendant. The defendant, if 
indicted, has full constitutional protections at trial. The grand jury’s power has been severely 
criticized by many legal and public interest groups. Abuse of its processes can do severe 
damage to innocent parties, particularly public figures to whom an indictment alone can be 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.507 
devastating. For this reason, defense counsel in major white-collar cases now often begins its 
defense at the grand jury stage to try to convince prosecutors not to indict — rather than 
waiting, as was traditionally the case, until an indictment is returned. 
 
The grand jury has the right to subpoena witnesses and documents. Refusals to appear or 
produce may be punishable as contempt, with fines or jail terms until the subpoena is 
complied with or the grand jury term expires. A witness or target of the grand jury retains 
the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
A grand jury may be used to obtain evidence of possible violations of the criminal law, and 
its process may not be used as a ruse to obtain evidence for parallel civil actions. A common 
example of such parallel proceedings would be investigation of possible antitrust violations. 
The grand jury may, however, with the appropriate court order, make evidence available to 
the proper government authorities for a civil proceeding, as long as the primary purpose of 
its inquiry was to enforce the criminal laws. Access by private parties via court orders to 
grand jury evidence for use in private civil proceedings is unlikely to be granted because of 
secrecy requirements, unless substantial need is demonstrated. 
 
Immunity 
In the course of a grand jury investigation or a criminal trial, the prosecution may apply for a 
court order compelling testimony from a witness under a grant of immunity. Because 
immunized testimony cannot be used against the witness in any criminal proceeding, such an 
order does not violate the Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination. 
 
An immunity order  protects the witness only from prosecution from past crimes about which 
testimony is compelled; other, undiscovered crimes are not covered, nor is the witness 
immune from prosecution for perjury based on the immunized testimony. Such testimony 
also may be used against the witness in a civil proceeding.  
 
Although it is legally permissible to prosecute an immunized witness on the basis of other 
testimony and evidence, as a matter of practice this is seldom done because of policy 
considerations and the difficulty of demonstrating — as the law requires — that the 
subsequent prosecution was not in any way based on the compelled testimony. 
 
A decision to immunize a witness is solely within the discretion of the prosecution. If the 
application meets statutory requirements, the court must grant the order. If the immunized 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.508  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witness refuses to testify — out of fear of reprisal or for any other reason — the witness will be 
found in contempt and jailed until he agrees to testify or the grand jury term expires. The 
witness can then be summoned before a new grand jury and the process repeated indefinitely 
or until a judge decides that there is no possibility that further incarceration will induce 
cooperation. 
 
Indictment and Information 
In the federal system, all offenses punishable by death must be charged by indictment; all 
felonies (generally crimes punishable by imprisonment for a year or more) must be 
prosecuted by indictment, unless the defendant waives the requirement, in which case the 
prosecution may proceed by the filing of an “information.” An information is a charge signed 
only by the prosecutor without the involvement of the grand jury. A misdemeanor may be 
charged by either an indictment or information. 
 
Arraignment 
Once the defendant is formally charged, he is brought before the court to enter a plea. This 
process is called the arraignment. A defendant named in an indictment, if not already in 
custody, may be arrested on a warrant. Alternatively—more often in white-collar crime 
cases — the defendant is summoned to appear before a magistrate at a stated time and place 
to be arraigned.  
 
The arraignment must take place in open court, and it consists of reading the indictment or 
information to the defendant and calling on him to enter a plea. The defendant may plead 
guilty, not guilty, or nolo contendere. If the defendant pleads guilty, the sentencing phase of the 
criminal justice process begins. A plea of not guilty sets in motion the adjudicative process as 
described below. A plea of nolo contendere means the defendant does not contest the charges, 
without formally admitting or denying them. A defendant may plead nolo only with the 
consent of the court. If accepted, a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilty for purposes of 
punishment, but it cannot be used as a formal admission of guilt. This makes it a favored 
plea for corporate defendants facing subsequent civil litigation. 
 
Before the court will accept a guilty plea, it must follow procedures to ensure that the plea is 
voluntary and accurate; that is, that there is a “factual basis” for the plea. This usually means 
that the defendant must admit to committing acts that satisfy each element of the offense. In 
some circumstances, however, a defendant may be allowed to enter an Alford plea (named 
after the Supreme Court case that upheld the practice) under which he pleads guilty, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.509 
although continuing to assert innocence. Such a plea may be made to obtain the benefits of a 
plea agreement and to avoid potentially more dire consequences, such as the death penalty, if 
the defendant is convicted after trial. Before the court accepts an Alford  plea, it must 
determine that there is strong evidence of guilt and that the defendant understands the 
consequences.  
 
Prosecutorial Discretion and Plea Bargains 
Whether criminal cases are actually brought to trial might depend on prosecutorial discretion, 
meaning that the decision to prosecute is left to the discretion of the appropriate 
jurisdictional authority. Prosecutors exercising this discretion consider issues like the 
potential for deterrence, the strength of the available evidence, and the resources (time, 
labor, money) incurred by going to trial. In general, the question is about the chances for 
obtaining a guilty verdict, but it is also about the cost and demands of achieving that verdict. 
According to federal statistics, about 84 percent of the people arrested are prosecuted; 62 
percent of these are convicted, and 34 percent are incarcerated. Cases can be handled 
through plea bargains or cooperative agreements, which are discussed below, in exchange for 
assistance, so it is difficult to say, statistically, how “successful” prosecutorial efforts have 
been. However, when public officials take a case to court, they are generally armed and 
ready — of those cases that do go to trial, more than 90 percent end in conviction. 
 
High-level crimes, especially those involving public figures, may require special approval 
from the U.S. Department of Justice before it  may be tried. White-collar crime is sometimes 
prosecuted on the basis of declination guidelines that set out dollar amounts below which cases 
are not accepted. A prosecutor’s office might decide, for example, that securities frauds of 
less than $500,000 will not be brought to trial. Because of the immense effort required to 
prosecute many fraudulent acts, prosecutors have to weigh the cost and exertion of going to 
court versus the amount available for recovery. Accordingly, many businesses are turning to 
civil actions to redress fraud. As the criminal courts become more and more jammed, 
companies can often speed up the process by filing their own civil action. Although the 
perpetrator cannot be given jail time as a result of a purely civil action, he can be ordered to 
pay back the ill-gotten funds.  
 
Prosecuting attorneys also have the power to settle charges with a plea bargain arrangement, 
avoiding the expenditures of time and effort involved at trial. About 90 percent of criminal 
defendants never go to trial, opting instead for a deal. Critics have charged that the plea  
 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.510  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
privilege is abused by cynical prosecutors and leads to dangerous offenders being released 
quickly and without retribution. 
  
The U.S. Supreme Court disagrees. A majority decision in 1971 declared that the plea 
bargain is a “highly desirable” part of the justice system because it “leads to prompt and 
largely final disposition” in most cases; it “a voids much of the corrosive impact of enforced 
idleness” suffered by defendants who aren’t released on bail; it reduces the chances that an 
accused person will commit a crime while free on bail; and it “enhances whatever may be the 
rehabilitative prospects” of the guilty by “shortening the time between charge and 
disposition” ( Santabello v.  New York, 404 U.S. 257, 261 (1971)). 
 
Plea bargains also can be a boon to offenders. A plea bargain is a negotiation between the 
parties that settles a criminal case. After entering a plea bargain, some offenders are released 
from any prosecution whatsoever, and others receive lesser charges. In a study of white-
 collar criminals, more than 42 percent of cooperating defendants were charged with just one 
violation of the law, while only 30 percent of noncooperating defendants were so lucky. 
 
Once charges are filed against them, white-collar defendants are more likely to insist on a 
trial than other offenders are. On average, considering all federal indictments, only about 10 
percent of those accused of committing a crime plead not guilty and proceed to trial. But 
more than 18 percent of defendants in white-collar cases (nearly double the average) insist 
on their trial. People accused of securities fraud are especially likely to demand their day in 
court, with well over half of these defendants pleading not guilty. 
 
Corporate Deferred Prosecution Agreements 
Generally, deferred prosecution agreements occur when prosecutors file criminal charges 
against a company, but then agree not to prosecute the claims as long as the company 
successfully complies with the deferral agreement’s terms. Essentially, deferred prosecution 
agreements help companies avoid indictment, trial, and conviction while providing 
prosecutors with another channel for disposing a corporate case that punishes malfeasance 
and effectuates changes in a company’s culture. 
 
The Burden of Proof in Criminal Trials 
In criminal cases, the verdict must be based on assurance beyond a reasonable doubt. Conversely, 
civil trials requires only a “preponderance of the evidence” to support a decision; therefore, 
criminal trials are tougher. Plainly put, beyond a reasonable doubt requires that jurors and 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.511 
judges hearing criminal cases to be as sure as they possibly can that the defendant committed 
the acts as charged. In purely philosophical terms, there might always be room for doubt 
(“Well, did he really…?”). Fraud charges can be especially hard to prove because the 
evidence is by its nature overwhelmingly circumstantial (i.e., composed of documents and 
their interpretation versus the testimony of eyewitnesses). But arch skepticism is hardly 
practical in making necessary legal decisions. Deciding “beyond a reasonable doubt” entails 
making the most assured judgment possible based on the evidence as presented. The appeals 
process recognizes that more than one examination of the charge(s) might be necessary to 
ensure an accurate, fair-minded verdict.  
 
The prosecution is responsible for proving the charges against the defendant. The 
Constitution guarantees that the accused is presumed innocent until the prosecution shows 
otherwise. The presumption of innocence  means that, until the prosecution proves every element 
of a charge beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant must be found not guilty, even if he 
offers no evidence in his defense. 
 
Pre-trial Motions in Criminal Court 
Criminal trials, like civil proceedings, often begin with pre-trial motions. Some of these are 
the same regardless of the type of court (civil or criminal). For example, both criminal and 
civil defendants can make motions in limine  to exclude certain evidence, can ask that the charge 
or complaint be made more definite and certain, or can request a postponement of the trial 
date. Other motions are particular  to the criminal process.  
 
Some pre-trial motions typically used in criminal trials are discussed below. 
 
Motion for Severance 
This motion occurs in cases involving multiple defendants that are to tried at the same trial. 
This motion asks that the defendants be tried separately, or at least that this particular 
defendant’s trial be conducted separately. 
 
Motion to Suppress Evidence 
A motion to suppress evidence argues that evidence that was improperly obtained, is 
impertinent or unduly prejudicial, or violates some other right, and it asks the court to issue 
an order that the evidence be excluded from consideration. In many cases motions to 
exclude evidence — decided at a suppression hear ing, where the judge (without a jury) rules 
on the propriety of the government’s conduct — are more important than the trial itself. If 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.512  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the defense is able to exclude certain pieces of evidence (e.g., seized narcotics, a tainted 
confession, or critical books and records), the prosecution might be forced to dismiss the 
charges (at least temporarily) for lack of adequate proof. But an unsuccessful suppression 
motion might be followed by renewed interest by the defendant in a plea bargain. 
 
Motion for a Change of Venue 
This motion asks the judge to move the trial to another court because the defendant cannot 
receive a fair trial due to public prejudice.  
 
Motion to Dismiss  
A motion to dismiss asks a judge to throw out the lawsuit because the opposing party’s 
argument is legally unsound. There are several grounds upon which a defendant may request 
that the indictment be dismissed. The most common reasons supporting motions to dismiss 
are discussed below.  
 
VIOLATING THE DEFENDANT’S RIGHT TO A SPEEDY TRIAL 
The indictment may be dismissed for violations of a defendant’s right to a speedy trial, when 
the trial date exceeds a certain amount of time after the charge (usually 70 days). A related 
basis for the motion is alleging pre-indictment delay, when, for example, the prosecution 
took an excessively long time in bringing the indictment.  
 
SELECTIVE PROSECUTION 
When multiple perpetrators are involved in a criminal act, a defendant may claim “selective 
prosecution,” accusing the authorities of targeting some individuals and exonerating others 
without cause. Defendants also may allege “vindictive prosecution.” If, after being 
exonerated on one charge, a person is charged with another, more serious charge, the 
individual may claim vindictive prosecution. 
 
VIOLATING THE DOUBLE JEOPARDY CLAUSE 
The “Double Jeopardy” clause of the Fifth Amendment — which prevents someone from 
being tried for the same crime twice — may be used to request a dismissal. Dismissal motions 
also may claim that the indictment is invalid because it is based on tainted evidence, 
insufficient evidence, or illegally seized evidence. 
 
A MOTION CHALLENGING THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE INDICTMENT 
Rule 7 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires the indictment to contain a plain, 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.513 
concise, and definite statement of the essential facts constituting the charge(s) against the 
defendant. As discussed previously, the indictment must, therefore, allege all of the essential 
elements of the crimes charged, including the requisite criminal intent where required by 
statute. If the indictment is deficient, then the defense can challenge it. The defense may 
challenge the indictment if the prosecution failed to plead an essential element of the fraud 
offense or plead the necessary facts. But even if an indictment is dismissed for insufficiency, 
the prosecution is usually free to re-file the indictment.   
 
EXAMPLE  
If a defendant is charged with mail fraud, the indictment must specifically describe the details of 
the fraudulent scheme perpetrated through the use of the mail and must set forth the false 
representations. (See United States v. Hess, 124 U.S. 483 [1888].) If the indictment fails 
to do this, the court will dismiss the indictment. However, the victory might be short-lived. Even 
though the indictment is dismissed, the prosecution usually is free to re-file the indictment.  
 
DUPLICITY 
Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure requires that each count of an 
indictment state one and only one offense. A count that charges two or more offenses is 
duplicitous. Unfortunately, what constitutes a single offense often is hard to determine with 
white-collar criminal statutes. Single and continuing offenses, committed for several 
objectives or by multiple means, like mail or wire fraud or conspiracy, may be charged in one 
count, although they alternatively could be charged as separate and distinct counts. 
Generally, however, if the separate violations are all a part of the same criminal scheme, they 
can be alleged in the same count. This is sometimes preferable for the defendant because if 
all of the violations are alleged in one count, it looks to the jury as if the defendant has 
committed one fraud rather than 50 separate frauds.  
 
MULTIPLICITY 
Multiplicity is the opposite of duplicity. Multiplicity occurs when two or more counts charge 
essentially the same offense, thereby exposing the defendant to cumulative punishment for 
one offense. In essence, multiplicity occurs when a defendant is charged twice for the same 
offense, exposing him to double the punishment. 
 
Discovery 
Discovery refers to the formal process whereby the parties to litigation collect evidence and 
learn the details of the opposing side’s case. Both the defendant and prosecution have 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.514  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
statutory rights to certain pre-trial discovery. The defendant may inspect copies of all 
relevant statements made by him (or, if a corporation, by its employees) in the custody of the 
government, a copy of the accused’s prior criminal record, and all documents, items, test 
results, and other evidence the government intends to introduce at a trial or that are 
necessary to the defense. But the defendant does not have an absolute right to see copies of 
prior statements made by a witness against him until such witness testifies at trial. In many 
cases, however, particularly fraud prosecutions where there is less risk of reprisal or 
tampering with witnesses, the government may voluntarily produce these statements before 
trial. 
 
Discovery Under Rule 16 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 16 identifies the information that each side must 
disclose. Generally, the defense is entitled to inspect and copy statements made by the 
defendant. The defense also may inspect the defendant’s prior record, material documents, 
tangible objects, and examination and test reports. 
 
If, and only if, the defendant requests discovery of documents and objects, or of 
examination and test reports, the government may seek similar kinds of materials from the 
defense. Any items that must be disclosed are required to be disclosed “as soon as 
reasonably possible.” The court may regulate the discovery process by entering protective 
orders or punishing the failure to timely provide the proper information.  
 
The rule allows the defense to obtain statements the defendant made to third parties, as well 
as government agents, if the statements were reduced to writing. Therefore, any written 
statements made by the defendant to the CFE investigating the case, if the statements were 
turned over to law enforcement or the government, must be produced. But oral statements 
made to third parties (i.e., nongovernmental agents) generally are protected from discovery. 
 
SUMMARY OF RULE 16 DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS 
• Statements of the defendant. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must disclose 
any relevant written or recorded statements made by the defendant. This includes written 
records of any relevant statements made by the defendant to a government agent, either 
before or after arrest, as well as any recorded testimony of the defendant made before a 
grand jury, which relates to the offense charged.  
• The defendant’s prior record. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must furnish a 
copy of the defendant’s prior criminal record, if it exists.  
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.515 
• Documents and tangible objects. Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy or photograph any books, papers, documents, 
photographs, tangible objects, buildings, or places which (1) are material to the 
preparation of the defendant’s case; (2) are intended for use as evidence at trial by the 
government; or (3) were obtained from the defendant or belong to the defendant. 
• Reports of examinations and tests.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must allow 
the defendant to inspect and copy any results or reports of physical or mental 
examinations, scientific tests, or experiments that are material to the preparation of the 
defense or that the government plans to use as evidence at trial.  
• Expert witnesses.  Upon the defendant’s request, the government must provide a written 
summary of the testimony to be given by its expert witnesses. This summary must 
include the expert’s opinions, the basis of those opinions, and the qualifications of the 
expert.  
 
While the state has a broad duty to disclose evidence in criminal cases, there are limits to 
what it must turn over to the defense. The defendant does not have a right to the work 
product of the state, which includes reports, memoranda, and other internal documents 
made by the government attorney in preparing for and prosecuting the case. In addition, the 
defendant does not have a right to inspect statements made by government witnesses prior 
to the time the witness actually testifies.  
 
The Jencks Act (18 U.S.C. § 3500) 
The Jencks Act permits the defendant to obtain, prior to cross-examination, a government 
witness’s prior statements (or portions thereof) that relate to the subject matter of his 
testimony on direct examination. However, the statute also protects statements from 
discovery until after the direct examination has been completed. The statements that must be 
produced include not only the written statements signed by the witness, but also may include 
notes or memoranda of government agents or prosecutors which set forth what the witness 
said during interviews. 
 
Exculpatory Information (Brady Material) 
The prosecutor has an ethical responsibility not to use evidence that is false and must correct 
testimony that he knows is false. In 1963, the Supreme Court (in the case of Brady v. 
Maryland, 373 U.S. 83) expanded the prosecution’s duty further. Under Brady, the 
prosecution must disclose all evidence requested by the defendant that is material to guilt or 
punishment (i.e., evidence that would tend to exculpate  him or reduce his penalty). The 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.516  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
government is expressly forbidden from concealing evidence that would call the charges into 
question. 
 
Disclosures by the Defendant 
Prosecution has similar privileges to learn the substance of the defense’s case and the basis 
for the accused person’s not-guilty plea. If the defendant requests disclosure of the 
prosecution’s documents and tangible objects, reports of examinations and tests, and its 
expert witnesses, then the prosecution is correspondingly entitled to disclosure of these 
items from the defense. The prosecution is not, of course, entitled to disclosure of the 
defendant’s work product, nor is it entitled to statements made by prospective witnesses to 
the defendant or his attorneys.  
 
 
The Trial Process 
Under the Sixth Amendment, the accused is entitled to a “speedy and public trial, by an 
impartial jury, in the state and district wherein the crime [was] committed …” In federal 
courts, the Speedy Trial Act mandates that the defendant be indicted within 30 days of arrest 
and tried within 70 days of notice of the charges, excluding delays caused by certain 
enumerated circumstances. If the time limits are not adhered to, the court may dismiss the 
case with or without prejudice, depending on the circumstances. 
 
Jury Selection 
The Constitution requires that “the trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall 
be by Jury …” In the federal system, the defendant may waive the right with the consent of 
the court and prosecution. Petty offenses do not require a trial by jury.  
 
Most criminal cases are tried by a jury of 12 with at least two alternates, but the parties may 
stipulate to a lesser number. The jury is expected to be impartial. For the jury selection 
process, called voir dire, the prospective jurors are brought into the courtroom, and they are 
questioned by the parties or the court to determine their suitability. Jurors are asked about 
their background, employment, general beliefs and principles, knowledge of the actual case 
or cases like it, whether they know any of the parties in the case or their attorneys—virtually 
anything that might elucidate the potential juror’s state of mind is fair game. (Provided, of 
course, the material is relevant to the case; outright character assassination is not part of jury 
selection, though some jurors have felt otherwise, especially in high-publicity trials.) 
 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.517 
There are three ways potential jurors are dismissed. In the first instance, the judge exercises 
discretion and dismisses a juror upon his own initiative. This happens when a juror fails to 
meet the minimum qualifications or is otherwise unable to serve.  
 
The second method dismisses individuals for cause (i.e., a request that a prospective juror be 
dismissed because his predispositions make him unfit to serve as a juror). Each party may 
remove any number of prospective jurors for cause, such as admitted bias or prejudice. 
Challenges for cause are not limited in number. 
 
The third way to dismiss jurors is by exercising a peremptory challenge. A peremptory challenge  
allows a litigant to remove someone from the jury panel without comment or justification. 
Peremptory challenges allow a party to remove a juror for virtually any reason. A party, 
however, cannot use its peremptory challenges in a way that is solely influenced by race, 
ethnicity, or gender. And unlike challenges for cause, peremptory challenges are limited in 
number.  
 
Additionally, the defendant may challenge the entire jury pool — called the venire — if the 
selection procedures systematically exclude certain groups, such as minorities, women, or 
young people.  
 
The jury that hears the case (the petit jury) is not required to reflect a cross-section of the 
community or contain individuals of the same race or age as the defendant. 
 
Opening Statements 
Once the jury is selected and sworn, and after some introductory remarks by the judge, the 
actual trial begins with the opening statements. The opening statements allow each side to 
present their positions to the jury; it lets them outline the evidence they will present and 
what the evidence will prove. In general, the prosecution presents its opening statement first. 
In it, the prosecutor usually explains the charges, outlines the evidence he intends to 
produce, and tells the jury that the prosecution will ask for a verdict of guilty. The 
prosecutor is not permitted to argue the case at this point; that will be done at the end. The 
defense counsel then gives an opening statement, although on occasion it will wait until the 
defense case begins. 
 
Presenting Evidence 
After the opening statements, each side presents its case. That is, each side presents 
witnesses and exhibits to build its case.  
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.518  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, the side with the burden of proof presents its case first. Thus, in criminal trial, the 
prosecution presents its case first because it bears the burden of proving every element of 
the offense beyond a reasonable doubt. The defense is under no obligation to produce any 
evidence at any time. 
 
The trial begins by calling witnesses to the stand for direct examination — the initial questioning 
by the side that called the witness. After the direct examination, the opposing party can 
submit these witnesses to cross-examination, referring to questioning of one side’s witness by 
the opposing side, but the opposing party may waive this right and proceed without 
questions. After cross-examination is complete, the party that called the witness can, if it 
chooses, reopen direct (referred to as redirect examination ), which may be followed by re-cross  
questioning by the opposing party. At the end of questioning, each witness is dismissed, 
though the person can be called again later by either side. 
 
Most evidence presented in court comes from di rect testimony. As a general rule, a witness’s 
testimony must be confined to facts within personal knowledge rather than conjecture or 
opinion. A duly qualified expert witness, however, may give an opinion if the court 
determines that it will assist the jury to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in 
issue. Accountants and fraud examiners may be (and often are) called to testify in fraud cases 
as lay witnesses, experts, or both. See the chapter on “Testifying as an Expert Witness” for 
more information. 
 
The Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant the right to confront and cross-examine 
witnesses. This is a principal reason why hearsay evidence — statements made out of court 
and not based on a witness’ direct knowledge — generally is excluded. Under the Sixth 
Amendment’s confrontation clause, a witness’s out-of-court statements are not admissible at 
trial unless the witness is testifying at trial and is subject to cross-examination. When hearsay 
is used instead of live testimony, the defendant can argue that the hearsay declarant was a 
witness and that the defendant was not afforded the opportunity to confront the witness. If 
a judge unduly restricts a defendant’s right to probe the prosecution’s witnesses’ credibility 
or knowledge of the facts, a conviction may be reversed.  
 
During trial, a party may object to the admission of evidence. The admission of evidence and 
objections thereto are ruled on by the trial judge. The rules of evidence are complex but can 
be summarized as follows: they intend to limit the evidence presented to the jury to only 
matters relevant to the specific charges, and to exclude unreliable or unduly prejudicial 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.519 
evidence. The same piece of evidence, however, may be admissible or inadmissible 
depending on the specific reason for which it is being offered. For example, evidence of 
other similar crimes or wrongful acts by the defendant may not be offered by the 
prosecution merely to show that the defendant is more likely to have committed the crime 
charged. But the same evidence may be introduced to prove intent, if disputed by the 
defendant, to rebut a claim of accident or mistake, or to impeach false testimony by the 
accused. 
 
At the close of the prosecution’s case, the defense usually moves for a judgment of acquittal 
on the ground that the prosecution’s evidence — even if believed—is legally insufficient to 
convict. If the judge grants the motion, the trial ends and the defendant is acquitted. If the 
motion is denied, the defendant may elect to present evidence or may rest. 
 
After the prosecution has presented its case, the defense will make its case. If the defendant 
elects to testify, he is subject to cross-examination, and the prosecution may impeach the 
defendant’s credibility by showing prior convictions. This usually is a deathblow to the 
defense and is the reason many defendants do not testify. The judge, however, may exclude 
such evidence as unduly prejudicial, particularly if the prior crime is remote in time or did 
not involve dishonesty or false statements. 
 
A defendant is entitled to call character witnesses on his behalf who often have no 
knowledge of the charges or facts in issue, but who are prepared to testify to the defendant’s 
character. Such testimony must be given in the form of the witness’s opinion or testimony as 
to the defendant’s general good reputation; testimony as to specific incidents of good 
conduct is not permitted because such would prove too confusing and time-consuming. 
Moreover, because any character evidence is ci rcumstantial at best, it is considered 
permissible to limit the testimony to reputation or opinion. Character witnesses may be 
asked on cross-examination if they have “heard about” alleged wrongful or dishonest acts by 
the accused, including a prior conviction. 
 
Common Legal Issues in Fraud Cases 
Two general types of legal issue — one subst antive, the other procedural — are often 
encountered in fraud examinations. The substantive issue includes the proving of each 
element of the offense beyond a reasonable doubt, including the element of intent (if intent, 
in fact, is an element). The procedural issue includes the right to counsel and the manner in 
which fraud examiners employed by law enforcement have conducted arrests, searches and 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.520  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
seizures, and interrogations. Fraud examiners are most likely to encounter legal problems 
over such issues as the condition, organization, and sanctity of their work papers and their 
audit assumptions if the case is based on an accounting hypothesis (net worth method, for 
example). 
 
Often, accounting data used as evidence is challenged as not meeting the hearsay exceptions. 
In general, the issues that arise with such evidence is whether the proffered documentary 
evidence is the “best” evidence, and whether secondary evidence is admissible when the best 
evidence is unavailable.  
 
Similarly, questions about the business records exception to the hearsay rule often arise. That 
is, a party questions whether a record was made in the ordinary course of doing business or 
was made in books of account contemporaneously with a business transaction.  
 
Another issue often encountered is the expertness of a fraud examiner called to provide 
expert testimony (opinion evidence). A party may challenge an expert witness’s credentials, 
and they may call another expert to question the first expert’s opinions. 
 
Legal Defenses 
A defense is an assertion by a defendant in a criminal or civil suit that seeks to explain away 
guilt or civil liability for damages. The more common defenses include:  
• Alibi 
• Consent 
• De minimis  infraction (trivial) 
• Duress 
• Entrapment 
• Ignorance 
• Mistake 
• Infancy 
• Insanity 
• Necessity 
• Protection of property 
• Self-defense 
• Public duty 
• Legal impossibility 
• Protection of others   
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.521 
A defendant might also raise a defense based on statutes of limitations, proper venue, and 
proper jurisdiction. 
 
In criminal fraud cases where intent is an element of the crime, defense attorneys may 
advance a number of “smoke screen” theories to excuse their clients of guilt (i.e., by alleging 
some inhibiting factor to the formulation of intent). For example, while ignorance of the law 
might be no excuse, it can persuade a jury, particularly if the crime is complex and financial 
in nature (e.g., an income tax evasion case where the net worth method of income 
reconstruction has been utilized). Some types of computerized embezzlements fit this 
category, too, as does bank fraud, securities fraud, and price-fixing conspiracies. In short, 
while ignorance of the law might not be an excuse, it sometimes induces pity or sorrow.  
 
Likewise, a defendant might use innocent mistak e, advanced age, sickness, and illiteracy to 
evoke sympathy, and while they may not work as defenses, they may persuade the judge or 
jury to be lenient in sentencing. 
 
Insanity may be used as a defense—and often is—in crimes of violence. But to make an 
insanity defense, the defendant generally must provide notice of the insanity defense before 
trial.  
 
The defenses that cause prosecutors the most headaches are assertions of poor investigative 
work (e.g., improper arrests, searches, seizures, and interrogations, improper handling and 
documentation of evidence, privacy invasions, and libeling, slandering, and defaming the 
defendant during the investigation). In fraud examinations, a defendant might make 
allegations of sloppy auditing and mishandling of work papers. 
 
Also, the increased use of the undercover approach in criminal investigations has led to an 
increase in the use of entrapment defenses. Entrapment occurs when law enforcement 
officers or government agents induce a person to commit a crime that he is not previously 
disposed to commit. To make this defense, the defendant claims that the peace officer or 
undercover agent solicited, encouraged, or incited the criminal act, and without that 
incitement, the defendant claims that he would not have committed the act. 
 
Rebuttal Witnesses 
After the defense rests, the court may permit the prosecution to call rebuttal witnesses and 
permit the defense to put on rebuttal evidence. At the close of all evidence, the defense may 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.522  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make or renew its motion for a judgment of acquittal. The court may reserve its decision, 
submit the case to the jury, and decide the motion before or after the jury returns with a 
verdict. The motion may be made for the first time and granted even after the jury brings in 
a guilty verdict. 
 
Proposed Jury Instructions  
At the close of the evidence, the jury usually is temporarily discharged and the parties meet 
with the judge to submit proposed jury instructions to the court. Usually, jury instructions 
are read to the jury after closing arguments, and the instructions will include such matters as 
the basic elements of the charges, the definition of reasonable doubt, the prosecution’s 
burden, and, if requested by the defense, the warning that no adverse inference may be 
drawn from the failure of the defendant to testify. Some defense attorneys, however, do not 
request adverse inference instructions because they believe it merely reminds the jury of the 
accused’s failure to explain or defend his conduct. 
 
Each side is entitled to instructions on the law supporting its theory of the case if there is 
any credible evidence in its favor even if there is substantial evidence to the contrary. If a 
request to instruct the jury is denied, a party must object and state the grounds for its 
objection before the jury retires to preserve its right to appeal. This is an extremely 
important point for defense counsel because jury instruction errors provide fertile ground 
for reversals on appeal. 
 
Closing Arguments 
After both sides have presented their evidence, they make their closing arguments. The 
closing arguments provide the jury with a final opportunity to hear each side’s positions. The 
prosecution argues first, the defense follows, and the prosecution has the opportunity for 
final rebuttal.  
 
The remarks in closing arguments are limited to issues pertinent to the case and confined to 
evidence presented during the trial. Improper comments during closing may be objected to 
by the opposing attorney, and the judge may strike them from the record if the objection is 
sustained. In extreme situations, a closing argument deemed improper may result in a 
mistrial; the present proceedings are terminated, and if the plaintiff or prosecutor chooses, a 
new trial date set. 
 
The prosecutor is held to a particularly high standard in closing argument. He may not 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.523 
misstate the evidence, express a personal opinion as to the defendant’s guilt or the credibility 
of witnesses, or otherwise make prejudicial or inflammatory remarks. The prosecutor is 
expected to stick to the facts and to the reasonable inferences that can be drawn therefrom.  
 
In most cases, the defense’s closing argument focus on attacking the motives and credibility 
of the government’s witnesses and emphasizes the heavy burden of proof the government 
bears. 
 
Instructions to the Jury 
After both parties have presented their closing arguments, the next step is for the judge to 
instruct the jury. In a jury trial, the judge presents a charge, or instructions, to the jury. Again, 
the instructions state the legal issues to be considered in a case, define any unusual terms, 
and tell the jury specifically what it must decide, reviewing the complaint or indictment 
count by count if necessary. A verdict charge form will state the decisive issues in a question-and-answer 
format; the jury uses the questions to focus their deliberation. 
 
Jury Deliberations 
After hearing instructions, the jury retires for its deliberations and selects a foreperson. 
Generally, the verdict must be unanimous. But in some states, such as Oregon and 
Louisiana, a jury can return a conviction with only 10 of 12 votes. If the jury is unable to 
reach a verdict, the judge will declare a mistrial. If there is a mistrial, the defendant can be 
retried if the prosecution elects to do so; double jeopardy does not attach unless the 
defendant is acquitted after the jury is sworn. 
 
Verdict of the Jury 
If the jury reaches a verdict, the foreperson or the bailiff announces the verdict in open 
court. Either party may request that the jury be polled, that is, that each juror be asked 
individually whether he concurred in the verdict. If any juror answers “no,” the jury must 
return for further deliberations or may be discharged. 
 
 
Sentencing 
Following a guilty verdict, the judge must impose a sentence without unnecessary delay. 
Prior to the sentencing hearing, a probation officer will prepare a pre-sentence report that 
will review the defendant’s character, background, associates, prior criminal record, and 
other factors relevant to setting an appropriate sentence. The report will recommend a 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.524  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
particular sentence or range of sentence. The Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure require 
that the pre-sentence report contain a victim impact statement, that is, an assessment of the 
financial, social, psychological, and medical impact upon, and cost to, the victim of the 
crime. This information may be used to set the punishment or to support a possible 
restitution order. The defendant and his counsel are allowed to review all or parts of the 
probation report except the sentencing recommendation. 
 
At the sentencing hearing, the defendant, counsel, and the prosecutor may be heard before a 
sentence is imposed. The court may impose a fine, a term of imprisonment, or both, or place 
the defendant on probation for a specified period and under certain conditions. The court 
may order restitution to the victims in addition to a fine or prison term, or as a condition of 
probation. A federal statute provides that a defendant who has been found guilty of fraud 
may be ordered to give notice to the victims, apparently to protect the public from further 
fraudulent acts by the defendant and to alert the victims to the possibility of civil recoveries. 
 
Sentences of imprisonment for two or more offenses may be ordered to run consecutively 
or concurrently, depending on the nature and severity of the offenses and other factors. In 
federal court, a defendant may be fined up to twice the pecuniary gain realized from the 
crime, or twice the loss sustained by the victim as an alternative to the statutory amounts. 
 
Sentencing Guidelines 
The Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 provided for the development of guidelines for the 
sentencing of individual and organizational offenders. The individual guidelines became 
effective in 1987, and the guidelines for organizations in 1991. In April 2010, the U.S. 
Sentencing Commission modified sentencing guidelines for organizations, especially as they 
relate to compliance programs. The changes will become effective on November 1, 2010, 
barring any Congressional modifications or rejection. 
 
Individual Guidelines 
Under the guidelines, sentencing determinations are made by cross-referencing the base offense 
level assigned to a particular offense with the “defendant’s criminal history category.” There 
are 43 basic offense levels (murder and treason being level 43 offenses) and six criminal 
history categories. Adjustments may be made up or down in each table based on the 
particular facts and circumstances of the case. For example, the base offense level for crimes 
involving fraud or deceit is six, but if the fraud involved a loss of more than $2,000, more 
than minimal planning, or other aggravating circumstances, the base offense level can be 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.525 
substantially increased. The final applicable offense level is then coordinated with the 
criminal history category of the defendant (which is computed on a point basis according to 
the number and type of previous convictions and other factors) to arrive at the final 
sentencing level. The court may depart from the recommended sentence if unique factors 
are present, but any such departure must be supported by specific reasons. 
 
As an example, a defendant with no prior convictions convicted of fraud involving the loss 
of $10,000 would be sentenced to a term of four to 10 months, absent unusual 
circumstances. If the fraud resulted in the loss of $1 million, involved more than minimal 
planning, and was perpetrated by a defendant who had a previous conviction punishable by 
more than a year in prison, the recommended term of imprisonment would be 41 to 51 
months. Under the Sentencing Act, the defendant will serve a substantial amount of the 
sentence he receives (a small reduction is possible for good behavior); the Sentencing Act 
abolished parole in federal cases. 
 
Sentencing of Organizations 
The sentencing guidelines for organizations were designed to reconcile the wide disparity in 
federal sentencing.  
 
Corporations and other organizations may be criminally liable for offenses committed by 
their agents if committed in the scope of the agent’s duty and with the intended purpose of 
benefiting the organization. 
 
Sentencing guidelines for organizations indicate that: 
• The court must, whenever practicable, order the organization to remedy any harm 
caused by the offense. 
• If the organization operated primarily for a criminal purpose, the fine should be set 
sufficiently high to divest the organization of all assets. 
• The fine range for any other organization should be based on the seriousness of the 
offense and the culpability of the organization. Culpability generally will be determined 
by the steps taken by the organization prior to the offense to prevent and detect criminal 
conduct, the extent of involvement in or tolerance of the offense by the organization’s 
personnel, and the organization’s response after an offense had been committed. 
 
SETTING THE AMOUNT OF THE FINE 
When an organization is convicted of a federal offense, the fine it must pay is determined by 
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.526  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
calculating the “base fine” and any culpability multiplier. First, the base fine is arrived at by 
determining the greatest of: 
• The amount from the offense level fine table 
• The pecuniary gain to the organization from the offense 
• The pecuniary loss from the offense caused by the organization, to the extent the loss 
was caused intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly 
  
The fine amounts on the base offense level fine table range from $5,000 to $72,500,000. 
Next the court calculates the appropriate multipliers for the base fine level, depending on the 
particular circumstances. Factors that are considered include: 
• Involvement in or tolerance of criminal activity 
• History 
• Whether the organization violated a judicial order or injunction during the offense 
• The existence of an effective program to prevent and detect violations of law 
• Any self-reporting, cooperation, and acceptance of responsibility 
• Obstruction of justice by the organization 
 
The culpability score is then converted to a multiplier that generates the recommended fine 
range. The court will consider a number of additional factors to determine where in the 
range the actual fine will be imposed. An organization must be ordered to serve a period of 
probation if the court finds that: 
• It is necessary to secure payment of restitution, to enforce a remedial order, or to ensure 
completion of community service 
• If a monetary penalty is ordered and has not been paid at the time of sentencing and 
probation is necessary to ensure payment 
• It is necessary to ensure that changes are made to reduce the likelihood of crime 
• It is necessary to accomplish Sentencing Act purposes 
• If the defendant organization sentence does not include a fine 
 
The length of probation may not exceed five years. In addition, the court has discretion to 
order the defendant organization to publicize its conviction and the nature of the offense. 
The court also may order the organization to make periodic reports to the court or the 
probation department and subject itself to unannounced examinations of its books and 
records. Finally, the court may order the organization to develop and submit for court 
approval an effective compliance program. 
 
Law  Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.527 
EFFECTIVE PROGRAM TO DETECT AND PREVENT VIOLATIONS OF LAW 
Under the guidelines, if a convicted organization has an effective compliance program in 
place at the time of the offense, the sentencing judge will consider the organization’s acts of 
due diligence in trying to prevent the illegality when deciding whether to increase or mitigate 
the sentence. The guidelines define effective compliance program  as one that is reasonably 
designed, implemented, and enforced so that it generally will be effective in preventing and 
detecting criminal conduct.  
 
The most significant change under the modified sentencing guidelines for organizations 
concerns the sentence reduction credit for having an effective compliance program. Before 
the guidelines were modified, organizations were disqualified from receiving a reduction in 
sentencing for maintaining an effective compliance program if a “high-level person” was 
involved with the fraudulent activity. Under the modified guidelines, however, involvement 
of a high-level person is no longer an automatic bar from effective compliance program 
credit, but the amendments impose several conditions to receive a reduction under these 
circumstances, including a direct reporting requirement to the governing authority (board or 
audit committee).  
 
See the chapter on “Fraud Prevention Programs” in the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual for more information about developing a corporate 
compliance policy. 
 
DUE DILIGENCE 
The organization must take at least seven minimum steps to meet the requirement of due 
diligence: 
• Implement policies defining standards and procedures to be followed by the 
organization’s agents and employees 
• Assign specific high-level personnel ultimate responsibility to ensure compliance 
• Use due care not to delegate significant discretionary authority to people whom the 
organization knows or should have known had a propensity to engage in illegal activities 
• Communicate standards and procedures to all agents and employees and require 
participation in training programs 
• Take reasonable steps to achieve compliance, e.g., by the use of monitoring and auditing 
systems, and by having and publicizing a reporting system where employees can refer 
criminal conduct without fear of retribution (hot line or ombudsman program) 
  
Criminal Prosecutions for Fraud  Law 
2.528  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consistently enforce standards through appropriate discipline ranging from reprimand to 
dismissal 
• After detection of an offense, the organization must take all reasonable steps to 
appropriately respond to the offense and to prevent further similar offenses, including 
modifying its program and appropriate discipline for the individuals responsible for the 
offense and for those who failed to detect it 
 
 
Appeal 
A convicted individual has the right to appeal the trial court’s decision. The defendant is 
advised of his right to appeal at the sentencing hearing. A notice of appeal must be filed 
within 10 days or, absent a showing of excusable neglect, the right is lost. 
 
Generally, an appeal may be made only for errors of law to which the defendant made timely 
objection at trial or in pre-trial proceedings. The failure to object is said to waive any claims 
of error. The underlying rationale for this rule is that a timely objection permits the trial 
judge to correct any error when it occurs, eliminating the delay and expense of an appeal and 
possible new trial.  
 
Although the general rule provides that a defendant can only appeal errors he objected to 
during trial, very serious errors that are plain, on the record, and affect the defendant’s 
substantial rights may be raised on an appeal even without a timely objection. 
 
An appellate court will reverse a conviction only if it finds error that denied the defendant a 
fair trial. Essentially, an appellate court will not reverse a conviction unless it finds error that 
affected the “substantial rights” of the defendant; “harmless error” that does not affect the 
jury’s decision is tolerated. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.601 
THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM 
 
In this part, we will review the legal aspects of actions by private parties — including fraud 
examiners, auditors, accountants, security personnel, private investigators, and attorneys to 
investigate and recover losses due to fraud. Many of these cases will end up in the civil 
justice system. 
 
 
Civil Litigation 
Civil actions to recover damages for fraud or to enjoin further fraudulent activity can be filed 
by private plaintiffs in state or federal courts. Most common-law fraud actions, usually styled 
misrepresentation claims, are filed in state courts. Suits involving parties from different states 
and involving more than $75,000 in controversy (known as diversity cases), or actions brought 
on the basis of federal statutes, such as the civil RICO provisions, can be brought in federal 
court. Federal court generally is preferred by plaintiffs in larger cases because federal courts 
provide better access to witnesses and documents located in different states. The procedures 
described below are largely drawn from the federal rules. 
 
Beginning the Civil Action 
A civil action begins with the filing of a complaint in the appropriate court, usually in the 
jurisdiction in which the defendant or the plaintiff resides, or where the claim arose. 
 
The federal rules provide that the complaint should be a “short and plain statement” 
showing the court’s jurisdiction to hear the case (e .g., in federal court, that there is diversity 
of citizenship and more than $75,000 in issue), the grounds for relief, and a demand for 
judgment. Rule 9(b) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure requires that the facts entitling 
the plaintiff to relief be stated with “particularity.” Thus, whereas a plaintiff in a negligence 
case might get into court by merely alleging—without any details or supporting evidence —
that the defendant operated his automobile in a negligent manner at such and such place and 
time, a fraud plaintiff must plead the alleged fraud in detail — the actual misrepresentations 
that were made, to whom, how they were false, and so on, depending on the type of fraud 
claim. 
 
The 9(b) requirement often creates a “Catch-22” for fraud plaintiffs. A company, for 
example, might have good grounds to believe that it is the victim of a kickback fraud, but it 
might need access to the discovery system (subpoenas for documents and witnesses, etc.) to 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.602  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
prove the illegal payments. In such circumstances, particularly where the specific information 
needed is within the sole control of the defendant, the court might relax the 9(b) 
requirement somewhat. 
 
The complaint, together with a summons, must be served on the defendant. The summons 
advises the defendant that a civil action has been commenced against him in court and that 
he has a certain time to answer (usually 20 days) or suffer a default judgment. This procedure 
is called service of process. A corporation may be served through any officer, managing agent, or 
other agent authorized by law to received process. Process may be served on a defendant 
outside the state where the court sits if the defendant has significant contacts within the 
state, such as a corporation conducting business there. 
 
Once served, the defendant must then file an answer within the specified period. A 
defendant’s answer may deny liability, add counterclaims against the plaintiff, or raise 
motions to dismiss the action based on grounds such as failure to state a claim, expiration of 
the statute of limitations, and improper service. In major litigation, these procedural 
challenges might consume a year or more and result in enormous legal fees before the case 
reaches the merits of the issue. If the defendant does not file the answer before the deadline, 
the defendant forfeits the case and is held liable for damages as the court deems fit. This 
type of judgment is called a default judgment. 
 
The Discovery Stage 
If the legal hurdles required to begin a civil action are overcome, the case enters the 
discovery stage. To review, discovery refers to the formal process whereby the parties collect 
evidence and learn the details of the opposing case. Under federal rules, either party may 
take discovery regarding any matter, not privileged, that is relevant to the subject matter of 
the action, or that might lead to admissible evidence.  
 
Discovery can be an extremely expensive and time-consuming process, often taking years to 
complete, particularly in complex litigation such as fraud actions. Proposals to reform and 
streamline the system are constantly advocated, but seldom adopted, in large measure 
because trial lawyers are unwilling to give up or to limit their opportunities to learn about 
and look for weaknesses in their opponent’s case. 
 
Due to the growth of documents in electronic formats, coupled with the difficulty courts 
have had in determining how electronic documents should be introduced as evidence, 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.603 
several discovery rules in the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (FRCP) were amended in 
2006 to acknowledge electronic information as a necessary component of discoverable 
evidence. Whereas the FRCP once used the term data compilations to refer to electronic 
evidence, the 2006 amendments replaced this term with electronically stored information  (ESI). 
The rules apply to parties in any civil dispute in federal court; however, many states will 
adopt or have adopted similar changes. 
 
The principal means of discovery, whether traditional paper document discovery or 
electronic discovery, include: prediscovery  disclosures, pre-trial conferences, oral 
depositions, written interrogatories, requests to produce documents, request for admission, 
request a physical or mental examination, and requests for inspection of property.  
 
Prediscovery Disclosure  
FRCP 26(a) and similar state rules require parties to make prediscovery disclosures. These rules 
require parties to disclose certain information before formal discovery begins, such as the 
disclosure of witnesses’ identities, materials that may be used to support claims or defenses, 
computations of damages, and insurance agreements that may cover the claim. As amended 
in 2006, Rule 26(a) includes electronically stored information (ESI) in the list of items that 
litigants must provide in their prediscovery disclosures. 
 
Pre-trial Conferences 
As amended in 2006, FRCP 26(f) requires parties to attend a discovery planning conference 
(called a pre-trial conference) to discuss certain issues, such as the form in which the parties 
want electronic information to be produced. Prior to the amendment, parties could  discuss 
electronic discovery issues, whereas now they must.  
 
After attending their discovery planning conference, the parties are to develop a discovery 
report (Form 35 report), which sets forth a description of how disclosure or discovery of 
electronic information should be handled.  
 
The court will enter a scheduling order after receiving a Form 35 report from the parties. 
Among other things, the scheduling order sets forth the time limits for completing 
discovery. The amendments provide that federal courts may also include “provisions for 
disclosure or discovery of electronically stored information” as an item in its scheduling 
order. Consequently, failure to abide by a discovery report or scheduling order might result 
in sanctions, and possibly criminal charges against the parties. 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.604  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Oral Depositions 
Depositions are probably the most popular and useful form of discovery. A deposition is 
sworn testimony given by a party or witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the 
parties before trial and outside of court, usually in a lawyer’s office. Opposing counsel and a 
stenographer, who administers the oath and transcribes the testimony, also are present. 
Deposition testimony may be used to obtain evidence about the party’s own case or the 
opponent’s, or to preserve testimony for trial. In the federal system, a witness outside the 
subpoena power of the court can be deposed in the area he resides and the transcript read to 
the jury at trial. If the deposing attorney wishes to inspect or refer during the proceedings to 
certain documents in the witness’s possession, these can be demanded by a subpoena duces 
tecum, a legal order for the witness to produce the documents for reference during the 
deposition. 
 
Unless otherwise specified, statements made during a deposition can be produced as 
evidence during the trial. According to federal guidelines, “examination and cross-examination
of witnesses may proceed as permitted at the trial ….” The deponent or counsel 
can object to particular questions, as in a trial. At a deposition, the person must answer the 
question, even when counsel enters an official objection; the evidence is “taken subject to 
the objections” (Federal Rule of  Civil Procedure 30). This means the objection is duly noted, 
and if the depositional evidence is presented at trial, the judge will be asked to rule on the 
objection before that part of the deposition is read to the jury.  
 
Interrogatories 
Interrogatories are questions that are submitted to an opposing party in a suit; they are 
something like a written deposition. Interrogatories cannot be given to anyone other than a 
party to a suit. Interrogatories are submitted to the witness in writing. If the receiving party 
thinks that a question is improper, then he may object to the question. If no objection is 
given, then the party must answer the question in writing. All answers must be sworn to 
under oath. Interrogatories are less expensive to perform than depositions. Some parties will 
try to provide as little information as possible but still give a “truthful” answer. However, 
that tactic can backfire — if the answering party does not provide the information requested, 
that party cannot introduce evidence on those issues at trial and can be sanctioned by the 
court.  
 
A typical interrogatory in a fraud case might inquire: 
• State your name, address, telephone number and title of the person answering these 
interrogatories. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.605 
• Describe in detail your educational background, and include the names and addresses of 
all institutions that you have attended, the dates of attendance, and a description of the 
degrees or certificates that you have obtained.  
• Identify all persons having knowledge, either directly or indirectly, of the allegations 
contained in Defendant’s Original Answer. 
• Please list the name, address, and telephone number and the employers name, address, 
and telephone number or each expert witness you expect to call as a witness at trial. 
• Describe in detail your duties at [the Company]? 
 
Interrogatories are covered under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 33. In addition to allowing 
parties to serve interrogatories on other parties, Rule 33 allows a party to produce business 
records in lieu of written responses. But this applies only when the burden for acquiring 
such records is nearly equal on both sides. As amended, Rule 33 adds ESI to the type of 
business records that the responding party may specify and produce in response to an 
interrogatory.  
 
A typical interrogatory in a fraud case regarding ESI might inquire: 
• Identify and describe all e-mail systems presently and previously in use by [PARTY] at 
any time within [TIME PERIOD], including but not limited to the names of the e-mail 
server and the client software, the version numbers of the software in use during [TIME 
PERIOD], and describe the dates of use for each 
• Identify all past and present individuals, including dates, responsible for the ongoing 
operations, expansion, maintenance, and upkeep of [PARTY’s] computer networks 
• For all past and present data backups performed on all computer systems in use during 
[TIME PERIOD], identify the individual(s) responsible for making backups and the 
individual(s) who supervises this process 
 
Requests to Produce Documents 
A written request to produce documents (or other tangible items) demands that specific materials 
be made available for inspection. The request must specify the documents or the type of 
information being sought (e.g., e.g., “All documents identified in your answers to 
interrogatories,” rather than, “Please turn over all documents related to this case”). These 
requests may be served on opposing parties. Records from third-party witnesses or 
institutions may be obtained by subpoenas that often must be accompanied by deposition 
notices as well to take testimony to authenticate the documents.  
 
The Civil Justice System Law 
2.606  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Requests for production are covered under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 34. In 2006, Rule 
34 was amended to specifically entitle any party to serve any other party with a request to 
produce ESI and to establish a procedure that gives parties a means for resolving any form 
of production issues.  
 
Concerning requests to produce ESI, the amended rule provides that a requesting party 
“shall set forth, either by individual item or by category, the items to be inspected, and 
describe each with reasonable particularity.” It further provides that the request shall specify 
a reasonable time, place, and manner of making the inspection and performing the related 
acts. In addition, the request may specify the form or forms in which electronically stored 
information is to be produced.  
 
Written requests for production of documents regarding ESI might inquire: 
• Please produce any and all documents relating to [PARTY’s] backup tapes and/or 
archive media containing e-mail and other electronic data from [TIME PERIOD]. 
• All e-mail or computer system logs. 
• Please provide exact copies of any and all disks, CDs, DVDs, and any other storage 
media used to store data related to this action from [TIME PERIOD]. 
 
Requests for Admission  
A request for admission is designed to assist in stipulating certain facts. Admission helps set 
what is and is not at issue in a suit. The request contains statements which are presented to 
the opposing party (witnesses and outside parties are not subject to requests for admission). 
To the declarative, “I, Daisy Miller, have discussed my company’s operations with 
individuals employed by our competition,” Daisy replies either “Admitted” or “Denied.” She 
may also “object to the question” if she feels it is inappropriate or impertinent to the 
proceedings. Alternatively, she can decline to answer since the issue is in dispute (she does 
not deny conversations, just the implication of the question), or because she does not have 
enough information to answer. Requests for admission often are used near the end of the 
discovery process to narrow the focus of the dispute. Any admissions established become 
part of the official record and can be produced during the trial. 
 
Requests for admission also are used to authenticate documents. For instance: 
• Exhibit A is a true and correct copy of check No. 3456. 
• Exhibit A was signed by you. 
• The signature shown on Exhibit A is your signature. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.607 
Physical and Mental Examinations 
Either side of a dispute can request a physical or mental examination of a party to the suit. The 
person’s condition must be “in controversy” and shown to be pertinent to the proceedings. 
The request is made “on motion for good cause” and the examination performed by 
qualified personnel. It may seem unthinkable that a defendant would plead insanity to a 
fraud charge, but mental and physical instability can be part of a defendant’s argument for 
mitigating circumstances. The physical or mental health of a defendant also may come into 
play if the defendant files a counterclaim alleging mental anguish as the result of an improper 
search, wrongful termination, invasion of privacy, and so on. 
 
Requests for Inspection of Property 
Parties may request to inspect equipment, real estate, or other property which has a bearing 
on the proceedings. Requests for inspection set forth as specifically as possible the items of 
the request and the type of examination desired. In fraud cases, this request may pertain to 
records, archives, office machines, or land that has been involved in a crime. For example, in 
the Johnnie McKenzie case, which can be found in the Appendix A, McKenzie was accused 
of taking money out of a safe; therefore, a crucial issue in the case involved who had access 
to the safe and whether the combination of the safe had been changed. The defense filed a 
motion requesting that they be allowed to enter the premises of the West Palm Beach Police 
Department to examine and conduct a test of the safe. (A copy of that motion is included in 
Appendix A.) Requests for inspection of property are covered under Federal Rule of Civil 
Procedure 34. 
 
Electronic Discovery 
Electronic discovery (e-discovery) refers to the legal discovery process that deals with 
electronically stored information (ESI). ESI is different from paper information because it 
can be stored in larger volumes and in more locations. It is also more volatile. In addition, 
electronic documents usually contain metadata (data about data), which is rarely found in 
paper documents.  
 
Because of ESI’s uniqueness, e-discovery poses additional challenges to the legal process. 
 
PRESERVATION 
The commencement of litigation creates a discovery-related obligation on the parties to 
preserve relevant information whenever litigation is reasonably anticipated. And although the 
duty to preserve is not unique to ESI, electronic information is often difficult to preserve 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.608  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
because of its volatile nature. Also, parties who fail to properly preserve evidence (spoliation) 
may be subject to adverse consequences. Thus, it is important to consider the basic 
characteristics of the obligation to preserve information and examine the relevant 
obligations, especially those concerning the preservation of ESI.  
 
To avoid any adverse consequences, companies should establish policies and procedures 
governing the maintenance, storage, and production of ESI. 
 
DOCUMENT RETENTION POLICIES  
Document retention policies that instruct employees on which documents to preserve or 
destroy are an important component of any risk management program. For this reason, 
organizations should adopt such policies, and management must effectively monitor and 
revise them. This is especially important given the growing amount, locations, and formats 
of ESI in today’s environment, which create additional risks and costs for companies that do 
not have such policies for both physical and digital data. 
 
LITIGATION HOLD PROCEDURES  
Organizations should also create litigation hold procedures, which provide a process whereby a 
company issues a litigation hold communication that notifies employees to suspend the 
destruction of potentially relevant records when the duty to preserve relevant information 
arises. The duty to preserve relevant data begins when a lawsuit is “reasonably anticipated.”  
 
There are, however, certain attributes of ESI that make executing a timely litigation hold 
difficult, including: (1) ESI may only be available for a temporary time period, (2) business 
practices are often designed to free up storage space, and (3) ESI is particularly problematic 
because of its sheer volume.  
 
Timely imposing a litigation hold is necessary to avoid sanctions, including monetary fines 
and sanctions, adverse inference jury instruction sanctions, or dismissal of claims or 
defenses.  
 
SAFE HARBOR 
FRCP 37 allows courts to order sanctions for a party’s failure to make disclosures or to 
cooperate in discovery, but, as amended, Rule 37 contains a “safe harbor” provision, 
providing that courts cannot impose sanctions on a company for failing to provide ESI that 
was lost because of routine data management practices. Nevertheless, it is important to note 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.609 
that ignorance is no defense against how a party’s electronic information is stored. 
 
INADVERTENT PRODUCTION OF PRIVILEGED ESI 
FRCP 26 provides that if a party has inadvertently produced ESI that is later determined to 
be privileged, the receiving party must destroy and refrain from using any protected 
information until any dispute is resolved. This rule recognizes that reviewing large volumes 
of ESI for attorney-client privileged material is generally more costly and time consuming 
than traditional document recovery. This rule, however, does not provide guidance for 
determining whether or not producing the material waives the privilege.  
 
On September 19, 2008, President Bush signed into law a bill adding Evidence Rule 502 to 
the Federal Rules of Evidence. This rule protects against the inadvertent waiver of the 
attorney-client privilege or the work product protection. See the “Basic Principles of 
Evidence” chapter below for further discussion of this rule.  
 
ESI FROM SOURCES THAT ARE NOT REASONABLY ACCESSIBLE 
FRCP 26 also makes a distinction between ESI that is reasonably accessible and that which 
is not. The relevant provision states that a party need not provide discovery of ESI “from 
sources that the party identifies as ‘not reasonably accessible’ because of undue burden or 
cost.”  
 
The rule, however, does not define what is reasonably accessible. Accordingly, disputes will 
continue to center on how “accessible” the information is and what constitutes “undue 
burden or cost.” Thus, at the outset of fores eeable litigation, parties should understand the 
scope and sources of their electronic information that may be related to the case, as well as 
the information’s location and format. Thereafter, it will be the court’s responsibility to 
reconcile disagreements between the parties as to what electronic information is and is not 
reasonably accessible. 
 
THE FORM OF PRODUCTION 
FRCP 34 also provides procedures for resolving any form of production issues. Specifically, 
Rule 34 requires that, where a party objects to the form for producing the electronic 
information, or if no form is specified in a request for information, “the responding party 
must state the form or forms it intends to use.” Furthermore, if a request does not specify a 
form for producing the electronic information, the “responding party must produce the 
information in a form or forms in which it is ordinarily maintained … or that are reasonably 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.610  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
usable.” Given the specificity of Rule 34, parties should decide the format they need prior to 
requesting electronic information from the opponent. 
 
BECOMING LITIGATION READY 
The recent amendments to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure concerning the discovery of 
ESI are exposing companies to further liabilities and costs during litigation because they 
require organizations to adapt how they manage, retain, store, and deliver ESI during legal 
proceedings. The amendments provide that, in most circumstances, parties must voluntarily 
turn over (i.e., without awaiting a discovery request by the other party) a copy, or a 
description by category and location, of all ESI to the other party within 14 days of the pre-
 trial conference. Therefore, it is essential that parties (or organizations) be prepared for the 
advent of electronic discovery prior to a case being filed, or in other words, companies must 
be litigation ready. To be litigation ready, parties (or organizations) must know the scope of 
their ESI, the location of their ESI, the storage format of their ESI, the length of time ESI is 
stored, and whether their ESI is readily accessible. 
 
Pre-trial Motions in Civil Court 
As noted above, there may be a series of pre-trial conferences in which the parties to the suit sit 
down with the judge. These exchanges are designed to narrow the dispute to as few 
contested points as possible, and to remove procedural obstacles that could delay a trial. 
Judges also may encourage parties to settle during this stage.  
 
Once one party files a motion, the other side can object and file an opposing motion. There 
generally will be a hearing in person before the judge on the motion. Sometimes a judge 
reviews the material in each side’s motion papers and will issue a tentative ruling  just before the 
hearing to indicate which way the opinion is likely to go. This gives each side an idea of how 
to prepare their arguments for the hearing. At the hearing, each side argues its case to the 
judge and answers questions from the bench. The judge may announce a decision 
immediately or take the matter “under submission,” making the final ruling later.  
 
Some common pre-trial motions are listed below, but please note that the actual names of 
the motions vary among jurisdictions. 
 
Writ of Attachment 
A writ of attachment is a court order to seize an asset before judgment is rendered. In some 
cases, a party may attach or secure assets before trial to prevent the defendant from 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.611 
disposing of them while the lawsuit is pending if the party can show that the defendant is 
likely to dispose of assets. Most courts do not like to issue writs of attachment, and 
attachment is usually available only in certain types of suit. Ordinarily, judges are very 
reluctant to deprive a defendant of his property until a determination has been made that he 
is liable to the plaintiff. In addition, if the plaintiff loses the suit, the defendant can sue for 
damages. In most cases, the party requesting attachment will be required to post a bond in 
the amount of the attached property.  
 
Sequestration
Sequestration refers to the act of seizing property that is the subject of a controversy and 
placing it in the custody of the court. This is similar to attachment. The difference is that the 
property is physically delivered to the court for safekeeping.  
 
Motion for Injunctive Relief 
As noted above, an injunction is a court order by which a party is required to perform, or is 
restrained from performing, a specific act. In a fraud case, the defendant is likely to have 
misappropriated assets, and there may be a substantial risk that he may try to hide or transfer 
the ill-gotten gains. If the money or assets taken can be located, the plaintiff can ask for a 
writ of attachment to secure the assets. However, there often are cases where the money 
may not be located yet. In these cases, the plaintiff or the prosecutor can ask the judge to 
issue an injunction.  
 
Application for a Preliminary Injunction 
A preliminary injunction is a court order that the defendant perform, or not perform, some 
act while the suit is being contested. If a lawsuit between the parties is pending, a judge can 
issue a preliminary injunction, which freezes everything until a trial can be held. The 
injunction will prohibit the defendant from transferring or moving any assets unless first 
approved by the court. A preliminary injunction is usually issued only after the other party 
has been given an opportunity to respond 
 
Motion for a Temporary Restraining Order  
A temporary restraining order (TRO) is an emergency, temporary injunction ordering the 
defendant to perform, or not perform, some act. Like preliminary injunctions, TROs are 
ordered to prevent irreparable injury. Unlike preliminary injunctions, however, TROs can be 
entered without the defendant being present and are usually entered without notice to the 
other party. It is only good for up to 10 days until the defendant can appear before the judge.  
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.612  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Motion to Dismiss 
This motion asks a judge to throw out the lawsuit because the opposing party’s argument is 
legally unsound. In other words, the motion argues that even if the allegations are taken as 
true, the other party is not entitled to anything.  
 
Motion to Make More Definite and Certain 
This motion asks for greater detail or specificity in the complaint. The specifics of the 
complaint — such as which losses Bartleby’s being held liable for — will affect how the 
defendant chooses to respond. 
 
Motion in Limine 
This motion is made before trial, and it requests the court to rule that evidence is 
inadmissible, prohibiting opposing counsel from referring to or offering the evidence during 
trial. For example, Rock-Hard may use something damaging from Bartleby’s criminal trial in 
their complaint. Bartleby objects to the complaint because it unfairly prejudices the case 
against him.  
 
Motion to Strike 
This motion asks that inflammatory, prejudicial, or irrelevant material be stricken from the 
record.  
 
Motion for Continuance 
A motion for continuance asks the court to postpone a hearing, conference, or an upcoming 
trial. Some courts grant one or two routinely; other districts require justification for each 
motion for continuance. 
 
Motion for Summary Judgment 
A motion for summary judgment asks a judge to decide the case, without a trial, based on 
the evidence contained in the complaint and answer. Judges may also consider affidavits or 
declarations (i.e., sworn written statements), contracts, or other materials in reaching their 
summary decision. Either side in a lawsuit can file for summary judgment. The motion is 
granted unless it can be shown that some of the facts as presented are in dispute.  
 
Counterclaims and Cross-Claims 
In addition to the available motions, defendants can file a counterclaim against the plaintiff in a 
civil action. A counterclaim (also known as a countersuit) does just what its name implies, it 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.613 
levels accusations against the original plaintiff, who is now the defendant of the 
counterclaim. The specifics of this claim may be filed as part of the defendant’s answer or as 
a separate document. If a defendant files a counterclaim, it and the original complaint will be 
tried concurrently, with the final judgment stipulating a decision on each side’s petition. 
 
Additionally, if a case involves more than one defendants, a defendant may file a cross-claim  
against one of its co-defendants. A cross-claim is simply an action between co-parties (i.e., 
claims between two defendants or two plaintiffs). The most common occasion for 
counterclaims in a fraud case is when an employer sues an ex-employee for fraud.  
 
 
Alternative Dispute Resolution 
A current trend in civil litigation is to allow or encourage parties to an action to resolve their 
disputes without the necessity of a trial. Alternative dispute resolution  is the term used to refer to 
these processes.  
 
Alternative dispute resolution has certain advantages over litigation. It helps preserve 
existing business relations between the parties, it provides more flexible remedies, and often, 
but not always, it is less costly. 
 
Alternative dispute resolution usually involves one of two types of methods: mediation or 
arbitration. 
 
Mediation 
Mediation is the process whereby an impartial third-person assists the parties in reaching a 
resolution of the dispute. The mediator does not decide who should win, but instead works 
with the parties to reach a mutually agreeable settlement. Any agreement will be enforced as 
a contract. 
 
Arbitration 
Arbitration is the process whereby a dispute is submitted to an impartial third-person (known 
as an arbitrator) who then decides the outcome of the case (i.e., which party should win). 
The arbitrator acts as a judge or jury by deciding the case on its merits. Arbitration can be 
either “binding” or “nonbinding.” If the arbitration is binding, then the decision of the 
arbitrator is final, and the parties cannot later submit their dispute to a judge or jury for  
  
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.614  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
determination. Conversely, if the arbitration is non-binding, the arbitrator’s determination is 
not binding upon the parties. 
 
Today, many contracts contain arbitration clauses providing that if a dispute arises between 
the parties to the contract, both parties agree to submit their claims to binding arbitration 
rather than filing suit.  
 
 
Trial of a Civil Case 
Trial procedures in civil actions are similar to criminal cases, although there are several 
notable differences. In civil trials, juries need not consist of 12 people; many civil cases are 
heard by six jurors. Also, the parties to a civil action may stipulate that the verdict need not 
be unanimous. The burden of proof for the civil plaintiff is lower than for the criminal 
prosecutor. In most cases, the civil plaintiff must prove his case only by the preponderance of 
the evidence, meaning that there must only be slightly more evidence in favor than against. 
Additionally, the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination is more limited in 
civil proceedings; a party still may refuse to answer questions or produce evidence, but if he 
does, inferences might be drawn and the refusal may be disclosed to the jury. The judge also 
may enter sanctions against the party refusing to produce evidence up to and including the 
entry of a judgment against such party. 
 
Furthermore, various privileges are recognized in civil proceedings, such as the marital 
privilege,  preventing one spouse from being compelled to testify against another; the attorney-client 
privilege, prohibiting the disclosure of communications between an attorney and his 
client for the purpose of rendering legal advice; and the work product doctrine, protecting an 
attorney’s notes and certain other materials the attorney prepares in anticipation of litigation. 
Work undertaken by an accountant, investigator, or fraud examiner at the direction of an 
attorney also may be protected by the attorney-client privilege and the work product 
doctrine. See the chapter on “Evidence” for more information. 
 
Like criminal trials, civil trials begin with the opening statements, starting with the party that 
bears the burden of proof. Thus, civil trials begin with the plaintiff’s counsel speaking first. 
As in criminal trials, the opening is devoted to introducing the parties, stating the nature of 
the dispute, and outlining the evidence the party expects to produce. 
 
Following the opening statements, the parties present their case. Because the plaintiff bears 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.615 
the burden of proof, he offers evidence first. In many civil trials, the proof consists of the 
witnesses and counsel reading portions of depositions taken in discovery from witnesses 
outside the subpoena power of the court. This tends to be particularly uninteresting for the 
jury, and may be very prejudicial for a party forced to rely on a great deal of such testimony. 
Answers to written interrogatories by the opposing party also may be read to the jury, which, 
if extensive, can be even more boring. 
 
Civil parties also may call expert witnesses to give their opinion on matters thought to be too 
technical for the average juror to understand. Fraud examiners and accountants may be used 
as experts in commercial cases to compute and testify to damages. As with expert testimony 
in criminal trials, each side usually produces a qualified expert who disagrees categorically 
with everything the expert for the other side says. Because the jury usually learns through 
cross-examination that each expert has been paid for preparation and trial time — and 
because jurors generally have a difficult time understanding and evaluating expert 
testimony — such testimony may have little effect on the outcome of the trial. 
 
The same rules of evidence apply in civil and criminal trials with certain exceptions, such as 
the application of the Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination noted above. 
Witnesses, except experts, must relate only facts — not opinions — and irrelevant and 
prejudicial evidence is excluded, as is most hearsay. Both parties may cross-examine and 
attempt to impeach the other side’s witnesses in essentially the same manner as at a criminal 
trial.  
 
The defendant may make a motion for judgment as a matter of law (also referred to as a motion for a 
directed verdict) at the close of the plaintiff’s case, on the grounds that even if the plaintiff’s 
evidence is believed, the defendant still is entitled to a judgment as a matter of law. Both 
sides may make such a motion at the close of all the evidence. If such motions are denied, 
both sides argue to the jury, with the plaintiff going first. The plaintiff usually is afforded an 
opportunity for final rebuttal. The jury is instructed on the law, regarding elements of liability 
and damages, and then retires for deliberations. Within 10 days of the verdict, the losing 
party may renew his motion for judgment as a matter of law and move for a new trial. In state 
court practice, the motion for judgment as a matter of law also may be referred to as a motion 
for judgment notwithstanding the verdict, or motion for judgment n.o.v. (non obstante veredicto). 
 
Both sides may appeal from an adverse verdict, either as to liability or as damages. As in the 
criminal system, the appellate court is largely limited to reviewing the legal decision of the 
The Civil Justice System  Law 
2.616  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
trial court rather than the factual determination of the jury. The appeals court may reverse 
and remand for a new trial on some or all of the issues, may order that a certain portion of 
the awarded damages be remitted, or may enter final judgment, if legal grounds are clear, in 
favor of either party. 
 
A plaintiff who obtains a money judgment often must take additional steps to collect it. This 
might include garnishing the wages of the defendant or levying against his nonexempt assets. 
In many instances, particularly in fraud litigation, a judgment might go uncollected because 
the defendant has already squandered or secreted the assets. In the latter circumstances, a 
plaintiff may conduct post-judgment discovery, including a deposition of the defendant, in an 
attempt to locate assets to satisfy a judgment. 
 
 
Fidelity Bond Claims 
The fidelity bond claim is an often-overlooked method of recovery for losses due to internal 
fraud. A fidelity bond is a type of policy, which is issued by many large insurance companies, 
under which the insured entity is covered against losses caused by the dishonest or 
fraudulent acts of its employees. Dishonest or fraudulent acts typically are defined as those 
acts committed with the intent to: 
• Cause the insured to sustain a loss 
• Obtain a financial benefit for the employee, or for any third party intended by the 
employee, other than his proper compensation 
 
As with any other insurance agreement, fidelity policies have deductibles, a limit of liability 
(often in the millions of dollars), and certain exclusions. To collect, the insured must submit 
a sworn proof of loss claim within specified time limits, together with supporting evidence 
of liability and the amount of loss. Proof of loss is entirely the responsibility of the insured; 
the carrier will not conduct nor assist in the investigation, nor will it reimburse investigative 
or legal costs incurred in making a claim. 
 
Most policies have express subrogation provisions providing that if the insurance company 
pays a claim, it acquires the rights of the insured to sue the wrongdoer. Policyholders are 
prohibited from interfering with these rights in any way at the risk of jeopardizing coverage, 
such as releasing the wrongdoer from liability. Therefore, no settlement agreements or 
releases should be executed with a dishonest employee or any confederate unless the 
insurance company consents. 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.701 
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF EVIDENCE 
 
Definition of Evidence 
Black’s Law Dictionary defines evidence as: 
 
Anything perceivable by the five senses, and any proof such as testimony of witnesses, records, 
documents, facts, data, or tangible objects legally presented at trial to prove a contention and 
induce a belief in the minds of a jury. 
 
Evidence refers to an intricate rule, developed and refined over hundreds of years, that is 
designed to ensure that only relevant and probative evidence is admitted in court proceedings, 
and that irrelevant, unreliable, and prejudicial evidence is excluded so that cases can be fairly 
and expeditiously decided. 
 
Every aspect of trying a case — from filing the complaint through discovery, into the 
presentation of witnesses and exhibits — is affected by rules of evidence. This body of law 
covers not just what counts as evidence, but how that evidence is gathered, handled, and 
presented.  
 
Evidence in federal courts is governed by the Federal Rules of Evidence (FRE). These rules 
set out what can and cannot be introduced during a dispute. In the late 1960s, a U.S. Supreme 
Court panel began codifying centuries of common law into the FRE. What had previously 
been a far-flung set of precedents, buried in local jurisdictions and lengthy appeals decisions, 
was gathered into a singular body of information. Congress passed the Uniform Code of 
Evidence in 1974 as Public Law No. 93-595. State and local courts often have some 
specialized rules of evidence, but these rules are themselves based on federal guidelines.  
 
The rules of evidence are complex, and counsel should be contacted if an important question 
of evidence arises. This part focuses on the more important rules and those of greatest 
interest to fraud examiners.  
 
 
Three Basic Forms of Evidence 
Evidence is anything perceptible by the five senses, which is invoked in the process of 
arguing a case. Documents, spoken recollections, data of various sorts, and physical objects 
are all potentially evidence. Evidence is simply anything that relates to the proving or 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.702  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
disproving of a fact or consequence. With the known universe available for court inspection, 
legal authorities have narrowed the field by setting up categories to evaluate evidentiary 
significance.  
 
There are three basic forms, as distinguished from types, of evidence: testimonial, real, and 
demonstrative. Testimony refers to the oral statements made by witnesses under oath. In 
general, there are two types of testimonial witnesses: lay witnesses and expert witnesses. A lay  
(or fact) witness is a non-expert witness who must testify from personal knowledge about a 
matter at issue. An expert witness is a person who, by reason of education, training, skill, or 
experience, is qualified to render an opinion or otherwise testify in areas relevant to resolution 
of a legal dispute. 
 
Real evidence describes physical objects that played a part in the issues being litigated. The term 
includes both documentary evidence — such as canceled checks, invoices, ledgers, and 
letters — as well as other types of physical evidence.  Therefore, a typewriter or printer in a case 
involving questioned documents is clearly real evidence, as is a tape recording since members 
of the court can experience the sounds firsthand.  
 
Demonstrative evidence is a tangible item that illustrates some material proposition (e.g., a map, a 
chart, or a summary). It differs from real evidence in that demonstrative evidence was not 
part of the underlying event; it was created specifically for the trial. Its purpose is to provide a 
visual aid for the jury. Nonetheless, it is evidence and can be considered by the jury in 
reaching a verdict. 
 
 
Direct Versus Circumstantial Evidence 
There are two basic types of admissible evidence:  direct evidence and circumstantial evidence. 
Direct evidence includes testimony that tends to prove or disprove a fact in issue directly, such 
as eyewitness testimony or a confession. Circumstantial evidence is evidence that tends to prove 
or disprove facts in issue indirectly, by inference. Many fraud cases are proved entirely by 
circumstantial evidence, or by a combination of circumstantial and direct evidence, but 
seldom by direct evidence alone. The most difficult element to prove in many fraud cases —
fraudulent intent — is usually proved circumstantially, and necessarily so, because direct proof 
of the defendant’s state of mind, absent a confession or the testimony of a co-conspirator, is 
impossible. 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.703 
In a circumstantial case, the court may instruct the jury that the prosecution must exclude all 
inferences from the facts other than its determination of guilt. Even if no such instruction is 
given, the Certified Fraud Examiner should apply the same standard in preparing a 
circumstantial case. 
 
 
Admissibility of Evidence 
Questions involving the admissibility of evidence occur when one party objects to another 
party’s offer of evidence. If a judge sustains  an objection, the evidence is not admitted. If, 
however, the judge overrules the objection, the evidence is admitted and can be considered by 
the fact finder.  
 
The admissibility of evidence depends on a wide variety of factors — and, in large part, on the 
discretion of the trial judge. 
 
Relevance 
Although the admissibility of evidence depends on a number of factors, the most important 
factor is relevance. The general rule of evidence provides that all relevant evidence is 
admissible. Rule 401 of the Federal Rules of Evidence defines relevant evidence  as evidence 
“having any tendency to make the existence of any fact that is of consequence to 
determination of the action more probable or less probable than it would be without the 
evidence.” In other words, evidence is relevant if it tends to make some fact in issue more or 
less likely than it would be without the evidence. The facts in issue, of course, vary according 
to the case, but generally can be said to be those that tend to prove the essential elements of 
the offense or claim, as well as related matters such as motive, opportunity, identity of the 
parties, and credibility. 
 
Whether a particular piece of evidence is relevant or not depends on what the evidence is 
offered to prove. An item of evidence might be relevant and admissible if offered to prove 
one thing, but not relevant and inadmissible if offered to prove something else. For example, 
under Rule 404(b) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or acts 
committed by the defendant would not be admissible if offered to prove that the defendant is 
generally a bad person, and therefore is likely to have committed the crime with which he is 
charged. However, evidence would be admissible if offered to prove motive, intent, identity, 
absence of mistake, or modus operandi, if such factors are at issue. If evidence of other 
wrongs or acts is admitted, the judge will instruct the jury that they may consider the evidence 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.704  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
only as it relates to the narrow issue for which it was admitted, and may not consider it for 
any other purpose.  
 
That evidence is relevant does not, however, automatically mean that it will be admitted. 
Under Rule 403 of the Federal Rules of Evidence, relevant evidence still might be excluded if 
it is unduly prejudicial, threatens to confuse or mislead the jury, threatens to cause 
unnecessary delay or waste of time, or is merely cumulative. Relevant evidence also might be 
excluded if it is subject to certain privileges as noted below. Thus, evidence of drug addiction 
technically might be relevant to prove motive for embezzlement or fraud, but the judge still 
might exclude the evidence if he believes that its probative value is outweighed by the danger 
of prejudice to the defendant. Evidence of other crimes and acts, as discussed above, that are 
otherwise relevant also might be excluded for the same reason. 
 
 
Special Rules Concerning Some Types of Circumstantial Evidence 
Special rules govern certain types of evidence that have been found over the years to be so 
misleading and prejudicial that they have been categorically excluded. Such evidence is always 
excluded unless an exception applies. 
 
Character Evidence 
In civil and criminal trials, there is strong policy against character evidence (FRE 404). 
Character evidence (sometimes called propensity evidence) is testimony or exhibits that 
purport to establish a “trait of character” or propensity to behave in a particular way, such as 
carefulness, honesty, violence, or cowardice. There are some good reasons to leave character  
out of the discussion whenever possible, such as the subjective nature of the description —
one person’s “gruff” is another viewer’s “aggressive.”  
 
Additionally, character is not an absolute indicator of behavior. That is, it is pretty common 
to remark how “out of character” somebody’s actions were in a given situation. So there is 
always a chance someone was acting out of character, making the behavioral propensity (if 
there was one) useless in the legal exchange. 
 
Finally, testimony about character has a reckless potential to be mistakenly founded, misled, 
or concocted. It is always possible to “misjudge” someone, especially if we only know the 
person in limited circumstances like work or a social club. Moreover, it is exceedingly easy to 
fabricate incidents about character and, for shrewd talkers, to manipulate perceptions of 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.705 
personality. In a fraud case, it must be shown that the defendant committed the act in 
question. There is too great a danger of prejudicing the jury if you allow testimony about the 
defendant just being a bad person. Whether he is a bad person or not ought to have no 
bearing on whether or not he committed the act in question. 
 
In general, character evidence is not admissible. In civil cases, character evidence is rarely 
admissible, and the general rule in criminal cases provides that evidence of a defendant’s bad 
character is not admissible at trial. For example, the government cannot offer evidence of a 
defendant’s prior crimes or other bad acts to prove the defendant’s bad character.  
 
There are, however, some instances where character evidence may be admitted in criminal 
trials. Some of the exceptions for use of character evidence in criminal cases include:  
• The accused may offer evidence of his good character, in which case the prosecution may 
introduce evidence of the accused’s bad character. 
• Character evidence may be admissible to reflect on the credibility of a witness. 
 
Under Rule 404(b) of the Federal Rules of Evidence, evidence of other crimes, wrongs, or 
acts is not admissible to prove the character of a person. In other words, such evidence is not 
admissible to prove that the defendant is generally a bad person, and therefore is likely to 
have committed the crime with which he is charged. For example, if a defendant is charged 
with stealing money from his employer’s safe, the prosecution would not be permitted to 
offer evidence that the defendant had previously stolen money from another employer to 
show the defendant had a propensity to steal.  
 
However, there are some uses of character evidence that may be admissible because they are 
offered for a purpose other than showing character. Some of the exceptions for use of 
character evidence in criminal cases include: 
• To show the accused’s knowledge, intent, or motive for the crime 
• To prove the existence of a larger plan of which the charged crime is a part 
• To show the accused’s preparation to commit the charged crime 
• To show the accused’s ability and means of committing the crime (possession of a 
weapon, tool, or skill used in the commission of the act) 
• To show the accused’s opportunity to commit the crime 
• Threats or expressions of ill will by the accused 
• To link the accused to physical evidence at the scene 
• The suspect’s conduct and comments during arrest 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.706  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Attempts to conceal identity 
• Attempts to destroy evidence 
• Valid confessions 
 
Opinion Testimony 
During trial, most evidence is introduced through the testimony of witnesses. Evidence on 
which the jury can make factual determinations must be introduced in the form of admissible 
testimony or documentary evidence by law or fact (i.e., non-expert) witnesses.  
 
The rules of evidence, however, limit the testimony of lay witnesses. Lay witnesses are only 
allowed to testify about what they have actually experienced firsthand and their factual 
observations (FRE 701). In general, witnesses provide a report on what they know and must 
keep their opinions and conclusions to themselves.  
 
Despite the general rule, there are ways to get a non-expert witness’s opinion into the record. 
A lay witnesses may give opinions if the statement is “rationally based” on their own 
perceptions, and if the opinion is helpful to a clear understanding of their testimony or the 
determination of a fact.   
 
Opinions are admissible if they pass a three-part test:  
• The witness must have direct personal knowledge of the facts to which the opinion 
pertains.  
• The opinion must be of the common, everyday sort (i.e., does not involve specialized 
knowledge or tests). 
• The opinion is not part of a legal judgment, reserved for the jury or judge to decide. 
 
Opinions from ordinary witnesses must be based on personal experience and have some 
bearing on the facts (as opposed to the judgment) of the case. This distinction is further refined 
in situations involving hearsay and personal judgment (discussed below).  
 
In contrast to lay witnesses, expert witnesses are exempt from the opinion rule because 
experts are hired to render a professional opinion. They possess education, training, skill, or 
experience in drawing conclusions from certain types of data or information that lay 
witnesses do not possess. Expert testimony, however, may be excluded if it embraces a legal 
conclusion. Therefore, expert opinions addressing guilt or innocence will likely be excluded in 
criminal cases.  
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.707 
Exhibits 
Exhibits are the tangible objects presented as evidence. Therefore, both real evidence and 
demonstrative evidence are entered into the record as exhibits. This includes documents such 
as contracts, letters, and receipts, as well as photographs, X-rays, baseball bats, knives, 
fountain pens and computer files. In short, anything that is not testimony is an exhibit. 
Testimony is what people say. Exhibits are the “props.” 
 
Authenticating Typical Exhibits 
At the most basic level, evidence must be established as reliable or authentic. Thus, evidence, 
other than testimonial evidence, must be properly authenticated; that is, the party offering the 
evidence must produce some evidence to show it is, in fact, what the party says it is. If a piece 
of real evidence cannot be authenticated, the evidence will not be admitted even if it is plainly 
relevant.  
 
For proper authentication, the party offering the evidence must produce some evidence (e.g., 
testimony from a person with first-hand knowledge) to show it is, in fact, what the party says 
it is and that it has remained in the same condition from the moment it was seized until it is 
used in court. 
 
Similar to the authentication requirement for tangible evidence, there is a similar sort of 
“credibility test” for witnesses. If testimony is to become admissible evidence, the witness 
must demonstrate that the knowledge being communicated is believable and gained by 
personal experience.  
 
Below are some of the issues you will encounter in proving to the judge that a particular 
exhibit is authentic. 
 
Demonstrative Evidence 
Again, demonstrative evidence refers to a tangible item that illustrates some material proposition. 
It differs from real evidence in that demonstrative evidence is not part of the underlying 
event; it is created specifically for the trial. Its purpose is to provide a visual aid for the jury. 
 
An exhibit used for purely “illustrative purposes” is a type of demonstrative evidence. 
Demonstrative evidence includes charts, graphs, and summaries that help to simplify 
complicated evidence for the jury. In complex fraud cases, such evidence is extremely useful, 
but it must be simple and easy to understand.   
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.708  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Demonstrative evidence is admissible if the court decides that it presents a fair and balanced 
summary or picture of the evidence and is not unduly prejudicial, and if offered for its truth 
value (and not just to illustrate a point), demonstrative evidence must be authenticated to 
show that the evidence is in fact what it is claimed to be.  
 
Also, demonstrative evidence must be made available to the other party, and the court may 
order that the information used to create the exhibit be produced in court. 
 
Diagrams 
A diagram  is a schematic or technical drawing that is used to help make something easier to 
understand. A diagram (on paper or some other tangible display) can be admitted as evidence 
with no more foundation than the assent of a witness: “Is this a fair representation of the 
suite where you work?” It does not have to be true to scale or particularly detailed. A diagram 
can be prepared before trial, during trial, or prepped outside the court and finished during 
questioning. If a party objects to the admission of a diagram, the offering party may need to 
establish that it is reliable. Diagrams can be used in tandem with photos or other 
representational evidence, or as assistance in demonstrations to the jury. 
 
Writings 
In general, authentication of a writing consists of establishing who authored the document. 
Depending on the document and situation, this is done in one of several ways: (1) the author 
testifies and claims authorship; (2) a witness testifies to seeing the author write the document; 
(3) with handwritten letters, a witness verifies the author’s penmanship; (4) with typed or 
machine-written documents, the witness verifies the author’s signature; (5) a witness testifies 
that the contents of the document point decisively to the author. These and many other 
document issues may require the participation of a questioned documents expert.  
 
Business Records and Other Documents 
Business records can encompass a broad range of documents, from all sorts of organizations, 
including corporations, small businesses, nonprofit operations, and community groups. Like 
other evidence, a party offering business records must provide testimony that the exhibit is 
the business record in question. For proper authentication, the party offering the evidence 
should be able to establish the following two things: 
• The content of the document is complete and unaltered 
• The document originated from the named place of origination 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.709 
Certain documents, such as business records, are self-authenticating and may be received into 
evidence without independent proof of authenticity. Under the Federal Rules of Evidence, 
business records are self-authenticating if a custodian or other qualified person certifies that 
the records meet the following requirements:  
• The records were prepared reasonably near the time of the event it describes. 
• The records were made by, or based on information transmitted from, a person with 
knowledge 
• The document was prepared as a usual part of doing business (i.e., it was not prepared 
specifically for litigation). 
 
Business records are also vulnerable to hearsay objections. Put differently, offering the 
contents of business records to establish the truth of their contents can constitute hearsay. 
Thus, such materials can be barred as unreliable out-of-court statements unless a trustworthy 
foundation can be established. If, however, there is certification that complies with the self-authenticating 
rules listed above, the records will not only be self-authenticating, but the 
contents of the records will be admissible to the prove the truth of the contents as an 
exception to the rule against hearsay.  
 
Government Documents 
The requirements for government documents are the same as for other business records. The 
distinction between government and business records arose because of narrow interpretations 
of the law that separated nonprofit from for-profit enterprises. Today, most records, 
regardless of origin, are called business records. 
 
Phone Records 
To be admitted into evidence, phone records  must meet the business records authentication test. 
However, investigators must also be aware of the federal Telephone Records and Privacy 
Protection Act of 2006 (TRPPA), which criminalizes the practice of obtaining and attempting 
to obtain confidential phone record information through pretexting (gaining access through 
the use of false statements) unless it is otherwise permitted by law. Violations of the Act are 
criminal, and if convicted, a violator faces up to 10 years in prison and up to $100,000 in 
fines.  
 
Electronically Stored Information 
Currently, there is still much controversy regarding how to authenticate electronically stored 
information (ESI). The U.S. Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.710  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Property Section has developed a manual for electronic search and seizure, which judges have 
used as a guide as to whether digital evidence has been properly seized. If digital evidence 
needs to be seized, it is vital that examiners engage the services of a trained computer forensic 
technician. A properly trained technician should know the procedures to follow to ensure that 
the files can be authenticated. 
 
Generally, to be admissible, ESI evidence must meet the same authentication standards as 
hard copy documents (i.e., to show that the item is what the proponent claims); however, 
courts have recognized that the authentication of ESI evidence may require greater scrutiny 
because ESI can easily be altered after creation. Thus, to prove that a particular electronic 
document is authentic, those offering the evidence must demonstrate that the original 
document was not modified after its creation.  
 
Rule 901 of the Federal Rules of Evidence provides a non-exclusive, explicative list of 
methods by which evidence can be authenticated, and some of the methods may be used to 
authenticate ESI. Rule 901(b)(1) allows authentication through testimony of a witness with 
knowledge that a matter is what it is claimed to be. Additionally, Rule 901(b)(3) allows for 
authentication by comparison to already authenticated evidence by an expert witness or the 
trier of fact. Similarly, Rule 901(b)(4) allows authentication by circumstantial evidence of 
distinctive characteristics (e.g., hash values or metadata).  
 
Furthermore, under Rule 902, some documents are self-authenticating, which means that they 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. For ESI purposes, 
the three most relevant categories of self-authenticating documents are official publications, 
trade inscriptions, and certified copies of business records.  
 
In addition, different forms of ESI evidence may require different authentication approaches. 
Therefore, it is helpful to examine a few common types.  
 
E-MAIL 
Unlike traditional business letters written on formal letterhead, e-mails are more prone to 
authenticity issues and may be more difficult to properly authenticate. For example, the judge 
in Lorraine v. Markel, 241 F.R.D. 534 (D. Md. 2007) refused to allow either party to offer e-mails
of an arbitration negotiation as evidence, finding that neither party authenticated the e-mails 
by simply attaching them to their motions as exhibits. 
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.711 
E-mail authenticity issues usually arise because e-mail systems are unreliable and inherently 
unsecure, making e-mails susceptible to alteration. Moreover, e-mails can lack reliability 
because the identities of senders can be corrupted through unauthorized access and use.  
 
Even so, there are numerous ways e-mail can be authenticated, including:  
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., a witness testifies that he recognizes a copy of an 
e-mail that he received or drafted) 
• Comparison with authenticated examples (e.g., if one e-mail has been properly 
authenticated, a second e-mail could by authenticated by comparing it with the first) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., the presence of a party’s name 
and e-mail address or the presence of metadata) 
• Trade inscriptions purporting to have been affixed in the course of business and 
indicating ownership, control, or origin (e.g., an automatic business signature at the end of 
the e-mail) 
• Certified copies of business records (e.g., e-mail is accompanied by a written certification 
by its custodian) 
 
TEXT AND INSTANT MESSAGES 
As the use of text and instant messages continues to grow, parties are offering this ESI as 
evidence in an increasing number of cases. However, given the nature of this type of 
evidence, parties often encounter foundational issues when authenticating text and instant 
messages. Notwithstanding the novel technology involved, these types of ESI can be 
admissible when the proponent offers direct or circumstantial evidence as to its authenticity. 
The most likely authenticate chat room and text messages are: 
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., a witness testifies that he recognizes a copy 
messages that he received or drafted) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., the use of the defendant’s name 
in the text messages and the subject matter of the messages) 
 
COMPUTER RECORDS  
Courts typically accept computer files and documents as evidence. In fact, courts themselves 
are using more electronic resources because many aspects of litigation can now be conducted 
electronically. 
 
Traditionally, to be admitted as evidence, computerized records need only meet the usual 
business-records authentication, which requires that the computerized records be 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.712  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
accompanied by certification by a qualified person stating that (1) the records were prepared 
reasonably near the time of the event they describe, (2) the records were prepared as a usual 
part of doing business, and (3) the organization’s way of keeping records is demonstrably 
reliable.  
 
The required supporting material to authenticate computer records will include information 
on the computing machine used, any software, and the record-keeping process. A business 
record, electronic or otherwise, is legal as long as it’s kept in the normal course of business. 
When there are clear routines for compiling information, admitting the record into court will 
be routine.  
 
Recently, however, courts have recognized that authentication of computerized records may 
require greater scrutiny because, unlike other ESI evidence, the primary authentication issue 
regarding computerized records is what has, or may have, happened to the record in the time 
between when it was entered in the files and the time of trial. Based upon this view, the most 
likely methods of authenticating computerized records are: 
• Witness with personal knowledge (e.g., an authenticating witness attests to the process by 
which the computerized records are created, acquired, maintained, and preserved) 
• Circumstantial evidence of distinctive characteristics (e.g., a person’s business habit is 
consistent with the document) 
• Certified copies of business records (e.g., computerized records are accompanied by 
custodian’s written certification)  
 
Website Data 
A growing number of people are using social networking sites like LinkedIn, Facebook, 
MySpace, and Twitter, and, as a result, the legal use of information obtained from social 
media sites has increased. Many users don’t give much thought to what they post online. And 
because most of the information that gets posted online becomes a permanent record 
somewhere, investigators, attorneys, and employers are increasingly mining these sites for 
information, photos, and videos that can become evidence in civil and criminal litigation. 
 
As with all evidence, the proponent of social media evidence must be prepared to establish 
that the evidence is authentic. The standard for authenticating evidence from social media 
sites is no different than for any other types of evidence. That is, there must be sufficient 
evidence to support a finding that the evidence is what the proponent claims.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.713 
In some courts, authenticity can be established by the testimony of a witness. Like any other 
demonstrative exhibit, parties can authenticate a website with the testimony of a witness who 
verifies that the exhibit at issue accurately reflects what he observed after logging on to the 
site and reviewing what was there.  
 
Alternately, the proponent may be able authenticate a website by providing testimony from 
the webmaster or someone with personal knowlege to show that the data was posted by the 
person to whom the information is attributed. For example, if website data is attributated to 
the website owner, the webmaster can testify that a particular file or content was entered on a 
site at a specific time. This is similar to authenticating writings by showing that the item was 
written by the person to whom it is attributed. But because Facebook, MySpace, and Twitter-type
evidence typically comes from third parties, who sometimes uses pseudonyms, 
attributing this type of evidence to a certain person can be challenging.  
 
Finally, some website data may be self-authenticated. To review, self-authenticating evidence 
may be received into evidence without independent proof of authenticity. The types of 
website evidence that may fall under this category include government material that appears 
on official government websites or business-related material that appears on an organization’s 
website. 
 
Photographs 
Concerning photographs, it is necessary to establish their fidelity to the object they claim to 
represent. This means that the offering party must prove that the picture is unaltered and 
shows what the proponent claims it shows. Generally it is enough to have a witness familiar 
with the object or space in a photo to corroborate it (e.g., “Yes, that’s the hallway running 
between our two buildings.”). The matter gets more complicated when a photo is 
controversial. This can require technical specifications for proper foundation. In the most 
famous trial since Sam Sheppard, O.J. Simpson’s lawyers challenged a photo of the defendant 
wearing Bruno Mali shoes as “doctored.” Both sides introduced experts to discuss whether 
the photo had been altered, what sort of camera, lens, and environmental conditions were 
involved, etc. The same issues can arise with photos in any trial.   
 
In some unusual situations, a photo may reveal information that no witness can corroborate. 
There has been at least one instance where the background of a photo showed a stabbing that 
took place in a crowd. No one, not even the photographer, saw the stabbing at the time. In 
unusual situations where a photo communicates evidence not substantiated elsewhere, the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.714  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation of the photograph will need more strength — including technical details on the 
camera, the film, who took the shot, why and where, etc.  
 
The exceptions make photos seem more legally fraught than they are. They usually are 
admitted with little objection. Photos do not even have to be contemporary with the crime or 
grievance to which they pertain. If a photograph is established as accurate in its portrayal, it 
can be shot after the original act.  
 
General Points 
Either side can enter exhibits into the record, given the proper foundation. Once admitted, 
the evidence is available for use by either side. It does not matter who entered the item into 
evidence; either side can use it during questioning.  
 
It also does not matter when exhibits are admitted. They may be introduced into evidence 
during direct examination: opposing counsel is allowed to inspect the exhibit and then the 
witness confirms the exhibit, which has been marked Exhibit A (or Exhibit 1). Some courts 
use letters for exhibits while some court use numbers. Usually the exhibit is identified by 
which side enters it (e.g., Plaintiff’s Exhibit 1.)  
 
When everyone agrees, exhibits can be directly entered into the record, without foundational 
review, by stipulation — both parties sign the stipulation form, describing and acknowledging 
the exhibit. 
 
The “Best Evidence” Rule 
Sometimes testimony may be rejected because of the “best evidence” rule, which prohibits a 
party from testifying about the contents of a document without producing the document 
itself. This rule, however, only applies when an original or copy is being used to prove the 
contents of a writing.  
 
Also known as the “original writing” rule, the best evidence rule provides that when a witness 
testifies about the contents of a document, at least a fair copy of the original must be available 
for inspection. If there is no original, a copy of the proven authentic document will do, but 
the court must be assured that the copies are reliable and accurate. If the document is lost —
no original, no copies — the judge will have to be convinced there is good reason to forgo the 
exhibit and admit the testimony.  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.715 
Fraud examiners can use copies in preparing their case reports, but at trial, the original must 
be produced if it is available. Thus, when public records are involved in a fraud examination, 
examiners should always obtain certified copies. 
 
With regard to computerized data, the best evidence rule does not require the party offering 
ESI as evidence to bring the original custodian’s computer, monitor, and other equipment to 
display the information at trial. Rather, Rule 1001(3) provides that an original writing includes 
any printout or other “output readable by sight, shown to reflect the data accurately.” Thus, 
hard-copy printouts of documents, e-mail, and other ESI qualify as originals under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence.  
 
Objections to Exhibits 
Just because an exhibit is authenticated does not mean it is automatically admitted. If the 
evidence violates some other rule of evidence — such as the rules against hearsay, prejudice, or 
relevance — the exhibit will likely be barred. 
 
If an objection is made, the admissibility of some exhibits require separate hearings for the 
judge to consider the issue. Fraud trials can be bogged down with lengthy challenges to the 
sometimes mountainous stacks of documents offered as evidence. In deciding on the 
admissibility of exhibits, judges can decide to admit the material just as it is, admit it with 
alterations (such as expurgating parts of a text or obscuring certain images), or deny the 
admission altogether. 
 
Chain of Custody 
If evidence is subject to change over time, or is susceptible to alteration, the offering party 
may need to establish that the evidence has not been altered or changed from the time it was 
collected through its production in court. This is done by establishing a chain of custody. The 
chain of custody is both a process and a document that memorializes (1) who has had possession 
of an object, and (2) what they have done with it; it is simply a means of establishing that 
there has not been a material change or alteration to a piece of evidence. 
 
Chain of custody issues are paramount issues in any case, affecting every piece of physical 
evidence. When parties present evidence to a court, they must be ready to show that the item 
they are offering is the same item that was seized. When that evidence is not distinctive but 
fungible (e.g., bags of cash, bullet shell casings, or electronic data), the process or system 
which authenticates the item is to maintain a chain of custody. 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.716  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In general, establishing the chain of custody consists of documenting each person who had 
control or custody of the evidence; how and when it was received; how it was maintained or 
stored while in each person’s possession; what changes, if any, it underwent in that person’s 
custody; and how it left that person’s custody.  The end result is a chain of testimony that 
accounts for the movement and location of physical evidence from the time it is obtained to 
the time it is proffered at trial. The goal is to show that access to the evidence was limited to 
those who testified in the chain of custody and thereby demonstrate that the evidence has not 
been materially altered. 
 
Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred with a set of records) or 
outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was not properly sealed), can 
dishevel a case but not wreck it outright. Courts have found in some cases that even though 
there have been mistakes in the chain of custody, the mistake affects the “weight,” though 
not the “admissibility,” of evidence. That is to say, the evidence will still be allowed into the 
record, but it is accompanied by a forthright description of any improprieties that have 
occurred in the chain of custody. The jury and judge are supposed to consider the 
improprieties when they deliberate, “weighing” the case for guilt or innocence.  
 
In fraud cases, the array of physical evidence, all the paper documents, audio and video 
recordings, and information-processing equipment, such as computers, demands some close 
monitoring in the chain of custody. This is an area of the law which either side — plaintiff or 
defendant — can manipulate to avoid talking about the evidence itself, rambling instead like a 
filibustering senator over “who touched what and when and why that means we will not see 
or discuss the item in question.”  
 
The following are some general guidelines that will help examiners demonstrate the chain of 
custody. They will also help examiners in authenticating obtained evidence: 
• If records are received via mail or courier-receipted delivery (such as FedEx or UPS), 
keep copies of the postmarked envelope or the delivery receipts. 
• If a cover letter is included, make sure you keep it. 
• If the cover letter or transmittal letter includes a list of the documents, check the package 
immediately to ensure all documents are there. If something is missing, make a note in the 
file and notify the sender immediately.  
• If you receive documents in person, create a memo stating the date and time the 
documents were received, who gave you the documents, where that individual obtained 
the documents, and a complete list of the documents received. 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.717 
• If you obtained the documents yourself from the original source (desk, file cabinet, etc.), 
create a memo describing the date, time, exact location of where the documents were 
found, and a complete list of the documents obtained. 
• Keep the originals of these memos or delivery receipts in the case file and keep a copy 
with the documents (it will be much easier to identify where the documents came from if 
you have the information with the documents). 
 
Additionally, because digital evidence can be easily altered or destroyed, a chain of custody 
must be maintained for all electronic evidence gathered and analyzed in an investigation. ”At 
a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
 
Hearsay 
Simply put, hearsay refers to a statement that repeats what some other person said while 
outside of court. FRE 801 defines hearsay as “a statement, other than one made … at the trial 
or hearing, offered in evidence to prove the truth of the matter asserted.” Basically, hearsay 
involves the following elements: 
• A statement (anything intended to be an assertion; statements can be oral, written, or 
nonverbal conduct, such as nodding a head) 
• That is made outside the court’s supervision (statements made at trial or during deposition are 
not hearsay because they are made during court proceedings, but a statement made at 
work or at a crime scene is outside the court’s supervision and could be hearsay if the 
other elements are also present) 
• That is offered to prove the truth of the matter asserted (a party is offering a statement to prove the 
truth of the matter asserted if the party is trying to prove that the assertion made by the 
declarant [the person who made the out-of-court statement] is true) 
 
This sets apart virtually anything said outside the courtroom or outside an officially 
designated function of the court such as a deposition.  
 
Under the general rule, hearsay is not admissible in court, but this rule is subject to numerous 
exceptions. Excluding hearsay on one level means witnesses cannot say, “He said … she 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.718  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
said.” Each person testifies to his own experience.  This is designed to protect the credibility 
and condition of testimony and to preserve each side’s right to cross-examine witnesses.  
 
Each witness in the trial will be questioned about personal, firsthand encounters. Unless their 
statements satisfy one of the exceptions discussed below, witnesses will speak only about 
things they have experienced themselves. If possible, evidence should be presented in the 
courtroom so that the jury can determine the weight to give each piece of evidence.  
 
The hearsay rule often creates admissibility issues for electronically stored information (ESI) 
because such evidence is often made out of court and offered to prove the truth of the matter 
asserted.  
 
Exceptions to the Hearsay Rule 
The general rule against hearsay is full of exceptions — ways to get information into the 
record — which accounts for the rule’s infamy in courtroom dramas and in real courtrooms. 
The rules of evidence exempts several categories of statements that are not to be considered 
hearsay, and there are many circumstances in which evidence, although hearsay, is admissible.  
 
The Truth of the Statement Is Not at Issue 
The hearsay rule only applies if the statement is being offered to prove the truth of the matter 
contained in the statement. Therefore, if the statement is offered for some other purpose, it 
technically is not hearsay. Any out-of-court statement can be admitted if it (1) is relevant to 
some aspect of the proceedings and (2) is not offered for the truth of its contents. Such 
statements are most often used to show a person’s knowledge or state of mind at a particular 
time. For instance, a witness will be allowed to testify that she heard the defendant say, “I 
can’t stand this company. They owe me big time.” The statement cannot be used to prove 
that the defendant actually stole from the company; however, it can be admitted to show the 
defendant’s state of mind — that he was disgruntled. 
 
Admissions by an Adverse Party 
Generally, the statement of an adverse party is not hearsay. Such statements are called 
“admissions” and can be very powerful evidence. More specifically, an admission is an out-of-court 
statement or conduct by a party to the lawsuit that tends to support the other side’s 
position or diminish the declarant’s own position. Thus, anything spoken or written by a 
party to a lawsuit can be entered into the record, provided that the statement can be  
 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.719 
corroborated and is relevant. Each side can use its adversary’s out-of-court statements as 
evidence.  
 
For example, during your investigation of the case prior to trial, you interviewed the 
defendant. During the interview, he tells you that he falsified the invoices. Later he denies 
making the statement. If you take the stand and tell the jury that the defendant told you he 
falsified invoices, technically that statement is hearsay. However, since it is an admission, it 
will be admitted under this exception to the rule.  
 
An admission is not necessarily an outright confession. A witness may testify that a bank 
officer told her, “I have ways of getting loans approved that no one else knows about.” The 
statement alone does not prove loan fraud against the officer, but it does establish, by his 
own admission, his stated intent to subvert the security controls of the institution. 
 
In cases involving corporations, large groups, or government agencies, any statement made by 
a member of the organization is potentially an admission. The person who made the 
statement has to be directly authorized to speak for the organization or perform a job related 
to the issue under discussion. For example, an agent employed by Jefferson Realtors who 
says, “You’ve been defrauded here” to an aggrieved client has made an admission on behalf 
of the company. A janitor at Jefferson Realtors, however, cannot make the same admission 
because janitorial duties are not related to the formation of contracts, and chances are the 
janitor is not authorized to make corporate declarations. Since an agent makes contracts on 
the company’s behalf, the statement is an admission even if the agent is not the official 
spokesperson for Jefferson’s legal affairs.  
 
Former Testimony Under Oath 
Testimony given by the declarant at another hearing is admissible if the party against whom 
the testimony is now offered had an opportunity and motive to examine the witness similar to 
that in the present trial. 
 
Business and Government Records 
We commonly think of invoices, receipts, and official documents as the final legal word, but 
like statements made outside of court, business and government records are hearsay; they are 
prepared outside the courtroom. A special exception for these materials, however, makes 
them admissible if they are provided with a legal foundation. The admissibility of such 
records rests on two criteria:  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.720  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Have they been prepared during “regularly conducted business activity”? 
• Are they verifiably trustworthy? 
 
Materials prepared specifically for trial are not admissible as business records. Anything that 
casts doubt on the veracity of these documents can bar them. In situations where the charge 
involves altered documents, the materials are admitted to prove the charge of alteration — not 
for their truth-value — so the hearsay rule does not apply.  
 
Computerized records have had no trouble being accepted as evidence. Generally, the hearsay 
exception for business records applies (i.e., they are admissible as long as the records have 
been compiled as a regular facet of doing business).  
 
However, it should be noted that a minority of courts follow a different approach when 
addressing hearsay within computerized records, which has recently garnered much acclaim. 
These courts distinguish between computer-stored records and computer-generated records 
and hold that ESI containing only computer-generated records (such as log-in records from 
ISPs, telephone records, and ATM receipts) untouched by human hands do not contain 
hearsay. In such cases, there is no need to establish that a hearsay exception applies. 
Alternatively, computer-stored records are created or maintained by a human and therefore 
are deemed hearsay. Thus, they must meet a hearsay exception to be admitted. 
 
Statement Against Interest 
A statement against interest is a special form of admission in which a prior statement is at odds 
with the declarant’s current claim. To be admissible under this exception, the statement must 
meet three requirements:  
• The declarant must be unavailable to testify. 
• The statement must have been against important interests of the declarant when made. 
• Corroborating circumstances must clearly establish the trustworthiness of the statement. 
 
In prosecuting a tax evasion charge, for example, prosecutors may present a financial 
statement used by the defendant to obtain a loan; this is a statement against interest because 
the document declares a higher net worth than the defendant now claims to have. 
 
Absence of an Entry in Business Records 
Evidence that a matter is not included in the memoranda or reports kept in the regular course 
of business may be admissible to prove that a certain event did not occur if the matter was 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.721 
one about which a memorandum or report regularly was made and preserved. However, this 
does not hold true if the source of information or the circumstances indicate a lack of 
trustworthiness. 
 
Recorded Recollections 
A memorandum or record may be admissible if it concerns a matter that the witness once had 
knowledge of but now has forgotten, if it was made or adopted by the witness when the 
matter was fresh in memory, and if it is shown to be accurate. Such memoranda or records 
also may be shown to a witness who has temporarily forgotten the events to refresh the 
witness’s recollection and allow the testimony to be more complete or accurate. 
 
Present Sense Impressions 
Courts assume statements that are made during or immediately after significant events or 
conditions and that describe or explain the events or conditions are reliable, so present sense 
impressions are admissible. For example, a witness can report that he first suspected fraud at 
Securities Plus by noting that his superior said, “Oh my God! This can’t be happening!” when 
he was informed that there would be an audit. In a similar example, Mr. Whistler notices 
Jenny Moore, a co-worker, in John Smith’s office and overhears her say, “Oh, here are some 
bid sheets in the trash can.” If the government prosecutes Smith for bid rigging, which is 
demonstrated by the bid sheets, Mr. Whistler can testify about Moore’s statement as a present 
sense impression because the words described the scene before her. 
 
Excited Utterances 
There is also an exception for statements relating to a startling event or condition made while 
the declarant was under the stress of its excitement. Unlike statements of present sense 
impressions, excited utterances require an occurrence that is startling enough to produce 
excitement.  In the Mr. Whistler scenario, for example, Moore’s statements might qualify as 
an excited utterance if she discovered the bid sheets after months of searching for 
incriminating evidence and told Whistler, while jumping up and down in excitement, “I’ve 
found the evidence I’ve been waiting for a long time!” Here, the successful conclusion of the 
search was sufficiently exciting.  
 
Then Existing Mental, Emotional, or Physical Condition  
Statements of the declarant’s then-existing state of mind, emotion, or physical condition are 
also admissible as exceptions to the hearsay rule. Specifically, the Federal Rule of Evidence 
803 lists “state of mind, emotion, sensation, or physical condition …, pain, and bodily health” 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.722  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
as acceptable subject matter, along with extremely personalized thought processes such as 
“intent, plan, motive, design, mental feeling ….”  
 
Defense attorneys at a fraud trial sometimes use arguments about what their client intended, or 
the confusion and stress the person was suffering. For instance, the defendant was seen 
shredding documents, and he was overheard to say, “They’ll never prove anything now.” The 
statement may be admitted to show the defendant’s state of mind at the time he was 
shredding the documents. It also shows that the defendant acted with the intent to destroy 
the documents. Hearsay statements that help establish this intention are admissible as 
exceptions. 
 
Statements for Purposes of Medical Diagnosis or Treatment 
Anything first communicated during a medical examination is admissible as a hearsay 
exception. This includes medical history, symptoms, pain, and the general character of the 
medical condition. These statements do not even have to have been made by the patient. 
They can involve someone (parent or spouse) accompanying the patient.  
 
Printed Matter, Learned Treatises, and Refresher Writings 
Written materials that add to the court’s knowledge of an issue are excepted from the hearsay 
rule. This exception often bears on the testimony of expert witnesses who often use 
published material in their work. 
 
Printed materials  that support technical or professional assertions, such as commodity market 
reports, stock market quotes, mortality tables, cost of living indexes, etc., are admissible if 
they are “generally used and relied upon by the public or by persons in particular 
occupations.” The Federal Rules of Evidence specifically mentions market reports and 
commercial publications. 
 
The Federal Rules of Evidence also creates a hearsay exception for learned treatises, providing 
that an authoritative work is admissible to either support or attack the opinion of an expert 
witness and that the works are established as reliable authority. However, some courts limit 
the rule. In these jurisdictions, specialized “treatises, periodicals, or pamphlets” can be 
referenced only during cross-examination. In a world of proliferating and sometimes 
contradictory sources of information, just what counts as a learned treatise and what is a 
fringe group’s manifesto is not immediately clear. 
Writing used to refresh a witness’s memory is admissible under special circumstances. Basically, 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.723 
courts may permit testifying witnesses to refresh or revive their memory by referring to a 
writing or anything else if the witnesses will thereafter be able to testify without depending on 
the terms of the writing. For example, Whistler, who is serving as a witness at a fraud trial, 
wants to see some notes he wrote two years ago to make sure he got the numbers right in his 
testimony. He is allowed to consult the notes and continue with his testimony. There is a 
lawyerly aspect to this rule—the text of the notes is admissible, too, but only if the opposing 
attorney requests the admission.  
 
Other Exceptions 
Miscellaneous exceptions to the hearsay rule include things like dying declarations  and ancient 
documents. For those instances not specified in any rule, there remains the judge’s discretion: 
Anything the judge deems trustworthy for the purposes of its presentation is admissible. This is 
the cornerstone of the rule. Hearsay is excluded in the first place because it supposedly lacks 
trustworthiness. However, other kinds of hearsay that do not fall within any specific hearsay 
exceptions may be admissible if they meet the same standards of trustworthiness as required 
for the listed exceptions.   
 
 
Excluding Illegally Seized Evidence 
In general, evidence obtained improperly is tainted and unfit for trial. The Fourth 
Amendment sets out this cornerstone exclusionary rule, barring anything obtained by 
authorities without proper authorization from the owner or possessor, or through a court-ordered 
search warrant. Generally, this rule applies only in criminal cases, But it also applies 
to government employers. Therefore, a public employer cannot use illegally seized evidence 
to discipline an employee. There is no Fourth Amendment prohibition against a private  
employer using illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee, however. But if a private 
employer does use illegally seized evidence to discipline an employee, the employer might be 
exposing itself to litigation for invasion of privacy, trespass, or other common law causes of 
action, even though the evidence may still be admitted in court. 
 
 
Impeachment 
The above discussion concerns the manner in which evidence is introduced at trial, usually 
during direct examination. There is, of course, another side to testimony: cross-examination. 
Under the Rules of Evidence and the Sixth Amendment — which guarantees a defendant the 
right to confront witnesses — the adverse party is entitled to offer evidence to impeach the 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.724  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
testimony or credibility of a witness. Impeachment is the practice of bringing out matters that 
attack a witness’s credibility.  
 
There are numerous ways an attorney might impeach a witness, but the most common ways 
include efforts to show that the witness:  
• Is influenced by bias or self-interest 
• Has an impaired ability to observe   
• Made prior inconsistent statements 
• Has been convicted of a felony 
• Has a reputation for untruthfulness 
 
Impeachment by bias shows that the witness has reason, or at least opportunity, to skew the 
evidence against one of the parties in the litigation. Questioning on cross-examination will 
cover any pecuniary interest the witness has in the case, any connection the witness might 
have to any matter or litigant, and any other information that will make the witness appear to 
have some interest in favoring one party over another. 
 
Another way to impeach witnesses is to show that their ability to observe was impaired. Matters of 
observance include the ability to see, hear, smell, or feel some item in question.  
 
Nothing overturns a witness’s statements like inconsistency. Opposing lawyers will always 
confront any witness on cross-examination with any apparent inconsistencies between the 
trial testimony and statements, testimony, or information given by the witness on other 
occasions.  
 
A witness’s credibility may be challenged, though not automatically impeached, by showing that 
the person has been convicted of a felony crime. The governing rule, Rule 609 of the Federal Rules of 
Evidence, offers a few basic instructions. First, convictions for acts involving dishonesty, 
such as larceny, theft, or fraud, are especially harmful to a witness’s testimony. Second, any 
witness may be impeached with any prior felony conviction. Third, evidence of any prior 
conviction is presumably inadmissible if the conviction is more than 10 years old. 
 
Finally, any witness may be impeached by proof of reputation for untruthfulness.  
 
Certified Fraud Examiners should keep in mind that the above methods of impeachment may 
be used not only on the defendant and defense witnesses, but also on witnesses for the 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.725 
prosecution or defense. Inquiries should be made before trial to determine if a prosecution or 
defense witness is subject to impeachment, and, if so, appropriate steps should be taken. 
 
 
Privileges 
 
Introduction 
There are certain evidentiary privileges that protect certain types of evidence from being 
discovered or produced. Invoking a privilege for a piece of testimony or other evidence in a 
legal encounter keeps the material outside trial proceedings. If a privilege applies, the court 
and its petitioners are denied access to the privileged information, and judges and juries must 
disregard any evidence they do actually hear if it is deemed privileged afterward.  
 
The most important privileges are discussed below. 
 
Attorney-Client Privilege 
The attorney-client privilege precludes disclosure of communications between an attorney 
and client, but only if the following conditions are met: 
• The client retained the attorney 
• To provide legal advice 
• And thereafter communicated with the attorney on a confidential basis, and 
• The privilege has not been waived 
 
The attorney-client privilege applies to individuals as well as corporations or other business 
entities. In the context of an investigation of a company, communications generally will be 
protected under the attorney-client privilege if the following elements are present: 
• The communications were made by corporate employees to counsel. 
• The communications were made at the direction of corporate superiors in order for the 
company to obtain legal advice from counsel. 
• The employees were aware that the communications were being made in order for the 
company to obtain legal advice. 
• The information needed was not available from upper management. 
• The communications concerned matters within the scope of the employees’ corporate 
duties. 
  
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.726  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The communications were confidential when made and were kept confidential by the 
company. 
 
A general counsel’s participation in an investigation conducted by management does not 
automatically create an attorney-client privilege. The key element is that the attorney (whether 
in-house counsel or outside counsel) is conducting the investigation for the purpose of 
providing legal advice to the company. The privilege generally extends to information 
gathered by investigators if the investigator is acting at the direction of the attorney. 
 
The attorney-client privilege prevents disclosure of the communications—the letters, memos, 
or contents of telephone calls—b etween the attorney and client, not of the underlying facts 
or documentary evidence in the case. A client may not refuse to produce documents or other 
relevant evidence merely because such evidence was previously given to the attorney. 
 
Similarly, the attorney-client privilege does not prevent disclosure of communications that 
relate to business rather than legal advice. Corporate counsel is often consulted to give advice 
on matters related to business conduct rather than legal issues. Such communications would 
be discoverable. 
 
Finally, the attorney-client privilege may not be asserted if the communication involved the 
attempted or actual commission of a present crime or fraud. The attorney does not have to be 
a participant in the fraud for the waiver to apply. 
 
Waiver 
Special care should be taken to ensure that the attorney-client privilege is not waived 
inadvertently by giving documents or communicating information to anyone outside the 
investigation team, including members of law enforcement. If information gathered during an 
investigation is shared with law enforcement, then the privilege may be waived not only as to 
the information given, but also to any other information relating to the same subject matter.  
 
For example, if an investigator submits a copy of his report to the prosecutor who initiates 
criminal proceedings based on the findings in the report, the criminal defendant may be able 
to require the investigator to provide all the documents he used in writing the report. In such 
an instance, the investigator may be considered to have waived the privilege. Likewise, if law 
enforcement requests the results of an investigation or information gathered during an 
investigation, the attorney should be consulted before turning over the information. Some 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.727 
courts have held that the privilege is not waived if a company is subpoenaed to produce the 
information. 
 
Inadvertent Waiver 
Moreover, some courts have held that inadvertent disclosure of a single privileged document, 
including digital documents, waives the privilege as to all documents concerning the same 
subject matter. For this reason, special care must also be taken to avoid inadvertent disclosure 
from the use of electronic communications, including e-mail, cell phones, faxes, text 
messages, instant messages, etc. It is clear that the attorney-client privilege extends to 
electronic communications, and it is also clear that a matter voluntarily communicated to a 
third-party who is not an agent of your counsel is not confidential and, therefore, not 
privileged. Thus, when a party chooses to use a form of electronic communication, which is 
vulnerable to interception and inadvertent disclosure, you run the risk that your messages 
might be intercepted by, or disclosed to, an unintended third-party.  
 
To illustrate how easily inadvertent disclosure of electronic communications may occur, 
consider a few ways that an e-mail may unwittingly end up in the hands of an unintended 
third-party. E-mails may be forwarded to additional unintended employees, indicating a lack 
of confidential subject matter; they may be distributed to a large number of persons, 
suggesting a lack of confidentiality; or the sender could mistakenly hit the wrong key on the 
keyboard and send the e-mail to the wrong recipient. Therefore, fraud examiners must be 
concerned about the risks of inadvertent disclosure of electronic communications and should 
take cautionary measures to preserve the attorney-client privilege. 
 
Unfortunately, fear over the consequences of subject-matter waiver has led to dramatic 
litigation cost increases in today’s digital environment, where reviewing tens, hundreds, and 
even thousands of gigabytes of information for privilege is time consuming and expensive.  
 
Federal Rule of Evidence 502 
In an effort to protect against inadvertent waiver of the attorney-client privilege or the work 
product protection, President Bush signed into law S. 2450, a bill adding Evidence Rule 502 
to the Federal Rules of Evidence. The legislation resolves conflict between courts throughout 
the country on whether an inadvertent production of privileged material results in waiver. 
Simply stated, under Rule 502, an inadvertent disclosure of a privileged communication can 
no longer waive protection for all documents concerning the same subject matter. 
 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.728  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Among other things, Rule 502 provides the following protections: 
• If disclosure is made, then the privilege is waived to any other undisclosed information 
only if (1) the waiver is intentional; (2) the other information relates to the same subject 
matter; and (3) “fairness” requires further disclosure (Rule 502(a)).  
• If disclosure is inadvertent, it does not result in waiver when the privilege holder “took 
reasonable steps to prevent disclosure” and “promptly took reasonable steps to rectify the 
error” (Rule 502(b)).  
• If the disclosure was made in a state court proceeding, the disclosure does not waive 
protection in a federal proceeding if one of two conditions is met: (1) the disclosure 
would not have been a waiver under Rule 502; or (2) the disclosure is not a waiver under 
state law (Rule 502(c)).  
 
The McNulty Memorandum and the DOJ Guidelines 
On December 12, 2006, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines (in the form of 
the McNulty Memorandum) for federal investigation and prosecution of business 
organizations. The McNulty Memorandum, which addressed the practice of federal 
prosecutors investigating and charging business organization misconduct, revised the DOJ’s 
prior guidance outlined in the much maligned Thompson Memorandum, which provided that 
federal prosecutors could seek waiver of the attorney-client privileges and attorney work 
product protections as an element of a company’s cooperation. Specifically, the McNulty 
Memorandum provided specific criteria that prosecutors were required to consider and 
procedures they were required to follow before seeking waiver of privileges or work product 
protection. 
 
On August 28, 2008, the Department of Justice (DOJ) issued guidelines, which revised the 
McNulty Memorandum, on how federal prosecutors investigate, charge, and prosecute 
corporate crimes. Unlike the McNulty Memorandum, the guidelines are a part of the U.S. 
attorney’s manual, which provides internal DOJ guidance but does not create any enforceable 
law. 
 
In an effort to stop congressional action, such that proposed by S. 445, the guidelines bar 
prosecutors from judging corporate cooperation for leniency on whether an entity is willing 
to waive the attorney-client privilege or work product protection. The guidelines also state 
that prosecutors can no longer seek disclosure of information that is either privileged or 
protected work product. In addition, the guidelines provide that when evaluating a 
corporation’s cooperation, prosecutors may no longer consider whether a company is 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.729 
advancing legal fees for its employees, whether a corporation has sanctioned or retained 
culpable employees, or whether a corporation has entered into joint defense agreements.  
 
Even though most observers agree that the guidelines are a significant improvement over the 
McNulty Memorandum, many contend that comprehensive legislation is still needed to make 
the DOJ’s reforms permanent and prevent a relapse in department policy, as well as to bar 
similar waiver policies adopted by other federal agencies such as the Securities Exchange 
Commission and the Internal Revenue Service. For this reason, the DOJ’s guidelines may 
stop interested parties from supporting the enactment of legislation that would further 
protect corporations and their employees from government-coerced waiver. 
 
Selective Waiver 
Under the selective waiver doctrine, a corporation seeking to cooperate with a government 
investigation, pursuant to a confidentiality agreement, can disclose material protected by the 
attorney-client privilege to the government without waiving those protections as to 
nongovernmental parties, such as private plaintiffs. But it should be noted that most federal 
circuit courts have rejected the selective waiver doctrine. In addition, Rule 502 of the Federal 
Rules of Evidence does not explicitly acknowledge selective waiver, but it does not explicitly 
eliminate selective waiver as a viable doctrine.  
 
The Attorney Work Product Doctrine 
Under Rule 26(b)(3) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and under comparable state 
rules, documents and tangible things that are prepared in anticipation of litigation are 
protected by the attorney’s work product doctrine or privilege. The privilege is conditional in part: 
The opposing party may obtain access to otherwise privileged investigative documents and 
things through pre-trial discovery if it can show substantial need  for the protected information 
and that the information cannot be obtained from another source. However, the attorney’s 
mental impressions, opinions, and strategies concerning the litigation are absolutely privileged 
and cannot be discovered even with a showing of substantial need. The privilege extends to not 
only information and documents prepared by a party or the party’s attorneys, but also by the 
consultants and examiners hired by the attorneys. For instance, communications with the 
attorney and any work or analysis done by an expert with whom the attorney has consulted is 
privileged as work product, although that privilege will be waived if the expert is called to 
testify as an expert witness at trial.  
 
Work product protection applies only to documents and things prepared  in anticipation of 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.730  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
litigation or for trial. Thus, documents and tangible things prepared in the course of an in-house 
or other pre-litigation investigation, even if at the direction of an attorney, may not be 
privileged if they were not prepared in anticipation of litigation. Just because there is a possibility 
of future litigation does not mean that the investigation is in anticipation thereof. Litigation 
must be actually planned and the work for which protection is sought must have been 
undertaken for the specific purpose of preparing for that litigation. But if the work to be 
protected was done in anticipation of litigation, then it does not matter in most jurisdictions that 
no lawsuit has been filed yet. 
 
The privilege protects documents and things prepared in anticipation of litigation from 
compelled disclosure. Nevertheless, it does not render the facts themselves confidential, 
privileged, or non-discoverable. Thus, while reports, interview notes, and transcripts might 
not be discoverable under the privilege, the facts learned may have to be provided in response 
to properly phrased discovery requests. Similarly, the privilege does not prevent discovery of 
the identity of witnesses and the existence of interview notes, tapes, or transcripts. The extent 
to which interview notes, transcripts, and other factual reports prepared in anticipation of 
litigation are actually protected from discovery by a party opponent may vary between 
jurisdictions and may depend on the facts and circumstances of a given case. 
 
Waiver of Work Product Protection 
Like the attorney-client privilege, work product protection can be waived. Moreover, the 
Federal Rule of Evidence 502 expressly applies to disclosure of a communication or 
information covered by work product protection. Therefore, the examiner should abide by 
the same rules governing disclosure of materials protected by the attorney-client privilege.  
 
Work Product Protection and Outside Auditors 
In late 2004, a federal district judge in New York, under the work product doctrine, protected 
the results of an internal investigation of a large company given to an outside auditor (Merrill 
Lynch & Co., Inc. v. Allegheny Energy, Inc., 2004 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 21543). However, courts 
continue to disagree as to whether such disclosure waives work product protection under the 
Federal Rules of Evidence. 
  
Before disclosing work product to an outside auditor, a company should determine whether 
the outside auditor is an “adversary.” Some courts consider auditors to be the “watchdogs” of 
companies, and therefore inherently adversary to their corporate clients. Certainly, the role of 
outside auditors is to independently ensure the accuracy of a company’s financials, find 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.731 
inaccuracies, and detect fraud. However, the court in Merrill Lynch distinguished this kind of 
adversary from a “litigation adversary.” A company’s auditor is not necessarily a “litigation 
adversary” (which is required to invalidate the work product privilege). Rather, “[a] business 
and its auditor can and should be aligned insofar as they both seek to prevent, detect, and 
root out corporate fraud.”  
 
The court also emphasized that a blanket waiver of privilege in this kind of situation would 
likely discourage ethical disclosure and conduct by companies. Thus, the trend in litigation 
seems to review the facts on a case-by-case basis to determine whether an auditor and 
company share common interests and therefore are non-adversarial.  
 
The following principles should aid companies in determining whether they should provide 
work product to outside auditors: (1) ensure a common interest between the company and 
the outside auditor; (2) only disclose information necessary to help the auditor assess 
sufficiency of the company’s controls and the accuracy of the company’s audit/accounting 
procedures; and (3) when disclosing informati on, always include a confidentiality agreement 
acknowledging that the documents were prepared by counsel and therefore privileged, as well 
as a covenant that the outside auditor is to maintain the strictest confidence of the 
documents.  
 
Self-Evaluation Privilege 
The self-evaluation privilege (also referred to as the self-critical privilege) may provide some 
protection for the investigative work product. This privilege is based on the need to 
encourage voluntary internal reviews and compliance programs. It applies if an organization 
can demonstrate that it is attempting to police itself in an area of public interest, and that 
disclosure of the work product would prejudice such efforts. The privilege is a relatively new 
concept and is not recognized in all jurisdictions. It is much weaker than the attorney-client 
and attorney work product privileges. 
 
Marital Privilege 
Additionally, the marital privilege protects communications between husbands and wives. 
There are two forms of the marital or spousal privilege: (1) the confidential communications 
privilege, enabling either spouse to prevent the other from testifying regarding a 
communication during marriage between the two that was intended to be in confidence, and 
(2) the adverse testimony privilege, protecting spouses from being compelled to testify against each 
other while they are married. Usually, the confidential communications privilege continues 
Basic Principles of Evidence  Law 
2.732  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
after the termination of the marriage; the adverse testimony privilege does not.  
 
There is no privilege that permits a person not to testify against other family members, 
although, as a matter of policy, many law enforcement agencies will not compel testimony 
from immediate family members. 
 
Law Enforcement Privilege to Withhold the Identity of an Informant 
Law enforcement agencies may legitimately withhold the identity of an informant unless 
disclosure is necessary to ensure that the defendant receives a fair trial. In such circumstances, 
the prosecution has to decide whether to forego prosecution or disclose the identity of the 
informant. In the private sector, there is no equivalent privilege. Certified Fraud Examiners or 
others who are investigating on behalf of a private client may be compelled by court order to 
disclose the identity of an informant or any other witness. This possibility should be disclosed 
to potential witnesses who may request confidentiality. See the Investigation Section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual for more information. 
 
Accountant-Client Privilege 
A few states have a weak accountant-client privilege that allows an accountant to resist 
production of a client’s work papers or documents. No such privilege is recognized in federal 
court, and the state privileges may be overcome by a showing of need or by the service of a 
subpoena.  
 
There is, however, a Federally Authorized Tax Practitioner Privilege under section 7525 of 
the Internal Revenue Code. This privilege is a evidentiary privilege that provides limited 
protection in federal tax law.  It applies only in situations where a CPA is providing tax advice  
in noncriminal proceedings before the IRS or before a federal court.  
 
Nevertheless, as discussed above, in federal proceedings, communications between a client 
and a third-party, such as an accountant, may be protected under the attorney-client privilege 
or the attorney work product doctrine.  
 
The attorney-client privilege extends to accountants if the attorney hired the accountant to 
assist in rendering legal advice. Additionally, the privilege extends to an accountant’s 
documents, which were made at the attorney’s request, used to render legal advice. This 
privilege was clarified in U.S. v. Cote, which concluded that there is no protection for 
accounting services if no legal advice was sought. In Cote, the client engaged the accountant 
Law  Basic Principles of Evidence 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.733 
before retaining the lawyer, the client and accountant had a long-standing professional 
relationship, and the attorney did not control or supervise the accountant’s efforts or work 
product.  
 
In addition, the attorney work product protection extends to information and documents 
prepared by the consultants and examiners hired by the attorneys, including accountants. 
However, any protection will be waived if the accountant is called to testify as an expert 
witness at trial.  
 
In cases where accountants serve as expert witnesses, the work product doctrine may apply. 
Protection under the work product doctrine generally depends on whether the accountant 
serves as a testifying expert or a non-testifying (consulting) expert. Nothing created by the 
testifying expert is privileged from discovery. Conversely, the rules of discovery generally 
protect communications between a non-testifying expert, the attorney, and the party from 
disclosure to adversaries. However, the protection against disclosure of communications with 
non-testifying experts can be lost, and this commonly occurs when the non-testifying expert’s 
communications are released to others, particularly to testifying experts. This topic is 
discussed in further detail below.  
 
There are a number of other privileges that are less likely to be asserted in fraud actions, 
including the priest-penitent  and physician-patient  privileges. 
 
 
  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.801 
TESTIFYING AS AN EXPERT WITNESS 
 
Introduction 
Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, and auditors often are called upon to provide 
testimony in criminal and civil prosecutions where their services can be used to support 
investigations of matters such as financial frauds, embezzlements, misapplication of funds, 
arson for profit, bankruptcy fraud, improper accounting practices, and tax evasion. Fraud 
examiners may also be used as defense witnesses or to support the defendant’s counsel on 
matters that involve accounting or audit issues. 
 
Experts can serve one of two roles in the trial process: testifying expert or consulting expert. 
Testifying expert witnesses give opinion testimony when specialized knowledge is needed to help 
the jury understand evidence or determine a fact in issue. Conversely, consulting experts typically 
do not testify at trial. Instead, they are hired to provide technical assistance to the attorney in 
preparing the case. Generally, both testifying and consulting experts play an ongoing part with 
the litigation process.  
 
Although experts serve one of two roles, they can perform various functions throughout the 
litigation process. Lawyers often count on testifying experts to help crystallize the judge or 
jury’s understanding of the case. In his book, Effective Expert Witnessing, author Jack V. Matson 
lists the four main functions of all expert testimony and offers advice on fulfilling each 
assigned duty: 
• Establish the facts. You must first develop a strategy to collect and examine the 
documentation in the case. The discovery process, which is a mechanism for full 
disclosure of all knowledge pertinent to the case, usually yields a vast amount of paper, 
which the expert then must sift through to make a preliminary classification of relevance. 
• Interpret the facts. Tie together cause and effect relationships with the data and the facts for 
the technical basis of your case. Do not be fooled by correlation that seemingly links cause 
and effect but holds no theoretical justification. 
• Comment on the opposing expert’s facts and opinions. Develop a good understanding of the 
opposing experts by reviewing their educational background and experience. Read their 
publications. Probe for weaknesses that your side might exploit. Oftentimes trials become 
a battle of the experts. Prepare for the battle with as much intelligence as you can muster. 
Take apart the opposition’s expert report, which represents the other side’s best case, 
piece by piece. Your attorney needs to know the most intimate details about the facts and 
opinions contained in that report. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.802  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Define the professional standards in the particular area of your opponent’s expertise. One of the most 
critically important ways an expert is used in trial is to define the “standard of care” 
exercised by fellow professionals in the field. Standard of care has been traditionally 
defined on the basis of judgment normally exercised by professionals in good standing. 
Additionally, the professional must be informed or aware of current practices and 
promulgation. Obsolete practices are now considered by the court to be negligent 
practices. Thus, professionals must exercise reasonable, informed judgment in carrying out 
their duties. You, as the expert, will be called upon to define the professional standard and 
to measure that against the standard of care exercised by the professional(s) on the other 
side. 
 
If called by the prosecution, examiners might testify to their findings, and if called by the 
defense, they might testify regarding opinions expressed by the prosecution’s expert — to 
create doubt in the jury’s mind about the credibility or weight to be given to that expert. 
 
Alternatively, an examiner might be called upon to give an opinion different from that reached 
by an equally credible expert on the other side. This might be due to different interpretations 
of the facts of the case. In some instances, given equally plausible alternatives, the case might 
be decided on whichever side has the most credible expert witness. 
 
Additionally, effective expert witnesses frequently share certain characteristics. Credibility is 
one such feature. To become a “credible” expert witness, one must be a member in good 
standing of the profession and usually be recognized as an authority in that profession or 
some specialized aspect of practice within it. 
 
Similarly, an expert witness in the area of accounting must have a thorough knowledge not 
only of generally accepted accounting principles, but also of current promulgations. The 
expert’s expertise often might involve special knowledge of a specific industry. In this case, 
the expert should be aware of recent developments and any important issues within that area. 
 
The expert also must be analytical and be able to work with incomplete data. The expert, 
however, might not always be able to recognize when data is incomplete. As a result, the 
expert might make assumptions that will then be open for interpretation or attack. If all data 
have not been made available, then the opposing counsel might be able to offer alternate 
scenarios that are more plausible under the circumstances, thus discrediting the expert. 
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.803 
Pre-trial Preparation 
Pre-trial preparation remains key to becoming a successful expert witness, and success often 
depends on full inquiry and thorough investigation. Following the initial complaint and 
answer, the discovery process usually begins with one side giving the other a set of written 
questions, called interrogatories. An expert’s assistance may begin by composing the questions 
or by providing the replies, depending on your side of engagement. Both sides then submit 
requests to the other for production of records pertinent to the case. A financial expert is 
often expected to educate a lawyer on the types of documents typically available. Most 
everything — from a single deposit slip to continuous ATM videotapes to voluminous 
accounting ledgers — is subject to discovery. 
 
Many times financial crime experts on the prosecutor’s side must scale a mountain of 
documents or scroll through a heap of computer files to find the core facts that show criminal 
intent or behavior. The defense may bury the other side in paper or electronic documents to 
hide or trivialize vital documentation. Because an efficient search saves time and money, 
successful experts develop an early strategy and tick off a detailed checklist to achieve their 
goals within a specific time frame. 
 
When testifying as an expert, it often is useful to have a list of all other witnesses, including 
those for the other side. This is important so that the expert is not surprised by the existence 
of other experts or reports. One can then determine if it is necessary to be present for the 
testimony of those witnesses and can obtain the necessary court approval. If another expert 
will be present, then it becomes incumbent upon the expert witness to examine the alternate 
reports and to assess whether or not reasonable points are brought up by the other side that 
might affect the credibility of the expert’s report. 
 
 
Conflicts of Interest 
When retained, experts must quickly determine if any conflicts of interest exist — or even 
appear to exist — in a particular case because a conflict might preclude participation. A conflict 
of interest exists when an expert’s ability to objectively evaluate and present an issue for a 
client will be impaired by any current, prior, or future relationship with parties to the litigation. 
 
There are several actions an expert can take to determine if any conflicts of interest exist. 
Before engagement, ask for the names of all parties involved. Review the names with your 
associates as well, requesting full disclosure of any connections, however remote. Prior or 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.804  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ongoing relationships may suggest to others that the expert could not provide undivided 
loyalty to the cause and your client.  
 
Penalties for consulting or acting as an expert in a conflict of interest include expert 
disqualification, attorney disqualification, and inadmissibility of expert testimony. 
 
 
Preparing a Report 
Careful consideration should be given to the preparation of an expert report, which 
documents your findings and opinions for both sides. It puts your reputation on the line. A 
well-written report that lays out a strong case might even prompt an early settlement. 
However, it also lets the opposition see the strengths and weaknesses of your case and better 
prepares them for your deposition and trial testimony.  
 
Keep the following six tips in mind when preparing an expert report: 
• Be brief 
• Avoid ambiguity or inexact language 
• Avoid generalizations; be specific 
• Add charts or graphs where appropriate 
• Reference your work 
• Meticulously check the report for accuracy and neatness 
 
An important problem in the preparation of reports and accounting summaries arises from 
the delegation of tasks to subordinates. If the person giving evidence has not had direct 
knowledge or has not examined the specific documents or prepared the summaries, the expert 
might be trapped under the hearsay rule. If tasks are delegated, it is important that the review 
process entails comparison of all original work documentation. 
 
It also is important to know the effect of other assumptions on the conclusion or opinion 
reached in the report. It often is possible to trap an expert into giving alternate opinions based 
upon assumptions that had not been considered. Generally, working papers and schedules 
supporting the report should not show contradictory conclusions as they may be produced in 
court. This is not to advocate that working papers should be deleted or amended subsequent 
to preparation; rather, it is a caution that these papers should be prepared with the precept 
that they could ultimately be submitted to the court. Thus, the work papers should be 
appropriately prepared.  
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.805 
Once they accept a case, many experts immediately start assembling a narrative version of the 
events. This detailed summary of the facts of the case serves as the raw material for rendering 
an official opinion. It is important that the text be written with care and professionalism — as 
the discussion below outlines, the text may (and probably will) have to be produced during 
discovery. Additionally, a well-written narrative helps the attorney in preparing and executing 
the case at trial. 
 
What to Include in an Expert Witness Report  
The requirements for an expert report differ depending on whether a case is pending in 
federal or state court. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 26(a)(2), which applies to civil cases in 
federal court, requires expert witnesses to prepare reports and provide them to the opposing 
parties, although this requirement may be waived if directed by the court or agreed to by the 
principle parties involved. The rule applies to experts who have been retained specifically for a 
given case, and it includes employees of a party if part of the employees’ duties involves giving 
expert testimony. A written report, often called a Rule 26 report, must be produced for each 
expert witness.  
 
Conversely, some state courts do not require written expert reports but may require another 
form of mandatory disclosures. Unfortunately, the requirements of all fifty states are beyond 
the scope of this manual. Therefore, experts should check with counsel prior to issuing their 
written report to make sure that the report will comply with any applicable standards or 
requirements under state law. 
 
Consult with Counsel 
Generally, experts should coordinate with counsel to ensure that their reports comply with all 
applicable legal standards. Failure to comply could result in a disposition of a claim by 
summary judgment or an order precluding an expert from testifying. 
 
Generally, Include Only What Is Necessary 
If a written report is requested, include only what is necessary. Avoid gratuitous and 
unimportant comments. At a minimum, an expert witness report should do the following: 
• Identify the reason for the report and provide the matter to be explored by the report 
• Provide the expert witness’s observations and opinions, including the basis, rationale, data, 
or other information used to reach the opinions 
• List any exhibits used as a summary of or in support of the provided opinions, including 
all charts or graphs 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.806  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• State any conclusions the witness may have reached based on the observations and 
information 
• Provide all sources, including individuals, articles, sources, documents, and books that the 
expert consulted 
• Cite specific tests that support the expert’s conclusion and list the standards or test 
methods used by the expert 
 
Rule 26 Reports and Disclosure Requirements Under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedures 
As noted above, expert reports in all civil actions in federal court must comply with Rule 26 of 
the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. Rule 26 states that testifying experts must prepare a 
written report and make certain disclosures about their opinions and supporting grounds. 
Specifically, the expert report, which must be prepared and signed by the expert witness, must 
include the following: 
• A complete statement of all expert opinions to be expressed and the basis and reasons for 
such opinions 
• The data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinion 
• Any exhibits to be used as support for or as a summary of the opinions 
• The qualifications of the expert witness 
• All publications authored by the expert in the preceding 10 years 
• A list of all other cases in which the expert has testified as an expert at trial or at 
deposition within the preceding four years 
• The expert’s compensation for his review and testimony 
 
The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure also impose time limits concerning Rule 26 Reports. The 
rules require that the identity and report of the expert must be disclosed at least 90 days before 
trial. But the disclosure of an expert whose testimony is intended solely to contradict or rebut 
another witness’s testimony must be disclosed within 30 days after the other witness’ 
disclosure. Additionally, an expert must supplement the written report or deposition 
testimony at least 30 days before trial if he becomes aware that previous disclosures might 
have been materially incomplete or incorrect. 
 
If a court finds that an expert report fails to satisfy the Rule 26 requirements, it may strike the 
expert designation and prohibit the expert from testifying. A sample format for an expert 
report is included at the end of this chapter. 
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.807 
Note that under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the expert witness must turn over 
anything he used in forming his opinion. Thus, if an expert uses privileged or confidential 
documents, those documents must be given to the opposing party. 
 
Moreover, draft reports are also discoverable. Therefore, experts should never destroy drafts, 
notes, recordings, or any other form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion. Any 
action to do so may result in permanent loss of the expert’s credibility. In fact, the best 
practice to prevent discovery of draft reports is not to create draft reports in the first place. 
 
These mandatory disclosure requirements remain controversial. Attorneys and judges cannot 
agree on whether the requirements add unnecessary expense or whether they promote 
uniformity and fairness. At least one of those goals, uniformity, has not been realized. Rule 26 
provides that the disclosure requirements are mandatory unless a particular district court 
provides otherwise by order or local rule. Several district courts have elected not to adopt Rule 
26 and have written their own local rules in its place. Accordingly, instead of providing a 
uniform system of disclosing information, the amendments have led to a system of different 
rules for different districts. 
 
Disclosure Requirements Under the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure 
Lawyers and expert witnesses must also mind the rules regarding expert disclosures in criminal 
cases, which are different from those required in criminal cases. In criminal cases, pretrial 
expert disclosure is only triggered if the defendant requests it from the government. When this 
happens, the government must produce a written summary of any testimony that it intends to 
use during its case-in-chief at trial. The summary must describe the witness’s opinions, the 
bases and reasons for those opinions, and the witness’s qualifications. If the government 
complies and requests reciprocal disclosure, the defendant must also provide a summary of 
any expert testimony he intends to use at trial.  
 
Expert Witness Discovery 
Concerning expert witnesses, discovery is the process by which the opposing side finds out an 
expert’s opinions and underlying rationales. Caution is the by-word for expert witnesses at 
every step of the legal process.  
 
In general, everything that a expert witness creates or uses is discoverable. According to FRCP 
26, which applies to civil cases in federal court, everything the expert receives, reviews, relies, 
produces, and says about the case after being hired is subject to discovery by opposing 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.808  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
counsel. That means everything: narrative versions of the case, comments to the press or law 
enforcement, hypothetical reconstructions, draft reports, and even notes can be demanded 
and used by the opposing party. A shrewd attorney can use an expert’s notebook — which 
contains “dry runs” at an opinion and other purely deliberative information — to call the 
witness’s testimony into question. The only exception, as discussed below, is when the expert 
is hired by the attorney purely on a consulting basis. 
 
Because all “data or other information considered by the witness in forming the opinions” is 
admissible in federal court, experts should never destroy drafts, notes, recordings, or any other 
form of documentation used to form the expert’s opinion (Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, 
Rule 26(a)). 
 
In legalese, an expert witness has no privilege. The principle of privilege exists to protect certain 
core societal relationships (attorney-client, husband-wife), but the expert witness’s relationship 
with clients is not among those protected. If the expert’s opinions will be presented in court, 
everything related to the expert’s opinion is discoverable.  
 
In fact, anything an expert carries into a deposition — sworn testimony given by a party or 
witness upon questioning by counsel for one of the parties before trial and outside of court — 
is subject to discovery. Attorneys have been known to request a search of someone’s attaché 
case to get at important materials. This sharp edge of discovery is why experts insist on being 
deposed away from their own workplace; if they did not, their entire files would be subject to 
discovery.  
 
The Consulting Expert Exception 
Although everything a expert witness receives, reviews, relies, produces, and says is generally 
discoverable, there is an exception of course: The rules of discovery generally protect 
communications between a consulting expert, the attorney, and the party from disclosure to 
adversaries.  
 
Specifically, the work of a consulting expert is generally not discoverable because it typically 
falls under the protection of the work product doctrine. To review, the work product doctrine 
prevents compelled disclosure of documents and tangible things prepared in anticipation of 
litigation. And because its protection extends to information prepared by or for a party or the 
party’s representative, including consultants, the work of a consulting expert is generally not 
discoverable. But otherwise protected materials may become discoverable through waiver, and 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.809 
the general test for waiver is whether the materials at issue have been disclosed in a manner 
inconsistent with keeping it from an adversary. 
 
The distinction between the protection afforded to consulting and testifying experts is 
something like this: when acting as “witnesses,” experts are bringing official information to 
the court and thus must disclose any contact with the case; when experts act as “consultants” 
or “associates” for attorneys or law enforcement, they are only assisting the attorney and do 
not have to disclose their involvement in the case. 
 
There is, of course, one trap for the unwary: Protection of work product performed by a 
consulting expert may be lost when a testifying expert reviews the work of a consulting expert. 
The rule is that if an expert will testify at trial, everything he does regarding the case must be 
turned over to the other side. If an expert works only as a consultant to the attorney, then his 
work product is not discoverable. But if a testifying  expert reviews the work of a consulting  
expert, then the work of the consultant expert will be discoverable. Just remember this: If you 
are hired to testify at trial, anything you used to form your opinion will be subject to review by 
the opposing party. This includes notes from other experts, documents received from the 
plaintiff or defendant, and any documents or notes from the attorney. Be sure to consult with 
the attorney before you review anything. If a document was given to you by someone other 
than the attorney, ask before you read it. Otherwise, you may inadvertently destroy the 
confidentiality or privilege of the material. 
 
Keeping Good Files 
The best way to protect the confidentiality of information is to keep good files. Dan Poynter 
reports that experts routinely “reduce their files to useful reports only” once they have been 
officially engaged as a witness for trial. No one is recommending that files be sanitized, 
Poynter adds, just updated. The difference may be subject to abuse, but it is simple: Any 
materials that serve as the basis for an expert’s opinion must be in the file. Notes, documents, 
or tests that serve as background or that represent unfruitful lines of investigation do not have 
to be included and probably should not be. The attorney trying the case doesn’t want an 
expert having to answer about dead ends or exploratory jaunts; a shrewd cross-examiner can 
turn a hastily scribbled hypothetical into just enough “reasonable doubt” to avert a conviction. 
So, in the best case scenario, an expert presents to the court an opinion and its basis — nothing 
more, nothing less.  
                                                 
7 Poynter, Dan.  The Expert Witness Handbook.  Santa Barbara: Para Publishing, 1997: p. 82. 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.810  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Proposed Changes to Expert Witness Rules Related to Expert Witness Discovery 
Recently, the Judicial Conference of the United States’ Advisory Committee on Federal Rules 
of Civil Procedures proposed significant amendments to Rule 26. If adopted, the amendments 
would significantly change the discoverability of the data or information considered by a 
testifying expert. This section examines the proposals.  
 
Although almost everything a testifying expert says or writes is subject to discovery by 
opposing counsel under current law, the revisions would prohibit the discovery of draft expert 
reports and limit discovery of attorney-expert communications. More specifically, the 
amendments would, among other things, make the following three changes: 
• Communications between counsel and retained testifying experts would generally be 
protected from disclosure or discovery. This amendment would offer work product 
protections similar to those already available to consulting experts.  
• Draft reports and disclosures required by Rule 26(a)(2) of any testifying expert would no 
longer be discoverable.  
• Rule 26 reports produced by a testifying expert would only need to include the “facts or 
data considered” by the expert. Currently, Rule 26(a)(2) reads “data or other information 
considered,” which courts have interpreted to include everything communicated by 
counsel to the expert. Thus, the amendment emphasizes that experts should only include 
factual information in their reports.  
 
These amendments are expected to be adopted and become effective on Dec. 1, 2010, as 
amended. 
 
 
Qualifying to Testify as an Expert Witness 
Just what constitutes expert status? Generally, the term expert witness refers to someone 
whose education and professional credentials establish their knowledge of a particular set of 
practices. As with introducing exhibits in trial, counsel must lay a foundation for the expert’s 
testimony. This means showing that by formal education, advanced study, or experience, the 
witness is sufficiently knowledgeable on the subject at hand. That is, a witness must be 
qualified to testify as an expert. The foundation may be established during the pre-trial stage 
or during direct examination.  
 
Unfortunately, it is becoming increasingly difficult to testify in federal courts as an expert and 
to understand the standards and rules to qualify as an expert. 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.811 
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the admissibility of expert testimony in 
federal court. Rule 702 provides that a witness qualified as an expert by “knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education” may testify in the form of an opinion or otherwise to 
“scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge” if such testimony will “assist the trier of 
fact to understand the evidence or to determine the fact in issue.” 
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, 509 U.S. 579 (1993), the Supreme Court stated that 
judges should act as “gatekeepers” and keep out scientific testimony that is not based on the 
methods of science. In a related case titled Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael, 526 U.S. 137 (1999),  
the Supreme Court stated that the judge’s gate-keeping function applies not just in cases 
dealing with scientific evidence, but in any case involving testimony based on “technical” and 
“other specialized knowledge.”Taken together, these cases mean that expert testimony given 
by Certified Fraud Examiners, accountants, or other experts must be judged against the 
standards set forth by the Supreme Court in the Daubert case.  
 
In response to these cases, Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence was modified to 
specifically include the standards set forth by the Supreme Court in Daubert and Kumho Tire. 
Rule 702 now reads: 
 
If scientific, technical, or other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to understand the 
evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill, 
experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwise, if (1) 
the testimony is based upon sufficient facts or data, (2) the testimony is the product of reliable 
principles and methods, and (3) the witness has ap plied the principles and methods reliably to the 
facts of the case. 
 
Simply put, Rule 702 provides that the judge must make three determinations before allowing 
an expert to testify before the jury:  
• Is the person qualified as an expert witness?  
• Will the expertise of the witness assist the jury in understanding the evidence or 
determining a fact at issue? In other words, is  the testimony relevant to the facts of the 
case? 
• Is the testimony reliable? 
 
Qualifications 
Before admitting expert testimony, the judge must determine that the expert is a qualified 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.812  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
practitioner. This element addresses whether the individual is qualified to assist the trier of 
fact. For a witness to qualify as an expert, counsel must establish that the witness is sufficiently 
knowledgeable on the subject at hand by showing formal education, skill, or experience. The 
determination of whether a witness is qualified as an expert or whether expert testimony is 
needed is left to the discretion of the trial judge.  
 
The process of evaluating whether an expert is qualified mainly centers on the candidate’s 
formal education and work experience — whether that includes 30 years in law enforcement or 
10 years in a large accounting firm. But there is no particular educational requirement for 
expert testimony; a witness with no formal education may be qualified based on training or 
experience. Some other factors that may be considered include the candidate’s: 
• Awards and honors 
• Licensing or certification 
• Technical training 
• Published books and journal articles 
• Positions in professional associations, societies, and organizations 
 
In addition to being qualified as an expert, the expert’s qualifications must be relevant to the 
particular issue(s) in the case at hand. But the important thing to remember is that a person 
can be qualified as an expert based on either special training or experience. A person does not 
have to be a CFE to testify as an expert on fraud detection techniques if that person has 
sufficient practical experience in those techniques. The CFE designation is important because 
it serves as a recognition of the special skills that those holding the designation have 
demonstrated to become a CFE. 
 
Although designations are important, it is most helpful to have prior experience as an expert 
with litigation or criminal matters. This is primarily because of what is learned during the 
experience of testifying. Further, it often is helpful to have been accepted as an expert in other 
cases thereby easing current acceptance. A danger exists, however, of appearing to be a 
“professional witness.” 
 
The counsel introducing the witness often will read the expert’s qualifications or ask specific 
questions to establish the witness’s credentials. Smart defense lawyers are not likely to 
challenge the credentials of experts, assuming they meet at least minimum standards of 
professional competence. To do so may give these experts an opportunity to fully highlight 
their professional credentials and perhaps make a greater impression on the jury or judge, thus 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.813 
adding more weight to their testimony. Although the expert’s qualifications are not often 
contested, it does happen. Beyond being accepted by both parties, the expert witness most 
importantly must be accepted by the court. 
 
Testimony 
After determining that a witness is a qualified expert, the trial judge must determine that the 
testimony offered by the expert is relevant to the facts of the case and reliable. These two 
questions focus on what opinions the expert will actually testify to in court.  
 
Relevant testimony will assist the jury in understanding the evidence or determining a fact at 
issue. To be relevant, the proposed testimony must be “sufficiently tied to the facts of the case 
that it will aid the jury in resolving a factual dispute.” Specifically, the court must determine 
whether the expert’s opinion has any tenden cy to make the existence of any fact more 
probable than it would be without the evidence. Testimony is not relevant if the jury can make 
its own determination without expert testimony. 
 
To be reliable, the testimony must be based on sufficient facts and data, and it must be the 
product of reliable methodology that has been reliably applied  to the facts of the case. This 
assures that an expert’s opinions are not mere speculation.  
 
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the Supreme Court set forth the following non-exclusive 
list of factors to assess reliability: 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique can be or has been tested 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique has been subjected to peer review and 
publication 
• Whether the expert’s theory or technique enjoys general acceptance within the relevant 
scientific community 
• Whether there are standards governing the method used by the expert 
• Whether the expert’s technique has a high error rate 
 
Accordingly, CFEs should be sure to fully cover the rationale for their assumptions and 
determine whether the assumptions are supported by the facts presented during discovery. In 
fact, courts often find that assumptions not supported by evidence render expert opinions 
insufficient, thus causing the judge to exclude the expert’s testimony. For example, in Target 
Market Publishing, Inc. v. ADVO, Inc., a breach of contract case arising from a joint venture to 
produce advertising publications, a well-qualified accountant and business appraiser concluded 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.814  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that, had the defendant performed its contractual obligations, the joint venture would have 
earned $1.4 million in profits. To reach this conclusion, the expert assumed the joint venture 
would have successfully entered 49 marketing zones at the time of the breach. But the joint 
venture had only entered into two marketing zones and was unprofitable in both. The 
appellate court affirmed the exclusion of the expert’s opinion as to the value of a contract 
because the methodology underlying the opinion was based upon subjective belief and 
speculation, including unsupported assumptions.  
 
When preparing an expert report or testimony, examiners should keep in mind the Daubert 
factors set forth above. Examiners should document their conclusions, how they reached 
those conclusions, what evidence they based the conclusions on, and what professional 
techniques or knowledge they used. It would also be a good idea to keep a list of professional 
books or journals that advocate or sanction whatever principles were used in drawing the 
conclusions. 
 
Daubert Challenges 
A Daubert challenge is a motion raised, either before or during trial, to exclude an expert 
witness from presenting evidence. This motion is used to exclude the testimony of an expert 
who lacks sufficient expertise or uses questionable methods. 
 
Basis of Expert Testimony 
Rule 703 of the Federal Rules of Evidence governs the sources on which experts may base 
their testimony. It provides that experts may rely on facts or data made known to the expert at 
or before the hearing: 
 
The facts or data in the particular case upon which an expert bases an opinion or inference may 
be those perceived by or made known to the expert at or before the hearing. If of a type reasonably 
relied upon by experts in the particular field in forming opinions or inferences upon the subject, the 
facts or data need not be admissible in evidence in order for the opinion or inference to be 
admitted.  
 
Therefore, under Rule 703, an expert may base an opinion on:  
• Firsthand observations 
• Facts, data, or opinions presented at trial 
• Facts, data, or opinions conveyed outside of court  
 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.815 
In addition, under Rule 703, experts can rely on inadmissible hearsay or other inadmissible 
evidence as long as it is the type reasonably relied upon by experts in the particular field — a 
determination that is left to the discretion of the trial judge. This rule allows an expert to 
employ data usually used by experts in the field, though the data itself may not be admissible. 
An example might be a table of interest rates taken from a Department of Commerce 
publication. Similarly, an accountant serving as an expert witness may rely on private sources 
in forming an opinion if such sources normally are relied upon by accountants.  
 
The majority of states, however, follow the common law rule, which permits a more limited 
basis for expert testimony. Most states require the expert to predicate testimony on firsthand 
perception, or in the alternative, information “admitted in evidence at the hearing” at which 
he is called to testify. 
 
 
Preparing to Testify 
The majority of cases filed will not go to trial. They will be resolved through either a 
settlement agreement or a plea bargain. Therefore, most experts’ experience in testifying 
comes through having their depositions taken.  
 
Depositions of Expert Witnesses 
A deposition is sworn testimony given by a party or witness upon questioning by counsel for 
one of the parties before trial and outside of court. A deposition serves as a powerful 
discovery device that may be used to compel anyone associated with the case to give oral 
testimony under oath. Although you cannot decline to testify, an expert may be allowed to 
specify a convenient time and place.  
 
Sometimes the party requesting the deposition pays the opposing expert’s fee — which consists 
of the time spent giving the deposition at his standard hourly rate or in half-day or full-day 
increments, plus travel time. This usually occurs in federal court. Most state courts require 
each side to pay the expenses of the expert’s they hire. An expert charges his client for the 
time spent preparing for deposition and for testifying. 
 
In addition to the required court reporter, the proceeding may be recorded by a camera or a 
voice recorder. A judge is not present during this question-and-answer session. For skilled 
investigators, deposition provides a golden opportunity to hear the other side’s case aloud. 
The opposition may set ulterior goals as well, including: 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.816  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To learn new information or confirm existing facts 
• To appraise the expert’s ability as a witness 
• To lock the expert into a hard-to-defend position 
• To create a written record for future impeachment 
 
Before testifying at a deposition or at trial, the expert should ensure that required graphic 
displays are ready and available, that all important discussions with the lawyer have been held, 
and that the expert has a complete understanding of the report and other relevant issues. The 
expert should ensure that he has agreement with counsel as to the sequence of evidence and 
the strategy for presenting it. It often is useful to have a “dry run” at the direct testimony, with 
all the questions posed by the counsel to the expert, to avoid surprises during trial. 
 
At pre-testimony meetings, it is appropriate to discuss the qualifications of the witness again 
to ensure that they are current, to discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the case, and to 
discuss and agree on what parts of the expert’s reports, if any, are to be entered as exhibits. 
 
Appearance 
The appearance of the expert witness often lends itself to an assessment of the credibility of 
that witness. It is recommended that the witness wear conservative business attire, be well-groomed, 
and neatly dressed.  
 
It is also important that the witness maintain a professional demeanor. In the witness box, the 
witness should maintain a poised, alert appearance, stand firmly, and be ready to take the oath. 
The witness should not smile gratuitously at the judge, jury, or the lawyers. Also, it is 
important that the witness keep control of his hands, to avoid fidgeting. And witness should 
maintain eye contact with the questioner as much as possible; he should not stare off into 
space, at the floor, or at the ceiling. 
 
As the judge will be taking notes, the witness should speak slowly to ensure that the judge 
does not fall behind. The answers should be directed to the questioner. The witness’s voice 
should be strong, clear, and audible. Thus, before answering each question, the witness should 
pause before answering and carefully consider the answer; he should also respond in a slow 
and deliberate manner. 
 
Do's and Don'ts 
There are other considerations in making an expert a credible witness. Some tips are: 
• Exude an alert and confident attitude. 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.817 
• Maintain professional pride and integrity throughout. 
• Tell the truth; be honest and avoid bias. 
• Use simple rather than complex terms, and refrain from using professional jargon. 
• Explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms. 
• Be friendly and polite to all parties present. 
• Be alert.  
• Correct any misstatements as soon as they are detected. 
• Listen carefully and answer the specific questions—do not go off on tangents or volunteer 
more than the question requires. 
• Do not verbally fence with the attorney. 
• Do not try to be humorous or hip. 
• Be calm and deliberate in responding to questions—think before you speak. 
• Plan your testimony in advance and know your material thoroughly.  
• Use graphs, charts, and other visual aids if they help to clarify a point. 
• Do not read from notes if you can avoid it (the opposition lawyer will probably demand to 
see such notes, and the witness will then look like he rehearsed his testimony). 
• Prepare your material completely. If you have documents to introduce, have them 
organized so that you can quickly retrieve them when asked to do so. 
• Do not “hem and haw” or stammer; recover your composure when a tough or complex 
question is posed. 
• Ask for a question to be repeated or clarified if not fully comprehended. 
• If an answer is not known, say so; do not guess. 
• Do not invent and do not inflate. 
• In cross-examination, do not respond too quickly because counsel might wish to object to 
the question. 
• Do not be evasive. 
 
Several other things should also be avoided. These range from drinking five cups of coffee 
immediately prior to testimony or chewing bubble gum while giving evidence, to small 
physical mannerisms that might affect your appearance. These physical mannerisms, which 
might be as simple as rubbing one’s hands together continually, looking down at one’s hands, 
fidgeting on the stand, or jingling coins in a pocket, could become irritating to the judge and 
jury. 
 
Similar to trial proceedings, the opposition commonly drills an expert about his credentials, his 
methodology, and his conclusions pertaining to the case. Unlike in a trial, the expert quite 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.818  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
often answers tersely, giving only a straight “yes” or “no.” For inquiries that require more, you 
should respond directly and precisely and refrain from volunteering any information. It is not 
your duty to educate the other side at deposition. You may ask for a recess or a break if 
needed. 
 
Pour over the written transcription of your deposition afterward to ensure accuracy, 
immediately correcting any omissions or errors, whether made by you or the stenographer. 
Notify your lawyer if your opinion has changed since deposition. If you are present at the 
deposition of the opposing expert, you may be asked to summarize your impressions 
afterward and note any gray areas that call for further lines of inquiry. 
 
 
Direct Examination  
Direct examinations are conducted by the attorney who retained the expert. Because experts 
are hired for their opinions, they are not subject to the usual restrictions about statements of 
judgment. Experts also have other leeway not given to ordinary witnesses. They may rely on 
documents or exchanges that would otherwise be inadmissible as hearsay. This allows them to 
use articles, academic papers, professional texts, and consultations in rendering their opinions 
of the case. These materials are admissible as long as they were used by the expert in 
developing his opinion.  
 
Presenting Expert Testimony 
Expert witnesses present their findings in various ways such as narrative questions, 
hypotheticals, specialized materials, and special exhibits. Experts are commonly asked to 
answer narrative questions, which are all but forbidden to lay witnesses. Narrative questions are 
broad, open-ended questions that allow experts to present their opinions in their own words 
with minimal prompting from the lawyer. Fraud cases, with their divergent paths of activity 
and intrigue, can require complex summarizing in order for the facts to make any sense. The 
average group of jurors has never considered how someone could manipulate store 
inventories to drive up the company’s stock price and then make millions on the phony surge. 
The expert witness in cases like this often will begin testimony by recounting the narrative 
background of a case, the tests and experiments that were performed during the investigation, 
and a summary of the findings based on his professional expertise.  
 
Expert witnesses also are allowed to demonstrate their findings by using hypotheticals: fictional 
situations, analogous to the act in question, which clarify and highlight particular aspects of 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.819 
the dispute. But to be effective, hypotheticals must be constructed exquisitely. Appeals courts 
have been adamant that the facts of the case being tried have to be reflected directly in the 
hypothetical situation; there must be no exaggeration or obscuring in the presentation.  
 
Moreover, experts sometimes use specialized ma terials in reaching and communicating their 
opinions. Professional publications and sources of information that normally are used in the 
course of business may be produced as part of the trial. Federal rules require only that the 
source be “generally used and relied on” by people in that field.  
 
Finally, experts may use special exhibits to demonstrate facts about the case or some aspect of 
their opinion. These exhibits may include charts, diagrams, annotated documents, or photos. 
If the exhibit is offered to prove a fact, it must satisfy the rules applicable to any other piece of 
evidence in the case. In demonstrating a professional opinion, the role of the exhibit must be 
clear and its applicability to the present case justified, if necessary.  
 
Direct Testimony Considerations 
The purpose of direct examination is to enable counsel for the side you represent to draw out 
the evidence to prove the case. Most likely, this will only be a reiteration of what previously 
has been discussed with your counsel outside the courtroom. It is still very important, 
however, to refresh your memory beforehand by reference to anything you may have read, 
written, or given in evidence on the case. 
 
Direct examination is the most organized aspect of the trial; it is the stage in which the 
expert’s credibility must be established with the judge or jury. According to the concept of the 
primary memory, people remember best what they hear first and last. This often is a useful 
idea to employ in giving or structuring evidence. Another noteworthy point is that the jurors 
often have limited attention spans in a long trial; thus, it is often useful to use a 
“grab/give/conclude” method of presenting evidence. 
 
To a witness, the interpretation of questions and the ability to listen are crucial skills. Even 
though the witness might already have gone through a mock direct examination, it is critical 
that each question be carefully evaluated again — the witness should reflect upon the questions 
asked and not anticipate them (they might have been changed, anyway, since the time of 
rehearsal). 
 
The answers to all questions should be clear and concise, and, where complex terms are used, 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.820  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
they should be clarified. Similarly, explain complex concepts in a layperson’s terms and avoid 
professional jargon because the fact finders might not be familiar with esoteric or technical 
terminology. 
 
Use of notes should be limited as much as possible to maintain eye contact. 
 
Schedules, if any, should be described accurately and succinctly in easily understood terms. 
Schedules are, by their nature, concise documents and should be described in that manner.  
 
If opinions are given, they should be stated with conviction. 
 
Certain standards for Certified Fraud Examiners are found in the Code of Professional Ethics 
(please see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual). 
Specifically, Certified Fraud Examiners are prohibited from expressing opinions as to the guilt 
or innocence of any person or party. This is not to say that the expert witness cannot testify to 
the badges, hallmarks, or characteristics of fraud found in the case. It also does not mean that 
the Certified Fraud Examiner cannot testify that, based on the evidence, he believes the 
accused might have committed the offense. However, the ultimate guilt or innocence of any 
person or party is the sole responsibility of the judge and jury. The Certified Fraud Examiner 
typically will not be permitted to testify to the ultimate fact questions. 
 
 
Cross-Examination 
Cross-examination is truly the highlight of the adversary court system. It is geared to allow 
counsel either to clarify or to make points at the witness’s expense. It generally is the most 
difficult part of the trial process for any witness. Anything can turn up that might refute or 
embarrass the witness. The witness’s credibility is constantly called into question. 
 
The goals of the opposing counsel during cross-examination are threefold. The first goal is to 
diminish the importance of the expert testimony just presented. The second goal is to have 
the expert testify in support of the opposing position by providing a series of assumptions. 
The third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequacies in the expert’s 
opinion, thereby discrediting the opinion, the report, and the witness. 
 
The opposing counsel can attack or question anything that has been said or entered into court. 
This includes notes, working papers, affidavits, will-says, reports, and preliminary trial or 
Law  Testifying as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.821 
discovery transcripts. Often, cross-examination creates an atmosphere of confrontation and 
contradiction.  
 
The witness must not take attacks or attempts to discredit personally. There are many ways to 
discredit an expert witness. Throughout the process, it is important for the witness to maintain 
pride and professional integrity. An adage to remember is that “even mud can be worn well.” 
 
Opposing counsel wants to reduce or limit the impact of the witness’s evidence — it is natural 
to feel a certain amount of apprehension, and this might do a great deal to keep the witness 
alert. The jury often watches the judge, and thus the expert often can take a clue as to the 
tempo and reaction of the jury and the judge to the evidence being presented. Slight changes 
in style and presentation could be made accordingly. 
 
The opposing counsel usually has a plan of cross-examination in mind and an expert witness 
should be able to anticipate this direction to prevent falling into a trap. A danger to this, of 
course, is that the witness will spend as much time planning ahead as answering the questions, 
and might not be giving appropriate attention to the immediate questions. Further, in 
attempting to anticipate a question, the witness might misunderstand what is actually asked. 
 
Generally, it is a rule of thumb that a witness should not volunteer or freely give information.  
 
During the answer, it often might be extremely difficult to avoid getting trapped in various 
assumptions, “what if” scenarios, and generalities presented by counsel during cross-examination. 
If this occurs, or if asked a long or imprecise question, retrench by asking for a 
question to be rephrased in smaller components. 
 
It is critical never to underestimate the expertise of the opposing counsel. Often, opposing 
counsel will be underplaying its understanding of the issues to lull the expert into a sense of 
security. This can lead the expert into a difficult situation. Opposing counsel’s golden rule is to 
cross-examine only if it would benefit the case. In asking questions of the witness, opposing 
counsel generally either will ask short questions in plain words or will ask leading questions. 
Usually counsel knows the answers to the questions. 
   
The opposing counsel generally will evaluate answers and then take a specific approach that 
furthers the argument. Generally, the witness will not be allowed to explain or elaborate on 
the question as that would allow the witness to alter the thrust of a carefully orchestrated 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.822  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
cross-examination. Opposing counsel will continually question or evaluate how the last 
question and answer could be used against the witness. 
 
Furthermore, opposing counsel often will prepare by researching the expert. For example, it is 
likely that counsel will read all earlier testimony and publications of the witness. Opposing 
counsel also might speak to other lawyers as to the witness’s capabilities in court if the lawyers 
have had experience with the witness. If weaknesses are discovered, the questioning probably 
will be directed to that area. 
 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to take psychological control of a witness by: 
• Using physical presence to intimidate 
• Making nonstop eye contact 
• Challenging space of the witness 
• Asking questions at a fast pace to confuse the witness 
• Not allowing the expert to explain or deviate from the exact question 
 
Physical domination often is used by opposing counsel. Opposing counsel will quickly 
discover the response pattern of the expert and might take an aggressive stance to lead the 
expert to the point where he is unsure. 
 
Counsel may employ the following strategic methods to discredit a witness or to diminish the 
importance of a witness’s testimony. These methods could be used alone or in conjunction 
with one another and are not an all-encompassing list. A good counsel in cross-examination 
will quickly discover the witness’s weak areas and employ any possible techniques to achieve 
its goal. 
 
Myopic Vision 
Myopic vision entails getting the expert to admit to a great amount of time being spent in the 
investigation of a matter, then selecting an area to highlight about which the expert is unsure 
or has not done much work. This area might not be central to the issues in the case, but it 
must be relevant to the conclusions reached. Then the opposing counsel will make a large 
issue of it and prove that the expert’s vision is myopic in that the work was limited in extent 
or scope and, as such, substandard. At the same time, the matter of fees could be drawn in to 
show that large sums were expended to have this “obviously incomplete” work done. 
 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.823 
Safety 
This approach involves lulling the expert into a feeling of false security by not attacking him. 
After the expert feels secure, the opposing counsel might find a small hole in the expert’s 
testimony that can be enlarged quickly. This approach often is characterized by being friendly 
and conciliatory, by which the jury is made sympathetic to the cause of the opposing counsel. 
Opposing counsel also might attempt to achieve a certain amount of association with the 
witness that will make the witness want to help the opposing counsel to bring out 
information. Doing so may result in the witness giving information that otherwise would not 
have been given. With this additional information, it might be possible to find a chink or hole 
in the evidence and open it further. 
 
Contradiction 
Opposing counsel might use leading questions to force the witness into a hard or 
contradictory position. Alternately, counsel can establish the credibility in court of a 
potentially contradicting document or quote from other articles written by experts in the field. 
If these documents or articles are in contradiction to the expert, then an admission can be 
obtained from the expert as to that contradiction. If a contradiction exits, the expert might be 
drawn into an argument as to who is the most appropriate or experienced person. Instances 
also occur in which a witness has contradicted himself or his own article written several years 
prior merely because of his lack of memory or confusion due to the attack. 
 
New Information 
Opposing counsel may introduce new information of which the expert might not be aware. 
This normally is done to introduce confusion in the witness’s mind in the hope that the 
witness might contradict himself or develop a series of alternate scenarios given the new 
information to show that the existing report and opinions are no longer of value. 
 
Support Opposing Side’s Theory 
This approach recognizes an expert’s qualifications and evidence. The same information used 
by the expert is then interpreted by opposing counsel in a different fashion to support an 
alternate theory. By getting the expert to agree to the alternate interpretation of the facts and 
the alternate theory, the opposing counsel, in effect, has made the expert a witness for the 
other side. This technique is useful to obtain concessions from the witness that would damage 
his conclusions and, ultimately, his credibility. 
 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.824  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bias 
This method draws the expert’s counsel and the expert together to show possible collusion as 
to the evidence being presented, and hence to demonstrate bias. This can be shown if the 
opposing counsel can determine that the expert’s  counsel had instructed the witness as to 
what to say or by limiting the expert’s scope and thus his conclusions. This approach also can 
focus on the question of whether or not the expert was told by his client what to do and look 
for. With this approach, opposing counsel might attempt to show that the expert overlooked 
important documentation in an effort to assist his client. 
 
Confrontation 
This method involves the use of a confrontation of wills to put the witness into a situation in 
which he might lose emotional control and show anger. Once a witness has exploded, 
credibility normally disappears. 
 
Sounding Board 
This method uses the witness as a sounding board to reacquaint the jury with the favorable 
aspects (to opposing counsel) of the case. This technique often uses the “is it not true?” and 
“would you agree with me?” approach. Constant agreement is useful to browbeat the expert. 
In the eyes of the judge and jury, agreement with various questions raised by the opposing 
counsel also might be assumed to be a general concurrence with the position of the opposing 
counsel. 
 
Fees 
This method attacks the witness on the basis of taking an inordinate amount of time for the 
result given. The attack might indicate a lack of complete work and be correlated to the fee 
charged. This method often is related to “bias” and “myopic vision.” It might be suggested 
that the witness and his opinion are, in fact, biased. This technique often builds to a 
conclusion in which the opposing counsel arrives at the idea that the work was superficial and 
unprofessional, yet a great deal of money was received by the expert for this and other areas 
of service to the client. The inference is that the testimony was purchased or that the expert 
was paid to overlook facts contradictory to the conclusions reached. 
 
Terms of Engagement 
This technique normally is employed by obtaining the original engagement letter and 
examining the terms of engagement. Opposing counsel can then show that the expert 
intended to look only at various items in support of his client and glossed over alternative 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.825 
theories, generally to the detriment of the opposition. As such, the witness could be portrayed 
as partial.  
 
Discrediting the Witness 
Discrediting the witness is based on proving that the expert is unworthy to be a credible 
witness instructor to the court. This often can be accomplished by showing that the expert is 
currently or has previously been grossly biased, prejudiced, or corrupt; been convicted of 
criminal activities; been shown to engage in immoral activities; made inconsistent statements; 
acquired a reputation for a lack of veracity; or exaggerated his qualifications. Discrediting also 
could consist of looking at the quality of the expert’s educational background to reveal any 
other unusual activities that might bias the witness or exclude him from the court as an expert. 
 
Personal Attacks 
Another cross-examination tactic often used by attorneys is to “kill the messenger.” These 
attacks are of a more personal nature and generally include some of the following: 
• The witness is unqualified. 
• The witness displayed unprofessional behavior during the examination (such as asking 
personal or sexual questions during interviews). 
• The witness had a conflict of interest. 
• The witness was harassing (phone calls at home, threatening voice mails, etc.). 
 
Failure to Follow the Standards of the Profession 
Additionally, the attorney may attempt to discredit experts by trying to show that they failed to 
follow the standards, best practices, or professional conduct rules set forth by their profession, 
such as the ACFE for fraud examiners or other professional bodies such as the AICPA, the 
IIA, or state bar associations. 
 
For CFEs, it is extremely important to be familiar with the tools and techniques set forth in 
the Fraud Examiners Manual. There have been cases where enterprising defense attorneys have 
obtained copies of the Manual and quizzed the fraud examiner about whether or not the 
methods set forth in the Manual were followed. Likewise, attorneys will often question CFEs 
about the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics, particularly regarding the prohibition against 
stating an opinion of guilt or innocence (which is discussed below). 
 
It is important to understand that the Fraud Examiners Manual does not set forth standards. 
The Manual provides the CFE with information, suggestions, and methods for conducting a 
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.826  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
fraud examination. A CFE is always required to follow the Code of Professional Ethics, but 
he is not required to follow what is set forth in the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
However, if a fraud examiner deviates from the normal investigative methods set forth in the 
Manual, he should have an explanation as to why it was appropriate and explain that the 
Manual is only provided as guidance. 
 
 
Expressing an Opinion on Guilt 
As previously discussed, testifying expert witnesses give opinion testimony, which is based 
upon their specialized knowledge and experience about case issues, but experts may only give 
opinion testimony in areas that will aid the jurors in reaching their verdict. Additionally, 
experts may give opinion testimony on ultimate issues (i.e., the basic conclusions upon which 
the outcome of a case depends), but they cannot offer legal conclusions or educate the jury on 
the principles of law.  
 
Moreover, article five of the ACFE Code of Professional Ethics prohibits opinions regarding 
the guilt or innocence of any person or party:  
 
A fraud examiner, in conducting examinations, will obtain evidence or other documentation to 
establish a reasonable basis for any opinion rendered. No opinion shall be expressed regarding the 
guilt or innocence of any person or party.  
 
This rule is a rule of prudence. For example, it is prudent for a Certified Fraud Examiner to 
refrain from usurping the role of jury. In a courtroom, no good attorney would ask a Certified 
Fraud Examiner for such a conclusion, and no alert judge would allow such testimony.  
 
The fraud examiner’s job is to present the evidence in his report. Such evidence might 
constitute a convincing case pointing to the guilt or innocence of a person. However, a clear 
line should be drawn between a report that essentially says “Here is the evidence,” and one 
that steps over the line and says “He is the guilty (innocent) person.” Nevertheless, there is a 
fine line between recommending action — forwarding the evidence to a law enforcement 
agency or filing a complaint or lawsuit — and giving an opinion on guilt or innocence. Certified 
Fraud Examiners might make such recommendations because they think the evidence is 
strong enough to support a case. They might even have a conclusion about whether the 
suspect committed a crime. The rule does not prohibit the Certified Fraud Examiner, under 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.827 
the proper circumstances, from accusing the person under investigation. However, the 
ultimate decision of whether a person is “guilty” or “innocent” is for a jury to determine. The 
CFE is free to report the facts and the conclusions that can be drawn from those facts, but the 
decision as to whether or not a person is guilty of a crime is a decision for the judge or jury. 
 
 
Witness Immunity for Experts 
Generally, federal and state courts grant fact witnesses immunity for their testimony at trial. 
There are three commonly cited public policy rationales for granting this immunity. First, the 
immunity rule prevents self-censorship of the witness. Second, without immunity, witnesses 
may be inclined to distort their testimony in fear of a retaliatory suit. Third, the cross-examination 
process ensures truthful and reliable testimony.  
 
Furthermore, courts have extended witness immunity to include adverse expert witnesses and 
court-appointed expert witnesses. This immunity generally applies to trial testimony, 
deposition testimony, and report preparation. Courts grant immunity to adverse and court-appointed 
experts for numerous reasons, including the long-standing common law witness 
immunity doctrine, the prevention of witness self-censorship, and the belief that the judicial 
system adequately ensures truthful and reliable testimony. However, even though immunity is 
the general rule for adverse and court-appointed experts, courts have denied immunity and 
permitted negligence claims where testifying experts breach their professional duty to act 
within the standard of care.  
 
Despite the witness immunity discussed above, recent cases indicate that expert witnesses may 
be liable to their retaining party for their pre-trial work or testimony, ruling that expert 
witnesses should not be immune from liability from their own clients. In fact, a growing 
number of states have allowed parties to sue their own experts for negligent testimony, 
including California, Connecticut, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Missouri, New Jersey, and 
Pennsylvania.  
 
The underlying bases for denying immunity to friendly experts are generally founded on the 
following rationales: (1) the common law grou nds for immunity are narrow; (2) potential 
liability encourages total and honest testimony; (3) experts should be held to the standard of 
their profession; (4) the role of the paid advisor and advocate warrants allowing claims; and (5) 
the judicial system does not adequately ensure truthful and reliable testimony from friendly 
experts.  
Testifying as an Expert Witness  Law 
2.828  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Expert witnesses should be aware that the witness immunity defense for experts is eroding, 
and as a result, suits alleging that expert witnesses committed fraud or negligence are 
increasing. Moreover, the presence of expert witnesses in the legal system will not decrease in 
the near future. Therefore, it is important that expert witnesses understand the liabilities and 
protections placed upon them.  
 
 
Summary 
In his book Succeeding As an Expert Witness, Harold A. Feder suggests keeping the following in 
mind while you are working on a particular case: 
• Keep an open mind. 
• Do not approach a case with predetermined conclusions as to causation, culpability, fault, 
or damage. 
• Remember that attorneys and clients come to you with facts that might be slanted, either 
accidentally or purposefully. 
• Carefully follow your own well-established investigative steps; develop forms, procedures, 
and processes that will ensure that you do not overlook evidence. 
 
One of the best things you can do is to stay current about new developments in your field. It 
takes a concerted effort to stay on top of changes and advances in any industry, as well as the 
latest forensic investigation methods. To be a successful expert witness in any area of 
accounting, for instance, you must have a thorough knowledge of not only generally accepted 
accounting principles, but also current promulgation. For cases involving credit card fraud, 
you must have a basic understanding of your nation’s electronic banking system. While active 
practice in your field of expertise — in other words, experience — remains your single most 
valuable source of knowledge, other sources abound. 
 
Actions, which maintain and improve your current credentials and make you a better expert 
witness, include: 
• Pursuing continuing education and training opportunities 
• Reading trade journals and publications 
• Joining and participating in professional societies and associations 
• Teaching, lecturing, and holding seminars 
• Attending specialized seminars and workshops 
• Writing for trade journals and publications 
• Taking advanced computer courses 
Law  Testifyin g as an Expert Witness  
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.829 
You can practice your oral delivery skills, and hence improve your credibility, by actively 
pursuing public speaking engagements and opportunities.  
 
Similarly, to feel more comfortable on the legal stage, you may wish to visit your local 
courtroom to observe another financial expert giving testimony in similar cases. Cable 
television, especially local government shows and the Court-TV channel, also offer a chance 
to see other experts in action in a variety of situations. 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.101




:


law
overview of the unit state legal system
basic concept of the law
the materi below introduc the fraud examin to the basic concept of the law legal
issu relat to fraud ar often complex and their interpret might requir the assist
of an experienc attornei the certifi fraud examin alwai should consult with counsel
if legal question aris dure a fraud examin
constitut law
the us constitut and it accompani amend ar the foundat of our legal
system the constitut defin and limit the power of the variou branch of the
govern and guarante basic right to all citizen right such as equal protect under
the law due process and the right to be free from unreason search and seizur
the constitut is the suprem law of the land the legislatur mai not properli pass the
execut branch enforc nor the judiciari uphold ani law or action that violat it
provis
constitut right that ar of particular import to certifi fraud examin includ
those found in the fourth fifth and sixth amend the fourth amend
guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason search and seizur thi
mean that the govern mai not seiz ani record in a crimin case unless reason
ground exist probabl caus to believ that the record would constitut evid of a
crime and that a suspect mai not be arrest unless there is probabl caus to believ that he
commit an offens the fifth amend guarante subject of a crimin investig
the right to refus to answer question or to provid certain person inform that might
be incrimin the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right
to counsel the right to confront crossexamin the wit against them and the right to
a speedi trial
substant and procedur law
addition in the unit state there ar two main categori of law substant law and
procedur law substant law is compris of the basic law of right and duti contract
law tort law crimin law etc as oppos to procedur law which involv rule govern
plead evid jurisdict and so on if someon sai an act is against the law he
mean substant law which includ statut and ordin at everi level common law or
overview of the unit state legal system law
2102 2011 fraud examin manual
case law from all the variou court and state and feder constitut
procedur law set out the rule of the legal system includ the procedur to be follow in
hear a grievanc thi mean deadlin file requir step to follow in bring a
claim rule of evid and so on substant law set the term of ani disput procedur
law dictat how a legal disput is handl
in feder court procedur ar govern by the feder rule of civil procedur and the
feder rule of crimin procedur
there ar special procedur law govern appeal court and evid the feder rule of
appel procedur ar collect in the us code follow titl 28 individu court of
appeal mai supplement the gener rule with their own public these ar list under
the name of the court eg appeal to the fifth circuit manual
the feder rule of evid cover what count as evid the condit of it admiss
in court and the method which author must us in acquir and process evid
each state and some counti publish it own procedur rule most state follow the
gener outlin of the feder rule but procedur rule can be vastli differ if you have a
specif question about a procedur or evidentiari rule at the state or counti level consult a
copi of the rule for the particular jurisdict or your attornei
statutori and common law
there ar two sourc of substant law statutori law and common law statutori law
includ statut pass by the feder or state legislatur and regul pass by
administr bodi the common law consist of the usag and custom of a societi as
interpret by the judiciari it often is refer to as judgemad law crimin law is
statutori while civil action can be base on either statutori or common law
although crimin fraud statut outlaw certain behavior thei often contain provis that
do not have ani obviou connect to basic principl of right and wrong for exampl a
violat of the feder mail fraud statut can be charg onli if the wrongdoer place or
receiv a letter in the us mail regardless of how seriou the underli fraud might be
similarli defend ar liabl under the racket influenc and corrupt organ
rico statut onli if thei engag in a pattern of racket activ through an
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2103
enterpris that is engag in interst commerc while violat of the feder monei
launder statut occur onli if the defend have engag in specifi unlaw activ
and have thereaft conduct a prohibit financi transact certifi fraud
examin prepar crimin case must be familiar with the specif technic element of
the applic statut and thei must carefulli review the evid to make certain that all
essenti element of proof ar met
in contrast to crimin fraud statut civil case brought under the common law usual
contain fewer technic element and incorpor tradit principl of fair and
moral for exampl a plaintiff mai file a common law claim for fraud by alleg simpli
that the defend misrepres import fact upon which the plaintiff reli result in
loss to the plaintiff
the common law is base not on statut pass by the legislatur but upon preced
establish by previous decid case stretch back hundr of year in us and english
court that is decis that establish particular legal principl ar call preced and in a
common law system the decis in an individu case bind judg in later case of a similar
natur until or unless the rule of law establish is overturn by a higher court or the
legislatur the bodi of judici opinion is sometim refer to as case law there ar an
increas number of civil statut in the fraud area includ the feder civil rico and
civil fals claim statut
the court system
civil and crimin case will be file in either state or feder court the power to hear a case
and render a judgment is strictli limit to a court jurisdict which is defin both by
geograph boundari and by the specif power grant to it by the legislatur thi reflect
the basic constitut principl of separ of power among the three branch of
govern the legislatur elect popularli enact the law the execut eg state or
feder prosecutor enforc them with a great deal of discret and the judiciari
interpret and appli them
jurisdict and venu
court ar defin by their jurisdict and venu to hear and decid a case a court must
have jurisdict over the parti and subject matter involv and proper venu
overview of the unit state legal system law
2104 2011 fraud examin manual
jurisdict is the power of a court to hear and decid a given case it refer to the subject
matter or person over which law author mai be exercis by a court a probat court
for instanc onli ha jurisdict to hear case relat to will and other probat matter
lower trial court such as a justic of the peac court mai onli have jurisdict to hear
matter under a certain dollar amount eg case with less than 5000 in controversi
venu refer to the geograph area cover by the court it is the physic locat where
the lawsuit is to be tri a trial court in dalla counti texa for exampl can onli hear
case that have some connect with either parti or event that occur in that counti
venu is technic an element of the court jurisdict thi issu mai be import in
decid where to file charg or claim
determin the proper court requir a threepart test 1 doe the court hear case of the
type in question claim 500000 in damag the plaintiff need a court that hear civil
complaint of that magnitud 2 doe the court have the author to exercis it power
over a particular defend or piec of properti you can sue a nebraska compani in a
nebraska state court becaus court have person jurisdict over all busi that do
busi in that state 3 doe the claim aris within the court venu if the claim for
damag is against the missouri offic of a compani headquart in nebraska determin
the proper venu is essenti if you file the claim in north dakota the court will have no
jurisdict to hear the case
state and feder court system
the us justic system us separ but interlock organ of court state court
can decid nearli everi type of case limit onli by the us constitut their own state
constitut and state law citizen will have most of their legal deal with the state and
local court situat throughout the countri most fraud case will be tri at thi level
probat case marit disput and real estat suit ar heard by state court
feder court ar princip locat in larger citi and hold limit jurisdict thei hear
onli those case over which the constitut or feder law give them author feder
court have jurisdict in onli two kind of case 1 feder question case and 2 divers
jurisdict case
a court ha feder question jurisdict over case base on aris under ani feder law
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2105
in divers case a feder court can hear a state action that involv more than 75000 and
is between parti who ar citizen of differ state divers of citizenship must be
completeal of the plaintiff must be citiz ns of a differ state from all of the
defend for purpos of determin divers jurisdict a parti is a citizen of the state
where he is domicil ie where he is present and intend to make hi perman home a
corpor is a citizen both of the state in which it is incorpor and the state in which it
ha it princip place of busi
state court
most state us a three or fourtier system
lower court try misdemeanor and preliminari for feloni case as well as civil disput
below a certain dollar amount eg 10000 or less
higherlevel trial court sometim call superior court try feloni case and civil disput
abov a certain amount eg 10000 or more
appel court review trial court decis
superior appel court or suprem court review lower appel court decis
mani state have differ system at the trial court and appel court level for try
civil and crimin case local and state crimin court might have limit jurisdict for
exampl some court onli handl traffic violat and minor offens some jurisdict
includ a smallclaim civil court to hear case involv no more than 2000 to 3000
feder court
the feder system us a threetier model
us district court conduct trial on crimin charg and civil complaint under feder
law
court of appeal includ the court of militari appeal review trial court decis
the us suprem court review lower court decis it is sometim call the court of
last resort
each feder district ha a chief prosecutor a polit appointe known as the unit state
attornei and a staff of prosecutor known as assist unit state attornei almost all case
ar prosecut by assist crimin case at the state and local level ar prosecut by the
district attornei offic or the attornei gener offic
the feder system also includ special court these ar
overview of the unit state legal system law
2106 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci court handl matter involv the us bankruptci code
tax court deal with tax law violat
court of feder claim jurisdict over complaint file against the feder govern
and it agenc
court of veteran appeal hear veteran benefit case
court of intern trade cover busi case of intern jurisdict
although feder administr agenc ar not part of the feder judiciari thei ar includ here becaus
appeal from their decis go to the feder court
appeal from the highest state court also mai be heard by the us suprem court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2107
feder court system
overview of the unit state legal system law
us suprem court
9 justic
us court of appeal
feder circuit
us court of appeal
12 circuit
threejudg panel not the entir
circuit court hear almost all case
us administr agenc
in a few case
appeal go to a us
district court
instead of the circuit
court
us district court
50 state
washington dc
puerto rico
virgin island the
canal zone
guam
us tax court
review ir
decis
us court of intern trade
creat in 1980
formerli the us
custom court
us claim court
and some special
agenc eg board of
contract appeal patent
and trademark offic
and merit system
protect board
us bankruptci court
us magistr
on court creat in 1982 by
a congression statut
form by merg the court
of claim and the court of
custom and patent appeal
judg sit in panel of three on
case involv custom
copyright trademark and
patent
2108 2011 fraud examin manual
a typic state judici system
highestlevel appel court
a state highest court
usual call the state suprem
court sometim call the court of
appeal of the suprem judici
court
typic 5 to 9 judg
intermedi appel or
review court
found in 41 of the 50 state
gener 3 judg per panel
trial court
gener jurisdict
call for exampl circuit court
or superior court
law equiti
lower trial court usual presid over by judg
although some state have justic of
the peac or magistr
nonjurylimit jurisdict
in some state
handl by sever
type of court in
other by the
same trial court
traffic
court
hous
rent
small
claim
court
probat
orphan
court
counti or
municip
court
juvenil
court
domest
relat
court
crimin
court
maximum amount vari
depend on the state from
200 to about 5000
seriou crimin case tend
to be handl by the gener
jurisdict trial court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2109
in gener the judg and juri serv import role dure a trial in the trial set the juri
find the fact and the judg appli the law rule on evid and gener moder the
proceed to ensur a fair trial if howev a juri is waiv by the defend and
govern the judg decid both the fact and the law
evid in a crimin or civil case is present base on burden of proof in gener term
the burden of proof is the respons of a parti to prove each element necessari to
establish the exist of a caus of action in a crimin case the prosecut must prove it
case beyond a reason doubt in a civil case the burden of proof usual is a
preponder of the evid a lower standard
after the trial court enter it decis a parti mai file an appeal with a higher court appeal
involv question of law or question involv both law and fact most question of law ar
decid by preced that is prior court decis of equal or higher author that have
consid similar case obvious howev disput exist over what preced should
prevail with both side attempt to persuad the court to interpret exist law in a manner
favor to it client
the right to appeal differ in crimin and civil case becaus of the fifth amend
doubl jeopardi provis which prohibit defend from be tri twice for the same
crime onli a convict defend in a crimin case can appeal a verdict the govern
cannot appeal an acquitt on the merit if a statut author the prosecut to appeal
such an appeal is constitut onli if the appel court can decid the appeal without
subject the defend to a second trial the prosecut mai appeal advers pretrial
rule on the admiss of evid and certain other matter that can termin a
prosecut temporarili but do not result in a decis on the merit in favor of the
defend either parti in a civil case mai appeal a judgment
an appel court will not revers a convict unless it find error that affect the
substanti right of a parti harmless error which supposedli doe not affect the juri
decis is toler defend ar entitl to a fair trialnot a perfect on if the appel
court revers a convict it will usual order a new trial but it mai also direct dismiss of
the case
appeal from decis of the us district court ar heard in the us court of appeal for
the circuit which cover a particular geograph area the unit state is divid into 11
overview of the unit state legal system law
2110 2011 fraud examin manual
judici circuit plu the district of columbia the us suprem court is the highest
appel court in the feder system and mai hear certain appeal from state court
particularli on constitut ground
in the feder system an appeal to the us suprem court is accomplish by appli for a
writ of certiorari rel few appeal writ ar grant the suprem court usual
hear onli those case that present an import question of constitut law or mai be
us to resolv a split or disagr on a point of law among the circuit or that have
consider signific to the judici system beyond the interest of the litig if the
suprem court deni cert the lower court decis stand and the appeal process end
unless the defend can find some collater ground such as alleg constitut error in
state court proceed to attack the judgment as death penalti challeng illustr appeal
on such point often brought by peopl in custodi under habea corpu proceed can
sometim consum a decad or more
the variou state and feder court oper in separ sphere confin by their own
jurisdict limit state court ar inferior to feder court onli in the sens that
thei ar subject to constitut and feder question limit without these factor a
feder court will not interfer in state court proceed a singl act might violat both state
and feder law and action mai be brought in separ court for both violat without
violat the doubl jeopardi protect howev on jurisdict will usual abstain if the
other ha alreadi prosecut
civil and crimin action for fraud
thi section seek to provid an overview of the law as it relat to fraud
crimin versu civil action for fraud
fraud mai be prosecut crimin civilli or both in sequenc or simultan but there
ar a number of differ between crimin and civil action with which the certifi fraud
examin should be familiar the follow is a brief descript of some of the differ
between civil and crimin action more inform about each action is contain in the
chapter on crimin prosecut and the civil justic system
on kei differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern who file the suit
crimin action for fraud ar brought by the govern act through the prosecutor
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2111
offic the prosecutor ha almost unbridl discret in such matter as whether to bring a
crimin case what charg to file who to charg and whether to try the case or negoti a
plea bargain convers civil action mai be brought by privat individu or organ
usual without the involv or permiss of the govern or court howev
corpor civil liabil mai be enforc by both privat individu as well as govern
agenc eg the sec moreov a civil action usual involv a disput over someth
such as the term of a contract or a claim that on part ha violat a legal duti ow to it
by the other parti which can be gener refer to as tort action
anoth kei distinct concern who investig the case crimin case ar investig
by law enforc agenc at time with the assist of the prosecutor offic and the
grand juri the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena
legal order to produc document wit or other thing for testimoni and document
to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur law enforc agenc and the
prosecut can therefor subpoena evid befor charg ar file to determin whether
an offens ha occur in civil action brought by privat parti howev there gener is
no opportun to compel the product of testimoni or other evid until a complaint is
file
moreov crimin investig and prosecut for fraud ar subject to constitut
limit such as those in the fourth fifth and sixth amend and other procedur
rule to protect the right of the defend includ the requir to give miranda
warn in gener these requir have limit applic to civil action violat
of constitut right in a crimin case can result in the suppress or exclus of ani
evid or statement obtain by such mean or in some instanc in dismiss of the
indict
also the burden of proof differ the burden of proof in a crimin case is alwai beyond a
reason doubt in civil case howev the burden of proof is lower usual a preponder of
the evid
anoth differ between crimin and civil action for fraud concern the outcom of
each type of case crimin case ar punish by outcom such as imprison fine order
of restitut probat and commun servic
civil case if success result in an award of civil remedi in gener remedi is a term us
overview of the unit state legal system law
2112 2011 fraud examin manual
to refer to ani process procedur or consequ of a legal wrong by which a victim of
misconduct can be redress for hi loss
civil remedi gener ar of three princip type monetari damag declaratori and
equit monetari damag remedi ar remedi for the victim recoveri of monei
damag for the injuri declaratori remedi ar remedi in which the court state or declar
the right of the parti for exampl when a court interpret a will or a contract or when a
court decid who own person properti it decis ar declaratori in natur equit
remedi ar remedi us when the legal remedi by itself would be inadequ compens
for the wrong suffer on of the primari equit remedi is the injunct which is a
court order by which a parti is requir to perform or is restrain from perform a
specif act
parallel proceed
parallel proceed ar simultan crimin and civil action against the same defend that
ar base upon a singl set of fact the gener rule is that crimin and civil action for fraud
mai proce simultan even though such parallel proceed present a dilemma for
the defend for exampl a defend lawfulli mai assert hi fifth amend right
against selfincrimin to avoid answer question or produc certain document in the
crimin investig he mai not do so in the correspond civil case howev without
suffer the possibl of sanction that can includ the dismiss of affirm defens or
the strike of testimoni for exampl if a defend take the stand in a civil case and
testifi on hi own behalf he cannot later invok the fifth amend and refus to answer
question concern the same subject matter on crossexamin if he doe the judg
mai order that hi testimoni on direct examin be stricken from the record
gener court have not been sympathet to the defend dilemma and have allow
civil discoveri to proce even though crimin charg ar pend in some instanc the
court or the parti mai seal the civil record by agreement in rare case the court mai order
that the civil case be stai pend resolut of the crimin case normal howev the
court will allow the case to proce simultan despit the substanti prejudic to the
defend in parallel civil and crimin case in which the govern is a parti the crimin
process includ the us of grand juri subpoena mai not be us to obtain evid sole
for a civil case
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2113
parallel investig
parallel investig ar simultan independ investig conduct by civil regulatori
agenc and feder prosecutor that involv substanti the same issu and parti us v
stringer 521 f3d 1189 9th cir 2008 recent address the applic boundari of law
govern conduct while conduct parallel investig although parallel investig
ar gener permiss the govern mai not initi a civil action sole to obtain
evid for it crimin prosecut and it mai not affirm mislead defend to
conceal the exist of a crimin investig stringer reaffirm the broad discret that
court afford civil regulatori agenc and feder prosecutor in pursu parallel
investig rule that so long as target ar gener awar of the possibl of
prosecut the govern ha no oblig to inform them about a crimin investig
furthermor where a regulatori agenc initi a legitim civil investig befor a
crimin investig feder prosecutor mai us and guid the civil investig to
facilit crimin prosecut thu stringer underscor the possibl that a feder crimin
investig mai be skulk behind everi ongo civil investig
jurisdict
crimin and civil action for fraud mai be brought in feder or state court feder court
have jurisdict over feder crimin or civil statut certain common law claim involv
parti who ar resid of differ state and controversi in which 75000 or more is at
issu state court have jurisdict over state statut and most common law civil claim
corpor civil and crimin liabil
at the feder level and in mani state corpor civil and crimin liabil is vicari liabil
the absolut liabil of on parti for the misconduct of anoth parti that is impos under
the doctrin of respondeat superior under the doctrin of respondeat superior a corpor is
liabl for the act of their employe if those act occur within the scope of employ and
with some intent to benefit the corpor
the doctrin of respondeat superior is veri broad and will in fact impos liabil on a
corpor even if those in manag had no knowledg or particip in the underli
crimin event moreov the act of ani em ploye from the lowest clerk to the ceo can
imput liabil upon a corpor and a corpor mai be liabl for the act of it
employe that violat secur law bank law antibriberi law and mani other
in addit there is no due dilig defens to a feder crimin charg mean that it
overview of the unit state legal system law
2114 2011 fraud examin manual
doe not matter that a corpor had reason and effect polici in place to prevent an
employe from commit the illeg act howev some state allow manag due
dilig as a goodfaith affirm defens to corpor crimin liabil
corpor men rea
when a corpor is be charg with a crime that requir proof of a mental state the
move parti must onli show that the agent who commit the wrongdo had the
requir state of mind thu the requir mental state is attribut to the corpor for
exampl to impos liabil against a corpor for fraud the move parti must prove that
an agent of the corpor made the alleg fals statement with specif intent to defraud
liabil of a corpor director and offic
the current legal environ impos civil and crimin liabil on a corpor director
and offic gener director and offic liabil stem from the certain duti impos by
law to their corpor the duti which ar discuss in more detail below ar as follow
duti of loyalti director and offic must act sole in the best interest of the
employerprincip free of ani selfdeal conflict of interest or other abus of the
princip for person advantag
duti of care director and offic must conduct busi affair prudent with the skill
and attent normal exercis by peopl in similar posit
statutori duti numer state and feder law regul director and offic action
and decis regard the manag of their compani includ secur law
antitrust law racket law tax law intellectu properti and patent law and state
corpor law
even though director and offic mai be pursu in crimin proceed crimin law
often impos men rea ie intent requir that gener make it more difficult to
impos crimin liabil on director and offic
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2201
the law relat to fraud part 1
definit of fraud
black law dictionari defin fraud as
all multifari mean which human ingenu can devis and which ar resort to by on
individu to get an advantag over anoth by fals suggest or suppress of the truth it
includ all surpris trick cun or dissembl and ani unfair wai by which anoth is
cheat
put more succinctli fraud includ ani intent or deliber act to depriv anoth of
properti or monei by guil decept or other unfair mean
the princip categori of fraud or whitecollar crime ar
misrepresent of materi fact
conceal of materi fact
briberi
extort
conflict of interest
forgeri
theft of monei or properti
theft of trade secret
breach of fiduciari duti
statutori offens
princip type of fraud
misrepresent of materi fact
misrepresent of materi fact is most often thought of when the term fraud is us
misrepresent case can be prosecut crimin or civilli under a varieti of statut
such as fals statement fals claim or mail and wire fraud thei might also be the basi for
common law claim the gist of the offens is the deliber make of fals statement to
induc the intend victim to part with monei or properti
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2202 2011 fraud examin manual
the specif element compos proof of misrepresent vari somewhat accord to
the jurisdict and whether the case is prosecut as a crimin or civil action the element
normal includ
a materi fals statement
knowledg of it falsiti
relianc on the fals statement by the victim
damag suffer
although it might be necessari to prove that the victim reli upon the fals statement and
actual suffer a loss in a civil case these element of proof might not be necessari in a
crimin prosecut in addit in some statut materi is assum and need not be
prove
in most instanc onli fals represent of present exist fact mai be prosecut
opinion or specul statement about futur event mai not be the basi for a fraud case
even if made with the intent to mislead a us car salesperson for exampl who assur
the naiv custom that the 20yearold car tow to the lot will give him year of drive
pleasur probabl cannot be prosecut for fraud the salesperson could be prosecut
howev if he tell the custom that the car ha been driven onli 15000 mile when he
know that it ha gone 150000 mile
the rule limit fraud case to misrepresent of exist fact is often appli to bar
fraud claim in contract disput a parti to a contract who promis to perform certain
servic by a particular date but fail to do so gener mai not be prosecut for fraud
unless the plaintiff can demonstr that the defend had the intent not to perform the
promis servic when the contract wa made of cours the other parti mai file an action
for breach of contract
the rule preclud fraud action base on fals opinion is subject to certain except
princip case involv opinion provid by profession advis such as certifi
public account for exampl an independ auditor mai be liabl for
misrepresent if he
certifi that a financi statement fairli present the financi condit of the compani
when the auditor know it doe not
fals state that the audit wa conduct in accord with gener accept
audit standard or
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2203
deliber distort the audit result
normal onli materi fals statement mai serv as the basi for a fraud case materi
usual refer to statement suffici import or relev to the defend to influenc
the defend decis for exampl a claim that a compani enjoi a 50 percent growth
in profit would probabl be materi to a prospect investor wherea a statement that the
compani wa consid move it headquart from new york citi to chicago might
not be the materi of allegedli fals statement often is a central issu in secur fraud
case
in all fraud case the prosecut or plaintiff must prove that a fals statement wa
intent and part of a deliber scheme to defraud a person intention make a fals
statement if it is hi desir to caus the social harm or if he act with knowledg that the
social harm will almost certainli result from hi action in some instanc particularli those
involv civil action for fraud and secur case the intent requir is met if the
prosecut or plaintiff is abl to show that the fals statement were made recklessli that is
with complet disregard for truth or falsiti
moreov there is no such thing as an accident or neglig fraud for exampal
mistakenli enter incorrect number on a financi statement is not fraud howev
knowingli enter incorrect number with the intent that someon will take action in
relianc on them is fraud if the other element ar present
although a misrepresent fraud case mai not be base on neglig or accident
misrepresent in some instanc a civil action mai be file for neglig
misrepresent thi action is appropri if a defend suffer a loss becaus of the
careless or neglig of anoth parti upon which the defend wa entitl to reli
exampl would be neglig fals statement to a prospect purchas regard the valu
of a close held compani stock or the accuraci of it financi statement
conceal of materi fact
an action for fraud mai be base on the conceal of materi fact but onli if the
defend had a duti in the circumst to disclos the essenti element of fraud base
on failur to disclos materi fact ar
that the defend had knowledg
of a materi fact
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2204 2011 fraud examin manual
that the defend had a duti to disclos
and fail to do so
with the intent to mislead or deceiv the other parti
the duti to disclos usual depend on the relationship between the parti those peopl
who occupi a special relationship of trust such as the offic or director of a corpor
an attornei account truste stockbrok or other agent mai be found to have a duti to
complet disclos materi fact to the parti who reli upon them statut might expand
the duti to disclos to area in which tradition there wa no such duti such as to the
seller of person or real properti or to the purchas or seller of secur
proof that the conceal fact wa materi probabl is the most import element in a
conceal case there can be no liabil if the withheld inform would not have
affect the other parti in addit to fraudul conceal a defend might also be
liabl for neglig failur to discov and disclos materi fact an account for
exampl might be liabl for failur to discov or report materi fact in a financi
statement or audit of cours as with neg ligent misrepresent the penalti ar less
sever for neglig than fraudul misrepresent and there is no crimin liabil
briberi
briberi is a form of corrupt that mai be defin as the offer give receiv or
solicit of anyth of valu to influenc an act or a decis
type of briberi scheme
briberi includ offici briberi and commerci briberi
offici briberi
offici briberi refer to the corrupt of a public offici illeg payment to public offici
can give rise to stiff crimin penalti the element of offici briberi vari by jurisdict
but gener ar
give or receiv
a thing of valu
with the intent to corruptli influenc
an offici act
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2205
commerci briberi
in contrast commerci briberi refer to the corrupt of a privat individu to gain a
commerci or busi advantag commerci briberi mai be prosecut either as a crimin
act or by a civil action about half of the state in the us have crimin statut that
prohibit commerci briberi if a state doe not have a commerci briberi statut
commerci briberi scheme can usual be prosecut under crimin fraud statut on the
theori that the payment of a commerci bribe defraud the busi owner of the right to
an employe unbias and loyal servic
there is no feder statut prohibit commerci briberi but such offens mai be
prosecut at the feder level as mail or wire fraud as a rico violat or as a violat of
some other law the element of commerci briberi vari by jurisdict but typic
includ
give or receiv
a thing of valu
with intent to corruptli influenc
a busi decis
without the knowledg or consent of the princip
the without the knowledg or consent of the princip element is includ on the theori
that a privat busi owner is not defraud if the owner know of or allow employe to
accept gift favor or other payment from vendor or other busi contact
most state commerci briberi statut ar misdemeanor punish by a jail term of no
more than on year commerci briberi is a feloni in colorado kansa texa arizona if
the valu of the bribe payment is 100 or more and new hampshir if the valu of the
bribe is 500 or more the new york commerci briberi law is a typic statut that make
it a misdemeanor to give or receiv or to offer or solicit ani benefit without the consent
of the employ with the intent of influenc the employe busi conduct the
louisiana michigan and new jersei commerci briberi statut confer immun on the
parti to the scheme who first agre to testifi against the other parti in a crimin
proceed
busi injur by commerci briberi scheme mai sue for trebl damag and attornei
fee under the civil rico statut titl 18 us code section 1964 and the clayton
antitrust act titl 15 us code section 13c and for compensatori and punit
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2206 2011 fraud examin manual
damag for common law fraud conflict of interest and breach of fiduciari duti civil
action mai be brought even if commerci briberi is not a crime in a jurisdict
method of make corrupt payment
in briberi scheme the thing of valu is not limit to cash or monei ani tangibl benefit
given or receiv with the intent to corruptli influenc the recipi mai be an illeg
payment court have held that such thing as lavish gift and entertain payment of
travel and lodg expens payment of credit card bill loan promis of futur
employ and interest in busi can be bribe if thei were given or receiv with
the intent to influenc or be influenc some state statut might distinguish between
feloni or misdemeanor accord to the amount of illeg payment
corrupt influenc
to establish a briberi claim it must be proven that the defend act with proof of corrupt
influenc often involv demonstr that the person receiv the bribe favor the bribe
payer in some improp or unusu wai such as by provid preferenti treatment bend
or break the rule take extraordinari step to assist the bribepay or allow the
bribepay to defraud the agenc or compani it is not necessari howev that the
prosecut or plaintiff demonstr that the bribetak act improperli a bribe might be
paid to induc an offici to perform an act that otherwis would be legal or an act that the
offici might have perform without a bribe briberi scheme involv these
circumst howev ar difficult to prove and lack appeal for prosecut
illeg gratuiti
illeg gratuiti ar similar to briberi scheme in fact under the feder legisl govern
the offens of briberi and illeg gratuiti titl 18 us code section 201 an illeg gratuiti
is a lesserinclud offens of offici briberi the element of an illeg gratuiti ar
give or receiv
a thing of valu
for or becaus of
an offici act
the big differ between a bribe and an illeg gratuiti is that an illeg gratuiti charg
doe not requir proof that the gratuiti wa given for the purpos of influenc an offici
act in other word an illeg gratuiti charg onli requir that the gratuiti be given for or
becaus of an offici act
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2207
in the typic illeg gratuiti scenario a decis is made which happen to benefit a certain
person or compani the parti who benefit from the decis then give a gift to the
person who made the decis the gift ar mere offer as a thank you for someth
that ha been done
the feder statut govern the illeg gratuiti offens prohibit a public offici from
accept ani payment of monei or thing of valu other than hi law compens in
practic the statut often is appli when rel small payment such as gift or
entertain ar us to attempt to influenc a public offici
extort
an extort case is often the flip side of a briberi case extort is defin as the obtain
of properti from anoth with the other parti consent have been induc by wrong
us of actual or threaten forc or fear fear might includ the apprehens of possibl
econom damag or loss a demand for a bribe or kickback coupl with a threat of
advers action if the payment is not paid also might constitut extort
in most state and the feder system extort is not a defens to briberi that is a person
who make a bribe payment upon demand of the recipi still is culpabl for briberi in
new york howev extort mai be a defens in certain circumst
conflict of interest
a conflict of interest occur when an employe ha an undisclos person or econom
interest in a transact these scheme involv selfdeal by an employe and can occur in
variou wai a conflict mai occur when an employe accept inappropri gift favor or
kickback from vendor or when an employe engag in unapprov employ
discuss with current or prospect contractor or supplier
statut in everi state and the feder system as well as common law decis in all
jurisdict prohibit peopl from engag in conduct that involv a conflict of interest a
conflict of interest mai be prosecut civilli or crimin the crimin statut vari wide
and includ prohibit on public offic from accept employ with govern
contractor or lobbi govern agenc dure specifi time
element of a typic civil claim for conflict of interest includ
an agent take an interest in a transact
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2208 2011 fraud examin manual
that is actual or potenti advers to the princip
without full and time disclosur to and approv by the princip
an agent includ ani person who under the law ow a duti of loyalti to anoth includ
offic director and employe of a corpor public offici truste broker
independ contractor attornei and account peopl who do not occupi posit of
trust with anoth parti such as armslength commerci parti do not ow a duti of
loyalti to each other and therefor ar not subject to conflict of interest restrict
the defend in a civil conflict of interest case must repai ani loss that the conflict
caus and disgorg ani profit he earn becaus of the conflict even if there wa no
actual loss to the princip the disloy parti also might be requir to forfeit all
compens receiv dure the period of disloyalti the victim of a conflict of interest
also mai void ani contract enter into on it behalf that were the result of or influenc by
the conflict
forgeri
forgeri includ two distinct common law offens forgeri and utter a forg
instrument both crime ar specif intent offens ie thei both requir proof of specif
intent to defraud
forgeri is
the fraudul make or alter
of a fals write or instrument that ha appar legal signific
with the intent to defraud
utter a forg instrument expand the forgeri offens by includ the offer or
pass of a forg document as genuin the element of utter a forg instrument ar
offer as genuin
a forg instrument
with the intent to defraud
a forgeri occur when a document is not what it purport to be it is not forgeri just
becaus the write contain a fals represent the write as a whole must have
appar legal signific forgeri occur not just when an entir write or instrument is
creat but also when there is ani materi alter that affect the legal signific of the
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2209
document andor whenev a signatur on a write is fraudul procur from a person
who doe not know what he is sign furthermor the offens is commit even if no
on is actual defraud
although forgeri is a crime not a civil wrong it can occur in connect with a fraud or a
convers of properti or properti interest for which the victim can seek civil remedi
theft of monei and properti
theft is a term often us to describ a wide varieti of fraudul conduct mani state
statut describ misrepresent fraud as theft by decept or larceni by trick as us here
the term theft is limit to embezzl larceni and misappropri of trade secret and
proprietari inform
embezzl
embezzl is the wrong appropri of monei or properti by a person to whom it ha
been lawfulli entrust or to whom law possess wa given embezzl involv a
breach of trust although it is not necessari to show a fiduciari relationship between the
parti the element of embezzl ar gener
the defend took or convert
without the knowledg or consent of the owner
monei or properti of anoth
that wa entrust to the defend defend had law possess of the properti
larceni
larceni is defin as the unlaw take of monei or properti of anoth with the intent to
convert or to depriv the owner unlik in embezzl in larceni the defend never ha
law possess of the properti but mai have mere custodi of it eg a cashier ha
custodi not possess of monei in a regist the element of larceni typic includ
unlawfulli take or carri awai
monei or properti of anoth
without the consent of the owner
with the intent to perman depriv the owner of it us or possess
misappropri of trade secret
misappropri is the intent illeg us of the properti fund or idea of anoth
person for an unauthor purpos in the fraud context misappropri claim gener
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2210 2011 fraud examin manual
involv trade secret or other proprietari inform
trade secret includ not onli secret formula and process but also more mundan
proprietari inform such as custom and price list sale figur busi plan or ani
other confidenti inform that ha a valu to the busi and would be potenti
harm if disclos
theft or misappropri of trade secret mai be prosecut under a varieti of feder and
state statut and the common law the definit of what constitut a trade secret depend
on the organ industri and jurisdict but the follow three characterist ar
common to most definit
the inform is not gener known to the relev portion of the public
it confer some sort of econom benefit on it holder where thi benefit must deriv
specif from it not be gener known not just from the valu of the
inform itself
it is the subject of reason effort to maintain it secreci
the element of a typic theft of trade secret claim ar
that a parti possess inform of valu to the busi
the inform wa treat confidenti
that the defend took or us the inform by breach of an agreement confidenti
relationship or other improp mean
an organ can onli maintain legal protect over it trade secret if it take reason
step to keep that inform secret thu it is critic that the inform be sought to
be protect wa treat confidenti although absolut secreci is not requir it is
suffici if the inform wa substanti undisclos limit disclosur to peopl
with a need to know or pursuant to confidenti agreement will not void the secret
method of demonstr that inform wa intend to be kept confidenti includ a
written polici describ the inform as proprietari or secret strict limit on
distribut of the inform and physic secur the inform to prevent
unauthor access and us
the owner of the inform also should enforc restrict agreement and act promptli
to remedi ani inadvert disclosur failur to do so might be constru as a waiver of
confidenti and make it imposs to prevent futur us or disclosur
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2211
common defens in trade secret case
the most typic defens is that the inform wa develop independ if the
aggriev parti demonstr that the inform came to the defend as the result of or
dure a confidenti relationship the burden of proof shift to the defend to
demonstr independ discoveri the defend also might defend a misappropri
claim by show that the inform wa not in fact a secret that the third parti us wa
author or that the trade secret or proprietari inform had been abandon by the
owner
civil action for trade secret theft
a victim of theft of trade secret mai file a civil action for damag or request an injunct
under a varieti of feder and state statut civil damag includ reimburs for actual
loss caus by the defend such as lost profit reimburs of develop expens
and overhead cost and the cost of effort to protect the secret or recov damag as well
as for reduct in the valu of busi damag also can be measur by the defend
profit which mai be order to be paid to the plaintiff punit damag and attornei
fee also mai be award
in addit to or in lieu of monetari damag the plaintiff in a civil action for theft of trade
secret also mai obtain an injunct prohibit further us of the inform to obtain
an injunct the plaintiff must demonstr that
it is the proper owner of the trade secret
an unauthor person ha taken or us the trade secret
there is a high probabl of improp disclosur
the plaintiff will suffer irrepar injuri mean that the plaintiff could not be
adequ compens by monetari damag
the plaintiff probabl will win the case
injunct have been issu in numer trade secret case to prevent the us of stolen
inform to prohibit an employe in possess of a trade secret from accept
employ with a competitor or to order the wrongdoer to return the misappropri
inform the injunct usual prohibit us of the trade secret onli for that period it
would have been requir for it legitim independ develop howev injunct
ar difficult to obtain
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2212 2011 fraud examin manual
breach of contract
if the fraudster ha ani kind of a contractu relationship with the victim there mai also be a
breach of contract claim ani nonperform of a contractu oblig or an announc
that a parti cannot or will not perform constitut a breach in other word a breach of
contract occur when on parti fail to perform or announc that it doe not intend to
perform without just caus
a breach of contract claim can aris under an oral or written contract mani state have
recogn certain impli or unwritten duti as a part of almost everi contract for
instanc some court have held that it is an implicit part of a contract that each parti will
us their best effort to fulfil their duti under the contract a similar duti that ha been
recogn by some state is the duti to deal with each other in good faith if a parti to a
contract which includ an employ contract steal from the other parti or act in bad
faith there mai be a civil claim for breach of contract
gross neglig
gross neglig can be gener defin as the intent failur to perform a duti in reckless
disregard of the consequ to the victim although the exact definit vari by state
the basic element of thi civil caus of action ar that the defend commit an
intent act know that it wa at least substanti like to caus harm to the victim in
regard to an employe the employe ha a duti to act in the best interest of the employ
if the employe conscious steal from the employ the employe ha breach that duti
and caus harm to the employ further the employe knew that the harm would occur
when he commit the act on further note about gross neglig gener punit or
exemplari damag ar avail if the defend is found liabl
breach of fiduciari duti
peopl in a posit of trust or fiduciari relationship such as offic director highlevel
employe of a corpor or busi and agent and broker ow certain duti
impos by law to their princip or employ the princip fiduciari duti ar loyalti
and care
duti of loyalti
the duti of loyalti requir that the employeeag act sole in the best interest of the
employerprincip free of ani selfdeal conflict of interest or other abus of the
princip for person advantag thu corpor director offic and employe ar
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2213
bar from us corpor properti or asset for their person pursuit or take
corpor opportun for themselv more tradit form of fraudul conduct such
as embezzl theft accept of kickback and conflict of interest also violat the
duti of loyalti and mai be prosecut as such in addit to or instead of the underli
offens
a breach of duti of loyalti is easier to prove than fraud the plaintiff doe not need to
prove crimin or fraudul intent or the other element of fraud to prevail the plaintiff
must show onli that the defend occupi a posit of trust or fiduciari relationship as
describ abov and that the defend breach that duti to benefit person
duti of care
a corpor offic director or highlevel employe as well as other peopl in a fiduciari
relationship must conduct busi affair prudent with the skill and attent normal
exercis by peopl in similar posit fiduciari who act carelessli or recklessli ar
respons for ani result loss to the corpor sharehold or other princip damag
mai be recov in a civil action for neglig mismanag or wast of corpor
asset
peopl in a fiduciari relationship howev ar not guarantor against all busi revers or
error in judgment the busi judgment rule protect corpor offic and director from
liabil for judgment that were made in good faith eg free of selfdeal or conflict
and that appear to be prudent base on the thenknown circumst
corpor offic breach their duti of loyalti if thei accept kickback engag in a conflict
of interest or ar otherwis disloy howev corpor offic who carelessli fail to
prevent such conduct enforc control or pursu recoveri of loss might breach their duti
of care corpor defend in such case might rais the busi judgment rule in
defens by show that thei had no reason ground to suspect such conduct or that the
cost of prevent or recoveri wa too high compar to the anticip return
breach of fiduciari duti claim
a breach of fiduciari duti claim is a civil action the plaintiff mai receiv damag for lost
profit and recov profit that the disloy employe earnedin some instanc even the
salari paid to the employe or agent dure the period of disloyalti the plaintiff mai
recov profit earn by the disloy agent even if the princip did not suffer an actual loss
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2214 2011 fraud examin manual
the plaintiff also mai void ani contract enter into on it behalf that were the result of or
were influenc by the employe or agent disloyalti
feder legisl relat to fraud
under our feder system the prosecut of most whitecollar crime such as
embezzl larceni and fals pretens is left to the state prosecut under the
crimin fraud statut in the us code requir a feder jurisdict basi such as an
effect on interst commerc or mail us the us law often ar us to prosecut the
larger and more seriou crime primarili becaus of the gener superior resourc of
feder law enforc agenc and their nationwid jurisdict
all feder crimin law ar the product of statut statut vari wide from a statut that
prohibit unauthor us of the smoki the bear emblem to the crimin provis of
the antitrust law the most import of the hundr of feder law rule and regul
ar list below
the sarbanesoxlei act public law 107204
on juli 30 2002 presid bush sign into law the sarbanesoxlei act thi law which
wa trigger in larg part by sever corpor account scandal that occur in 2001
and 2002 significantli chang the law of corpor govern and the rule and
regul under which account firm must oper the sarbanesoxlei act wa
design to restor investor confid in capit market and help elimin financi
statement fraud in publicli trade compani while at the same time significantli increas
the penalti for corpor account fraud the most signific chang brought on by
the act includ
the creation of the public compani account oversight board
requir for senior financi offic to certifi sec file
new standard for audit committe independ
new standard for auditor independ
enhanc financi disclosur requir
new protect for corpor whistleblow
enhanc penalti for whitecollar crime
public compani account oversight board
sarbanesoxlei section 101 establish the public compani account oversight board
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2215
pcaob whose purpos is
to overse the audit of public compani that ar subject to the secur law and relat matter in
order to protect the interest of investor and further the public interest in the prepar of inform
accur and independ audit report for compani the secur of which ar sold to and held by and
for public investor
in short the pcaob is charg with overse public compani audit set audit
standard and investig act of noncompli by auditor or audit firm the pcaob
is to be appoint and overseen by the secur and exchang commiss sec which
is part of the execut branch it is to be made up of five person two who ar or have
been cpa and three who have never been cpa the pcaob member which ar
appoint by the sec can onli be remov by the sec for caus
the act list the pcaob duti which includ
regist public account firm that audit publicli trade compani
establish or adopt audit qualiti control ethic independ and other
standard relat to audit of publicli trade compani
inspect regist public account firm
investig regist public account firm and their employe conduct
disciplinari hear and impos sanction where justifi
perform such other duti as ar necessari to promot high profession standard
among regist account firm to improv the qualiti of audit servic offer by
those firm and to protect investor
enforc complianc with the sarbanesoxlei act the rule of the pcaob
profession standard and secur law relat to public compani audit
recent the suprem court consid a constitut challeng to the pcaob in free
enterpris fund v public comp ani account oversight board et al in thi case the free
enterpris fund a nonprofit public interest organ and a nevada account firm
su the pcaob seek an order that the sarbanesoxlei act violat the us
constitut
the main issu rais by the suit concern whether sox violat the separ of power
doctrin by the manner in which the pcaob member ar select and remov to
review the separ of power doctrin preclud each of the three branch of
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2216 2011 fraud examin manual
govern legisl execut and judici from interf upon the domain of the
other two branch in particular the plaintiff argu that sox is unconstitut becaus
the pcaob member ar impermiss insul from presidenti oversight note that
the member ar appoint by and can onli be remov for caus by the sec and not the
presid
in it opinion the suprem court rule that becaus the presid lack the power to fire
the board member the current method for remov pcaob member violat the
separ of power principl the court detail that the buck stop with the presid
and therefor a clear and effect chain of command must be in place by grant the
board execut power without the execut oversight sox subvert the presid
abil to ensur that the law ar faithfulli execut as well as the public abil to pass
judgment on hi effort the act restrict ar incompat with the constitut
separ of power congress cannot limit the presid author in thi wai
despit rule that the provis violat the constitut the court allow sox to
remain fulli oper as a law it also said that to bring the pcaob into complianc with
the constitut the sec must be given the abil to remov the board member at will
thu pcaob mai continu to function without ani for oper chang or legisl
action
registr with the board
public account firm must be regist with the pcaob to legal prepar or issu an
audit report on a publicli trade compani to becom regist account firm must
disclos among other thing the name of all public compani thei audit in the
preced year the name of all public compani thei expect to audit in the current year
and the annual fee thei receiv from each of their public audit client for audit
account and nonaudit servic
audit qualiti control and independ standard and rule
section 103 of the act requir the pcaob to establish standard for audit qualiti
control ethic independ and other issu relat to audit of publicli trade
compani although the act place the respons on the pcaob to establish audit
standard it also set forth certain rule that the pcaob is requir to includ in those
audit standard among these rule ar
audit work paper must be maintain for at least seven year
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2217
audit firm must includ a concur or second partner review and approv of audit
report as well as concur approv in the issuanc of the audit report by a qualifi
person other than the person in charg of the audit
all audit report must describ the scope of test of the compani intern control
structur and present the auditor find from the test includ an evalu of
whether the intern control structur is accept and a descript of materi
weak in intern control and ani materi noncompli with control
sinc the enact of the sarbanesoxlei act the pcaob in conjunct with the
secur exchang commiss sec ha promulg sever rule requir complianc
with addit audit standard becaus these rule ar extens and everchang
auditor should period review the sec websit for updat and new rule at
httpsecgovrulesfinalshtml
inspect of regist public account firm
the act also author the pcaob to conduct regular inspect of public account
firm to assess their degre of complianc with law rule and profession standard
regard audit inspect ar to be conduct onc a year for firm that regularli audit
more than 100 public compani and at least onc everi three year for firm that regularli
audit 100 or fewer public compani
investig and disciplinari proceed
the pcaob ha the author to investig regist public account firm or their
employe for potenti violat of the sarbanesoxlei act profession standard ani
rule establish by the board or ani secur law relat to the prepar and issuanc
of audit report dure an investig the pcaob ha the power to compel testimoni
and document product
addition the pcaob ha the power to issu sanction for violat or for
noncooper with an investig sanction can includ temporari or perman
suspens of a firm registr with the board which would mean that firm could no
longer legal audit publicli trade compani temporari or perman suspens of a
person right to be associ with a regist public account firm prohibit from
audit public compani and civil monetari penalti of up to 750000 for an individu
and up to 15000000 for a firm
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2218 2011 fraud examin manual
certif oblig for ceo and cfo
on of the most signific chang affect by the sarbanesoxlei act is the requir
that the chief execut offic ceo and the chief financi offic cfo of public
compani person certifi annual and quarterli sec file these certif essenti
requir ceo and cfo to take respons for their compani financi statement and
prevent them from deleg thi respons to their subordin and then claim
ignor when fraud is uncov in the financi statement
there ar two type of offic certif mandat by sarbanesoxlei crimin
certif which ar set forth in sarbanesoxlei section 906 and codifi at 18 usc
1350 and civil certif which ar set forth in sarbanesoxlei section 302
crimin certif sarbanesoxlei 906
under section 906 all period file with the sec must be accompani by a statement
sign by the ceo and cfo which certifi that the report fulli compli with the sec
period report requir and that the inform in the report fairli present in all
materi respect the financi condit and result of oper of the compani
these certif ar known as crimin certif becaus the act impos crimin
penalti on offic who violat the certif requir
corpor offic who knowingli violat the certif requir ar subject to
fine of up to 1000000 and up to 10 year imprison or both
corpor offic who willfulli violat the certif requir ar subject to fine
of up to 5000000 and up to 20 year imprison or both
civil certif sarbanesoxlei 302
sarbanesoxlei section 302 requir the ceo and cfo to person certifi the follow
six item in everi annual and quarterli report
1 thei have person review the report
2 base on their knowledg the report doe not contain ani materi misstat that
would render the financi mislead
3 base on their knowledg the financi inform in the report fairli present in all
materi respect the financi condit result of oper and cash flow of the
compani
4 thei ar respons for design maintain and evalu the compani intern
control thei have evalu the control within 90 dai prior to the report and thei
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2219
have present their conclus about the effect of those control in the report
5 thei have disclos to the auditor and the audit committe ani materi weak in
the control and ani fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other
employe who have a signific role in the compani intern control
6 thei have indic in their report whether there have been signific chang in the
compani intern control sinc the file of the last report
note that in item two and three the ceo and cfo ar not requir to certifi that the
financi ar accur or that there is no misstat thei ar simpli requir to certifi
that to their knowledg the financi ar accur and not mislead thi doe not mean
howev that senior financi offic can simpli plead ignor about their compani
sec file to avoid liabil
furthermor the term fairli present in item three is a broader standard than what is requir
by gaap in certifi that their sec file meet thi standard the ceo and cfo
essenti must certifi that the compani 1 ha select appropri account polici to
ensur the materi accuraci of the report 2 ha properli appli those account
standard and 3 ha disclos financi inform that reflect the underli
transact and event of the compani furthermor the other certif rule see item
on four five and six abov mandat that ceo and cfo take an activ role in their
compani public report and in the design and mainten of intern control
also it is signific that in item four the ceo and cfo not onli have to certifi that thei
ar respons for their compani intern control but also that thei have evalu the
control within 90 dai prior to their quarterli or annual report essenti thi certif
requir mandat that compani activ and continu reevalu their control
structur to prevent fraud
in conjunct with the sarbanesoxlei section 302 certif requir on the
respons of the ceo and cfo for intern control sarbanesoxlei section 404
requir all annual report to contain an intern control report that 1 state manag
respons for establish and maintain an adequ intern control structur and
procedur for financi report and 2 contain an assess of the effect of the
intern control structur and procedur of the compani for financi report
item five requir the ceo and cfo to certifi that thei have disclos to their auditor and
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2220 2011 fraud examin manual
their audit committe ani materi weak in the compani intern control and ani
fraud whether materi or not that involv manag or other kei employe obvious
thi is a veri broad report standard that goe beyond the materi standard
contempl in audit standard the ceo and cfo now must report to their auditor
and audit committe ani fraud commit by a manag thi place a greater burden on the
ceo and cfo to take part in antifraud effort and to be awar of fraudul activ within
their compani to meet thi certif requir
item six is signific becaus period sec file must now includ statement detail
signific chang to the intern control of publicli trade compani
the overal effect of these certif requir is to forc ceo and cfo to take an
activ role in the antifraud effort of their compani make intern control and fraud
prevent a high prioriti
standard for audit committe independ
audit committe respons
section 301 of the sarbanesoxlei act make the audit committe for each publicli trade
compani directli respons for appoint compens and overse the work of
the compani outsid auditor the act also mandat that the auditor must report directli
to the audit committe not manag and make it the respons of the audit
committe to resolv disput between manag and the auditor section 301 also
requir that the audit committe must have the author and fund to hire independ
counsel and ani other advisor it deem necessari to carri out it duti
composit of the audit committe
the sarbanesoxlei act mandat that each member of a compani audit committe must
be a member of it board of director and must otherwis be independ the term
independ mean that the audit committe member can onli receiv compens
from the compani for their servic on the board of director the audit committe or
anoth committe of the board of director thei cannot be paid by the compani for ani
other consult or advisori work
financi expert
section 407 of the sarbanesoxlei act requir everi public compani to disclos in it
period report to the sec whether or not the audit committe ha at least on member
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2221
who is a financi expert and if not to explain the reason why the act defin a
financi expert as a person who through educ and experi as a public account
auditor cfo comptrol chief account offic or a similar posit 1 ha an
understand of gener accept account principl and financi statement 2 ha
experi in prepar or audit financi statement of compar compani and the
applic of such principl in account for estim accrual and reserv 3 ha
experi with intern control and 4 ha an understand of audit committe
function
establish a whistleblow structur
the sarbanesoxlei act make it the respons of the audit committe to establish
procedur eg a hotlin for receiv and deal with complaint and anonym
employe tip regard irregular in the compani account method intern
control or audit matter
standard for auditor independ
restrict on nonaudit activ
perhap the greatest concern aris out of the public account scandal of 2001 and 2002
wa the fear that public account firm that receiv multimilliondollar consult fee
from their public compani client could not maintain an appropri level of object in
conduct audit for those client to address thi concern congress establish section
201 which provid a list of activ that public account firm ar now prohibit from
perform on behalf of their audit client the prohibit servic includ
bookkeep servic
financi inform system design and implement
apprais or valuat servic fair opinion or contributioninkind report
actuari servic
intern audit outsourc servic
manag function or human resourc
broker or dealer invest advis or invest bank servic
legal servic and expert servic unrel to the audit
ani other servic that the public compani account oversight board proscrib
there ar certain other nonaudit servic most notabl tax servic that ar not
expressli prohibit by sarbanesoxlei in order for a public account firm to perform
these servic on behalf of an audit client howev that servic must be approv in
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2222 2011 fraud examin manual
advanc by the client audit committe which must be disclos in the client period sec
report furthermor regard nonaudit servic the sec prevent account from
provid audit client with expert opinion and servic as well as legal represent for
advoc the audit client litig regulatori or administr interest
mandatori audit partner rotat
sarbanesoxlei section 204 requir public account firm to rotat the lead audit partner
or the partner respons for review the audit everi five year
conflict of interest provis
anoth provis of sarbanesoxlei aim at improv auditor independ is section
206 which seek to limit conflict or potenti conflict that aris when auditor cross over
to work for their former client the act now make it unlaw for a public account firm
to audit a compani if within the prior year the client ceo cfo control or chief
account offic work for the account firm and particip in the compani audit
auditor report to audit committe
sarbanesoxlei section 301 requir that auditor report directli to the audit committe and
section 204 make certain requir as to the content of those report to help ensur
that the audit committe is awar of question account polici or treatment that were
us in the prepar of the compani financi statement sarbanesoxlei section 204
state that auditor must make a time report befor ani report is file with the sec
pursuant to the feder secur law of the follow to the audit committe
all critic account polici and polici us
altern gaap method that were discuss with manag the ramif of
the us of those altern treatment and the treatment prefer by the auditor
ani other materi written commun between the auditor and manag
auditor attest to intern control
as wa state previous section 404 of the sarbanesoxlei act requir everi annual report
to contain an intern control report which state that the compani manag is
respons for intern control and which also assess the effect of the intern
control structur sarbanesoxlei section 404 requir the compani extern auditor to
attest to and issu a report on manag assess of intern control
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2223
improp influenc on audit
the sarbanesoxlei act also make it unlaw for ani offic or director of a public
compani to take ani action to fraudul influenc coerc manipul or mislead an
auditor in the perform of an audit of the compani financi statement thi is yet
anoth attempt by congress to ensur the independ and object of audit to prevent
account fraud and strengthen investor confid in the reliabl of public compani
financi statement
enhanc financi disclosur requir
offbal sheet transact
the sarbanesoxlei act direct the sec to issu rule that requir the disclosur of all
materi offbal sheet transact by publicli trade compani the rule requir
disclosur of all materi offbal sheet transact arrang oblig
includ conting oblig and other relationship the compani mai have with
unconsolid entiti or person that mai have a materi current or futur effect on the
compani financi condit chang in financi condit liquid capit expenditur
capit resourc or signific compon of revenu or expens these disclosur ar
requir in all annual and quarterli sec report
pro forma financi inform
sarbanesoxlei section 401 increas the type and extent of disclosur in period report
file with the sec under section 401 pro forma financi that ar file with the sec or
that ar includ in ani public disclosur or press releas must not contain ani untru
statement or omiss that would make them mislead and thei must be reconcil to gaap
prohibit on person loan to execut
sarbanesoxlei section 402 make it illeg for public compani to make person loan or
otherwis extend credit either directli or indirectli to or for ani director or execut
offic an except appli to consum lender if the loan ar consum loan of the type
the compani normal make to the public and ar on the same term
restrict on insid trade
sarbanesoxlei section 403 establish disclosur requir for stock transact by
director and offic of public compani or by person who own more than 10 percent of
a publicli trade compani stock sec rule further specifi content and time
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2224 2011 fraud examin manual
requir of blackout period notic that must be provid to director and offic
report of chang in benefici ownership by these person must now be file with the
sec by the end of the second busi dai follow the transact
under sarbanesoxlei section 306 director and offic ar also prohibit from trade in
the compani secur dure ani pension fund blackout period thi restrict onli
appli to secur that were acquir becaus of their employ or servic to the
compani a blackout period is defin as ani period of more than three consecut
busi dai in which at least 50 percent of the particip in the compani retir
plan ar restrict from trade in the compani secur if a director or offic violat
thi provis he can be forc to disgorg to the compani all profit receiv from the sale
of secur dure the blackout period
code of ethic for senior financi offic
pursuant to sarbanesoxlei section 406 and sec releas no 338177 public compani
must disclos in their annual report whether thei have adopt a code of ethic for senior
financi offic and if thei have not thei must explain their reason
enhanc review of period file
sarbanesoxlei section 408 requir the sec to make regular and systemat review of
disclosur made by public compani in their period report to the sec review of a
compani disclosur includ it financi statement must be made at least onc everi
three year prior to thi enact review were typic minim and tend to coincid
with regist offer
real time disclosur
under sarbanesoxlei section 409 public compani must publicli disclos inform
concern materi chang in their financi condit or oper these disclosur
must be in plain english and must be made on a rapid and current basi
protect for corpor whistleblow under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act establish broad protect for corpor whistleblow there
ar two section of the act that address whistleblow protect section 806 deal with
civil protect and section 1107 establish crimin liabil for those who retali against
whistleblow
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2225
civil liabil whistleblow protect
sarbanesoxlei section 806 which is codifi at 18 usc 1514a creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 806 make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud to trigger section 806 protect the employe must
report the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a
member of congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also
protect against retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or
sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect not onli cover retaliatori act by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
if a public compani is found to have violat sarbanesoxlei section 806 the act provid
for an award of compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti
includ reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag
includ litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction whistleblow protect
sarbanesoxlei section 1107codifi at 18 us c 1513 make it a crime to knowingli
with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for provid truth
inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder offens thi
protect is onli trigger when inform is provid to a law enforc offic it
doe not appli to report made to supervisor or to member of congress as is the case
under sarbanesoxlei section 806
in gener the coverag of sarbanesoxlei section 1107 is much broader than the civil
liabil whistleblow protect of sarbanesoxlei section 806 while the sarbanesoxlei
section 806 protect appli onli to employe of publicli trade compani sarbanesoxlei
section 1107 crimin whistleblow protect cover all individu and
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2226 2011 fraud examin manual
organ regardless of where thei work also sarbanesoxlei section 806 onli appli
to violat of secur law or sec rule and regul wherea sarbanesoxlei section
1107 protect individu who provid truth inform about the commiss or
possibl commiss of ani feder offens
violat of sarbanesoxlei section 1107 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and
up to 10 year in prison for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to
500000
enhanc penalti for whitecollar crime
as part of congress gener effort to deter corpor account fraud and other form of
whitecollar crime the sarbanesoxlei act also enhanc the crimin penalti for a number
of whitecollar offens
attempt and conspiraci 18 usc 1349
the act amend the fraud provis of the us code chapter 63 to make attempt and
conspiraci to commit offens subject to the same penalti as the offens itself thi
appli to mail fraud wire fraud secur fraud bank fraud and health care fraud the text
of the statut provid
ani person who attempt or conspir to commit ani offens under thi chapter us code
chapter 63 shall be subject to the same penalti as those prescrib for the offens the
commiss of which wa the object of the attempt or conspiraci
mail fraud and wire fraud
sarbanesoxlei amend the mail fraud and wire fraud statut 18 usc 1341 1343
increas the maximum jail term from five to 20 year
secur fraud
section 807 creat an addit secur fraud offenc that can carri a maximum sentenc
of 25 year in prison specif thi law impos crimin liabil for anyon who
knowingli execut or attempt to execut a scheme or artific to defraud in connect
with regist secur
the fraud enforc and recoveri act of 2009 fera sign into law by presid
obama on mai 20 2009 contain a number of measur intend to combat fraud among
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2227
other provis the legisl expand the definit of secur fraud in section 1348 to
includ fraud scheme involv commod for futur deliveri or option on commod
for futur deliveri
document destruct
sarbanesoxlei section 802 make destroi evid to obstruct an investig or ani
other matter within the jurisdict of ani us depart illeg and punish by a fine of
up to 250000 and up to 20 year in prison
sarbanesoxlei section 802 also specif requir that account who perform audit
on publicli trade compani maintain all audit or review work paper for a period of five
year violat of thi rule mai be punish by fine up to 250000 and up to 10 year in
jail for individu or fine up to 500000 for corpor although sarbanesoxlei
section 802 onli requir work paper to be maintain for five year keep in mind that
under sarbanesoxlei section 103 the public compani account oversight board is
direct to set standard that requir public account firm to maintain audit work paper
for seven year account firm should design their document retent polici
accordingli
sarbanesoxlei section 1102 amend section 1512 of the us code to make it a crimin
offens to corruptli alter destroi mutil or conceal a record or document with the intent
to impair it integr or us in an offici proceed or to otherwis obstruct influenc or
imped ani offici proceed or attempt to do so violat of thi section ar punish
by fine up to 250000 and imprison for up to 20 year
freez of asset
dure an investig of possibl secur violat by a publicli trade compani or ani
of it offic director partner agent control person or employe the sec can
petit a feder court to issu a 45dai freez on extraordinari payment to ani of the
forego person if grant the payment will be place in an interestbear escrow
account while the investig commenc thi provis wa enact to prevent
corpor asset from be improperli distribut while an investig is underwai
bankruptci loophol
sarbanesoxlei section 803 amend the bankruptci code so that judgment settlement
damag fine penalti restitut payment disgorg payment etc result from
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2228 2011 fraud examin manual
violat of feder secur law ar nondischarg thi wa intend to prevent
corpor wrongdoer from shelter their asset under bankruptci protect
disgorg of bonus
on of the most uniqu aspect of the sarbanesoxlei act is section 304 which state that
if a publicli trade compani is requir to prepar an account restat due to the
compani materi noncompli as a result of misconduct with ani financi report
requir under secur law then the ceo and cfo must reimburs the compani for
ani bonu or other incentivebas or equitybas compens receiv dure the
12 month after the initi file of the report that requir restat and
ani profit realiz from the sale of the compani secur dure the same 12month
period
while the act requir the ceo and cfo to disgorg their bonus if the compani
financi statement have to be restat becaus of misconduct it make no mention of
whose misconduct trigger thi provis there is certainli noth in the text of sarban
oxlei section 304 that limit the disgorg provis to instanc of misconduct by the
ceo and cfo presum then the ceo and cfo could be requir to disgorg their
bonus and profit from the sale of compani stock even if thei had no knowledg of and
took no part in the misconduct that made the restat necessari
extend statut of limit for feder secur fraud
the sarbanesoxlei act also amend the statut of limit for sever secur fraud
claim section 804 of the act extend the statut of limit to the earlier of two year
after the discoveri of fact constitut fraud or five year after such violat prior to the
act the statut of limit wa the earlier of on year after the discoveri of fact
constitut fraud or three year after such violat
howev the extend statut of limit onli appli to caus of action involv a
claim of fraud deceit manipul or contriv even though litig ha arisen over
the type of claim subject to the extens it is clear that section 804 extend the statut of
limit for section 10b and rule 10b5 claim
fraud enforc and recoveri act
on mai 20 2009 presid obama sign into law the fraud enforc and recoveri
act fera thi legisl contain a number of measur intend to combat fraud and
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2229
to protect against fraud wast and abus in feder program specif thi legisl
broaden feder statut us to prosecut financi fraud expand potenti liabil for
fals claim author addit fund for fraud investig prosecut and civil
proceed and creat the financi crisi inquiri commiss to examin the caus
domest and global of the current financi and econom crisi in the unit state
strengthen crimin statut
fera is design to increas antifraud enforc by enhanc a number of feder
crimin statut us to prosecut financi fraud first it amend the definit of
financi institut in the crimin code to includ mortgag lend busi under
the revis definit the justic depart mai prosecut mortgag fraud case as bank
fraud and seek enhanc penalti under the mail and wire fraud statut
second fera broaden the prohibit against make fals statement in mortgag
applic to employe and agent of mortgag lender fera amend the fals
statement in mortgag applic statut 18 usc 1014 to includ a prohibit of
fals statement in mortgag applic intend to influenc ani action by a mortgag
lend busi befor fera section 1014 did not necessarili extend to privat mortgag
lend busi
third fera amend the major fraud statut 18 usc 1031 to cover fraud in fund
provid under the troubl asset relief program tarp and other fund constitut
feder assist
fourth the legisl amend the feder secur statut 18 usc 1348 which
impos crimin liabil for secur fraud to includ fraud scheme involv
commod for futur deliveri or option on commod for futur deliveri
final fera amend antimoneylaund law to broaden the term proce to includ
the gross receipt of unlaw activ rather than mere it profit thi amend
address a recent suprem court rule that proce of crimin activ as treat by
feder monei launder statut includ onli the defend profit from such activ
modif to the fals claim act
in addit to the modif of crimin law fera enact sever chang to the civil
fals claim act fca 31 usc 372937 33 which increas the potenti for liabil
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2230 2011 fraud examin manual
under the act among other signific chang fera amend the fca in the follow
wai
fera elimin the requir that a fals claim be present to a feder offici or
that it directli involv feder fund befor fera the fca requir that allegedli fals
claim for payment be present directli to an offic or employe of the govern
in addit the legisl broaden the definit of a claim under the fca to includ
ani request or demand for properti even if the unit state doe not have titl to the
monei or properti
fera also reduc the intent requir to establish liabil under section 3729a by
remov the to get languag from the statut by remov the word to get fera
overturn the suprem court 2008 hold in allison engin co v unit state that a
defend must intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern as a result liabil can
attach even if the defend did not intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern
addition fera enhanc the whistleblow protect under the fca which
allow employe to seek relief against their employ if thei ar retali against for
whistleblow fera now make these retali claim avail to govern
contractor and agent
addit appropri for fraud investig prosecut and civil proceed
in addit to modifi financi fraud statut fera author addit appropri
for the govern fraud enforc effort over the next two fiscal year
financi crisi inquiri commiss
fera also creat the financi crisi inquiri commiss to examin the caus
domest and global of the current financi and econom crisi in the unit state the
commiss mai hold hear take testimoni receiv evid issu subpoena and
obtain inform from government entiti
mail fraud and wire fraud
the mail and wire fraud law prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in
further of a fraudul scheme design to obtain monei or properti virtual ani
intent scheme to deceiv or depriv anoth of monei properti or ani other valuabl
right or interest by fraud or fals pretens is within the scope of the statut
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2231
mail fraud 18 usc 1341
the mail fraud statut is the workhors of feder whitecollar prosecut it ha been us
against virtual all type of commerci fraud public corrupt and secur law violat
in gener mail fraud is the us of the mail to perpetr a scheme to defraud a victim of
monei or properti the statut provid
whoever have devis or intend ing to devis ani scheme or artific to defraud or for obtain
monei or properti by mean of fals or fraudul pretens represent or promis or to
sell dispos of loan exchang alter give awai distribut suppli or furnish or procur for
unlaw us ani counterfeit or spuriou coin oblig secur or other articl or anyth
repres to be or in timat or held out to be such counterfeit or spuriou articl for the
purpos of execut such scheme or artific or a ttempt so to do place in ani post offic or
author depositori for mail matter ani matter or thing whatev to be sent or deliv by
the postal servic deposit or ca us to be deposit ani matter or thing whatev to be sent or
deliv by ani privat or commerci interst carrier or take or receiv ani such matter or
thing or knowingli caus to be deliv by mail accord to the direct thereon or at the
place at which it is direct to be deliv by the person to whom it is address ani such
matter or thing shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than twenti year or
both if the violat affect a financi institut such person shall be fine not more than
1000000 or imprison not more than 30 year or both
the gist of the offens is the us of the mail thu where the postal system is not us no
matter how larg or seriou the fraud there is no feder jurisdict under thi statut yet
the mail doe not itself need to contain the fals and fraudul represent as long as
it is an integr part of the scheme what is integr or incident depend on the fact of
each case gener a mail that help advanc the scheme in ani signific wai will be
consid suffici
fraud and swindl ar not defin in the mail fraud statut or elsewher in the us code
most of the case treat ani intent scheme to deceiv and depriv anoth of a tangibl
properti right as be within the statut
it is not necessari that the fraudul scheme succe or that the victim suffer a loss for the
statut to appli it also is not necessari that the predic mail travel in interst
commerc ani us of the us postal system provid suffici ground for feder
jurisdict
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2232 2011 fraud examin manual
wire fraud 18 usc 1343
the wire fraud statut is similar to the mail fraud statut gener defin wire fraud is the
us of wire commun to perpetr a scheme to defraud a victim of monei or
properti the text of the statut provid
whoever have devis or intend to devis ani scheme or artific to defraud or for obtain
monei or properti by mean of fals or fraudul pretens represent or promis
transmit or caus to be transmit by mean of wire radio or televis commun in
interst or foreign commerc ani write sign signal pictur or sound for the purpos of
execut such scheme or artific shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than
twenti year or both if the violat affect a financi institut such person shall be fine
not more than 1000000 or imprison not more than 30 year or both
the wire fraud statut often is us in tandem with mail fraud count in feder
prosecut unlik mail fraud howev the wire fraud statut requir an interst or
foreign commun for a violat
honest servic fraud 18 usc 1346
under section 1346 of titl 18 us code the mail fraud and the wire fraud statut mai be
us to prosecut offici corrupt along with the briberi law under the theori that the
payment or receipt of bribe depriv the public of it right to honest and unbias servic
of public servant specif section 1346 provid the term scheme or artific to defraud
which is the term us in the mail and wire fraud statut among other includ a scheme
or artific to depriv anoth of the intang right of honest servic
thi statut gener is refer to as the honest servic fraud statut and it core
applic is briberi or conflict of interest involv a public offici that affect hi offici
duti
congress specif enact section 1346 in respons to the us suprem court decis
render in the case of mcnalli v unit state 483 us 350 1987 in mcnalli the suprem
court tri to halt the expans of the mail and wire fraud statut rule that those law
did not prohibit scheme to defraud citizen of the intang right to honest govern
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2233
a year later congress effect overrul mcnalli by enact section 1346 to ensur that
mail and wire fraud would reach the depriv of citizen right to the honest servic of
their public offici
the crime of honest servic contain the follow element 1 a scheme to defraud that
includ a materi decept 2 with the intent to defraud 3 while us the mail or
interst wire in further of that scheme and 4 that result in the depriv of the
intang right of honest servic
although it core involv public offici who in violat of their fiduciari duti accept
bribe or person benefit from undisclos conflict of interest prosecutor have us the
honest servic statut to address a wide rang of conduct by public offici and privat
actor which make it a valuabl tool for feder prosecutor in case involv fraud
the law howev ha long been critic for be so vagu that it allow prosecutor to
crimin behavior that might not be explicitli illeg and over time the vagu of
honest servic led to a medlei of conflict interpret as court struggl with how
to appli the statut
in 2009 the us suprem court grant certiorari on the convict of former enron ceo
jeffrei skill agre to harmon the conflict interpret of thi law
and on june 24 2010 the court issu a unanim rule hold that the honest servic
law couldnt be us to convict skill for hi role in the collaps of enron 1
in it opinion the court reject skill argument on appeal that the definit of honest
servic wa unconstitution vagu but it did hold that the govern stretch the law
too far when it prosecut skill the court said congress enact the statut specif
to address briberi and kickback but found that the statut could becom vagu if appli
to a wider rang of offens conduct
accordingli the court rule that the statut wasnt unconstitution vagu if limit to
briberi and kickback scheme that is defend accus of violat the honest servic
statut must have gain some benefit from the alleg conduct and becaus the
1 s kill v unit state no 081394 june 24 2010
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2234 2011 fraud examin manual
govern didnt accus skill of briberi or take kickback the court sent hi case
back to the lower court to determin whether hi convict should be overturn
in a companion case the court also side with imprison media execut conrad black
who wa convict of honest servic fraud for fail to disclos noncompetit fee
set asid a feder appeal decis that upheld black convict but as in skill
case black convict wont necessarili be overturn instead the case will be sent back
to the feder appel court for further consider
moreov becaus the skill case ha limit the honest servic statut to briberi and
kickback it make it more difficult for prosecutor to pursu crimin case against
corpor execut for misconduct that harm their compani as a result the decis
will like result in fewer privatesector fraud case brought under the honest servic fraud
law
but even with the court rule prosecutor still have a varieti of other less controversi
law thei can invok in fraud case
embezzl and theft of feder monei or properti 18 usc 641
section 641 of titl 18 is the princip feder statut aim at protect govern
properti thi statut crimin intent and unauthor take destruct or us of
govern monei properti or record and it also prohibit receiv or conceal such
properti or record the text of section 641 provid
whoever embezzl steal purloin or knowingli convert to hi us or the us of anoth or
without author sell convei or dispos of ani record voucher monei or thing of valu of
the unit state or of ani depart or agenc thereof or ani proper ty made or be made
under contract for the unit state or ani depart or agenc thereof or whoever receiv
conceal or retain the same with intent to convert it to hi us or gain know it to have been
embezzl stolen purloin or convert shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not
more than ten year or both but if the valu of such properti in the aggreg combin
amount from all the count for which the defend is convict in a singl case doe not exce
the sum of 1000 he shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than on year or
both
the follow section outlin the offens encompass by section 641
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2235
embezzl of govern properti
to review embezzl is the fraudul appropri of monei or properti by a person to
whom it ha been lawfulli entrust or to whom law possess wa given the
element of embezzl as defin in section 641 ar
there wa a trust or fiduciari relationship between the defend and the properti
owner
the defend took or convert monei or properti
the properti wa entrust to the defend defend had law possess of the
properti
the defend intend to take or convert the properti not by accid or mistak
the properti at issu belong to the unit state
larceni
larceni is defin as the unlaw take of monei or properti of anoth with the intent to
convert or to depriv the owner unlik embezzl scheme in larceni scheme the
defend never ha law possess of the properti but he mai have mere custodi of it
eg a cashier ha custodi not possess of monei in a regist to establish a violat
under section 641 the govern must prove the follow
the defend fraudul appropri monei or properti of anoth
the appropri occur without the consent of the owner
the defend intend to convert it to hi us
the properti at issu belong to the unit state
howev it is not necessari to prove that the defend knew that the properti belong to
the feder govern
penalti
if the valu of the properti is 100 or less a defend is subject to on year of
imprison a 1000 fine or both when the valu of the properti exce 100 the
defend mai be sentenc to 10 year of imprison a fine equal to the amount of the
properti taken or both
interst transport of stolen properti 18 usc 2314
section 2314 of titl 18 us code regul interst transport of stolen properti
popularli known as itsp section 2314 is often us in fraud prosecut in conjunct
with mail or wire fraud count or to provid feder jurisdict in their absenc when
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2236 2011 fraud examin manual
proce of a valu of 5000 or more obtain by fraud ar transport across state line
the statut also is violat if a defend induc the victim to travel in interst commerc
as part of the scheme to defraud individu transport of monei or other item valu
at less than 5000 as part of the same sc heme mai be aggreg to meet the valu
requir
also prosecutor have attempt to charg defend in violat of the itsp statut in
addit to or in lieu of the theft of commerci trade secret or the theft of other
proprietari inform charg it is clear that section 2314 appli when defend steal
tangibl item which qualifi as good ware or merchandis that contain intellectu
properti howev court have had vari opinion on the character of intellectu
properti as good ware merchandis secur or monei when an individu steal
intang properti through intang mean for exampl in unit state v brown 925 f2d
1301 10th cir 1991 the tenth circuit held that the theft of intellectu properti through
intang mean doe not implic section 2314 altern the court in unit state v
rigg 739 fsupp 414 nd ill 1990 and unit state v farraj 142 f supp 2d 484
sdny 2001 reach the opposit result
even though prosecutor mai us the itsp to prosecut theft of commerci trade secret
proprietari inform or other type of intellectu properti in certain situat thei
cannot us the itsp to prosecut copyright infring case unless the infring
involv the theft of a tangibl piec of hardwar
final when patent infring is the onli theori for an individu to steal a piec of
properti the itsp doe not allow prosecut for interst transport of patent
infring good
racket influenc and corrupt organ 18 usc 1961 et seq
the racket influenc and corrupt organ rico statut is probabl the best
known and most controversi feder statut in us todai origin enact in 1970 to
fight organ crime infiltr of legitim busi it power crimin and civil
provis have come to be us in a wide rang of fraud case the statut outlaw the
invest of illgotten gain in anoth busi enterpris the acquisit of an interest in
an enterpris through certain illeg act and the conduct of the affair of an enterpris
through such act
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2237
rico provid both crimin penalti and civil remedi crimin penalti includ stiff
fine and prison term as well as the forfeitur of all illeg proce or interest civil
remedi includ trebl damag attornei fee dissolut of the offend enterpris and
other penalti
rico violat under section 1962c
section 1962c is probabl the most commonli us provis it make it an offens for
ani person associ with an enterpris that is engag in interst commerc to
particip in the affair of such an enterpris through a pattern of racket activ
the element of a section 1962c offens ar
the defend wa emploi by or associ with an enterpris as defin in the
statut which can be a busi union a group of individu associ in fact or
even a singl individu
the enterpris wa engag in or affect interst commerc
the defend conduct the affair of the enterpris through a pattern of racket
activ that is two or more illeg act enumer in the statut as predic
violat such as mail and wire fraud or itsp violat
emploi by or associ with an enterpris
under thi element the govern must show that the defend wa directli involv in
the manag of the enterpris as an employe offic director owner or other person
with substanti manag author an outsid consult account or attornei who
doe not have substanti manag author is not liabl
an enterpris includ ani individu partnership corpor associ or other legal
entiti and ani union or group of individu associ in fact although not a legal entiti
the enterpris should be an entiti distinct from the person or person who violat the
statut an enterpris includ both a legitim and an illeg organ
engag in interst or foreign commerc
thi element is met if the enterpris conduct busi in or affect even if onli to a
minim extent commerc or trade between two or more state or a foreign countri proof
of an effect on interst commerc mai be show that the enterpris bui sell or
transport good or servic in more than on state or a foreign countri
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2238 2011 fraud examin manual
conduct the affair through a pattern of racket activ
the defend violat thi element if he ha some involv in the manag or
oper of the enterpris and in the commiss of two or more racket offens
through the enterpris the term racket activ includ a broad assort of state and
feder crime such as briberi extort bankruptci fraud mail fraud and secur fraud
pattern mean at least two act of racket activ the last of which occur within 10
year exclud ani period of imprison after a prior act proof of a pattern requir
that the act be connect in some manner and not be separ isol or random crime
each act must have continu plu relationship that is the same or a similar purpos
result particip victim method of commiss or be otherwis relat
civil rico action
the most controversi aspect of rico is it civil provis under section 1964 civil
action mai be brought by the govern or ani privat parti injur in hi busi or
properti critic complain that privat parti suit have been us to reach deep pocket
defend such as account firm who cannot be character as racket and to
coerc unwarr settlement from blameless defend fear of possibl trebl damag
judgment support contend that a plaintiff cannot recov unless there is proof of fraud
or other crimin act whomev the defend make the stigma of be alleg a
racket and the award of trebl damag justifi
fals claim and statement
chapter 47 of titl 18 us code contain a number of relat provis that punish fals
or fraudul statement oral or in write made to variou feder agenc and
depart
the princip feder fals statement statut is 18 usc 1001 briefli state section 1001
prohibit a person from ly to or conceal inform from a feder offici howev
thi statut overlap with mani of the more specif law such as 18 usc 1014 which
appli to fals statement made on certain loan and credit applic
a statement is fals for the purpos of section 1001 if it wa known to be untru when it
wa made and it is fraudul if it wa known to be untru and wa made with the intent to
deceiv a govern agenc for a violat to occur the agenc need not actual have
been deceiv nor must it have in fact reli upon the fals statement the statement must
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2239
have been capabl howev of influenc the agenc involv
the element of a typic section 1001 violat ar set forth below
the defend made a fals statement or us a fals document
that wa materi
regard a matter within the jurisdict of ani agenc of the unit state
with knowledg of it falsiti
knowingli and willfulli or with reckless disregard for truth or falsiti
section 1001 is most often us to prosecut fals statement to law enforc or
regulatori offici not made under oath in the cours of an offici investig or on an
applic for such thing as feder employ credit and visa applic the
statut a feloni also mai be us in lieu of the misdemeanor provis of the ir code
for file fals document with tax return see the financi transact section for
addit inform on tax fraud
in recent year we have seen more instanc of prosecut under thi statut take for
exampl the infam case of martha stewart in 2003 in stewart case the sec wa
conduct an investig into an insidertrad scheme base upon stewart dispos of
imclon stock share in 2001 rather than prosecut stewart for insid trade she wa
charg with and convict of among other crime provid the govern with fals
statement anoth promin exampl of a prosecut under thi statut involv lewi
scooter libbi a former senior white hous offici on march 6 2007 libbi wa found
guilti of among other crime ly to the fbi about inform he disburs regard a
cia oper employ
the fals statement statut of greatest import to the fraud examin follow
18 usc 1001 statement or entri gener
a except as otherwis provid in thi section whoever in ani matter within the jurisdict
of the execut legisl or judici branch of the govern of the unit state
knowingli and willfulli
1 falsifi conceal or cover up by ani trick scheme or devic a materi fact
2 make ani fals fictiti or fraudul statement or represent
3 make or us ani fals write or document know the same to contain ani fals
fictiti or fraudul statement or entri
shall be fine under thi titl imprison not more than 5 year or if the offens involv
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2240 2011 fraud examin manual
intern or domest terror imprison not more than 8 year or both if the
matter relat to an offens under chapter 109a 109b 110 or 1 17 or section 1591
then the term of imprison impos under thi section shall be not more than 8 year
b subsect a doe not appli to a parti to a judici proceed or that parti counsel for
statement represent write or document submit by such parti or counsel to a
judg or magistr in that proceed
c with respect to ani matter within the jurisdict of the legisl branch subsect a
shall appli onli to
1 administr matter includ a claim for payment a matter relat to the
procur of properti or servic personnel or employ practic or support
servic or a document requir by law rule or regul to be submit to the
congress or ani offic or offic within the legisl branch or
2 ani investig or review conduct pur uant to the author of ani committe
subcommitte commiss or offic of the congress consist with the applic rule
of the hous or senat
18 usc 1002 possess of fals paper to defraud the unit state
section 1002 make it a crime to knowingli possess ani fals alter forg or
counterfeit write or document with intent to defraud the govern the text of thi
statut provid
whoever knowingli and with intent to defraud the unit state or ani agenc thereof
possess ani fals alter forg or counterf eit write or document for the purpos of
enabl anoth to obtain from the unit state or from ani agenc offic or agent thereof
ani sum of monei shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than five year or both
18 usc 1003 demand against the unit state
thi statut crimin the make of fraudul demand for monei against the unit
state specif section 1003 provid
whoever knowingli and fraudul demand or endeavor to obtain ani share or sum in the
public stock of the unit state or to have ani part thereof transfer assign sold or
convei or to have ani annuiti dividend pension wage gratuiti or other debt due from the
unit state or ani part thereof receiv or paid by virtu of ani fals forg or
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2241
counterfeit power of attornei author or instrument shall be fine under thi titl or
imprison not more than five year or both but if the sum or valu so obtain or attempt to
be obtain doe not exce 100 he shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more than
on year or both
18 usc 1005 bank entri report and transact
section 1005 make it unlaw among other thing for ani offic director agent or
employe of a feder insur or charter bank to make ani fals entri on the book of
such institut with the intent to injur or defraud the bank or third parti or to deceiv
ani bank offic examin or govern agenc the text of the statut state
whoever be an offic director agent or employe of ani feder reserv bank member
bank depositori institut hold compani nation bank insur bank branch or agenc of a
foreign bank or organ oper under section 25 or section 25a of the feder reserv
act without author from the director of such bank branch agenc or organ or
compani issu or put in circul ani note of such bank branch agenc or organ or
compani or
whoever without such author make draw issu put forth or assign ani certif of
deposit draft order bill of exchang acceptan ce note debentur bond or other oblig or
mortgag judgment or decre or
whoever make ani fals entri in ani book report or statement of such bank compani branch
agenc or organ with intent to injur or defraud such ba nk compani branch agenc or
organ or ani other compani bodi polit or corpor or ani individu person or to
deceiv ani offic of such bank compani branch agenc or organ or the comptrol of
the currenc or the feder deposit insur corpor or ani agent or examin appoint
to examin the affair of such bank compani branch agenc or organ or the board of
governor of the feder reserv system
whoever with intent to defraud the unit state or ani agenc thereof or ani financi
institut refer to in thi section particip or share in or receiv directli or indirectli ani
monei profit properti or benefit through ani transact loan commiss contract or ani
other act of ani such financi institut
shall be fine not more than 1000000 or imprison not more than thirti year or both
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2242 2011 fraud examin manual
18 usc 1014 loan and credit applic gener renew and discount crop insur
section 1014 prohibit fals statement or report upon ani credit applic or relat
document submit to a feder insur bank or credit institut for purpos of
influenc such organ action in ani wai as with section 1001 the fals statement
must be will but thei need not have been reli upon or actual deceiv the agenc for
a violat to occur
on mai 20 2009 presid obama sign into law the fraud enforc and recoveri
act fera which contain a number of measur intend to combat fraud among other
thing fera amend section 1014 to includ a prohibit of fals statement in mortgag
applic intend to influenc ani action by a mortgag lend busi
the text of section 1014 provid
whoever knowingli make ani fals statement or report or willfulli overvalu ani land
properti or secur for the purp os of influenc in ani wai the action of the farm credit
administr feder crop insur corpor or a compani the corpor reinsur
the secretari of agricultur act through the farmer home administr or successor
agenc the rural develop administr or successor agenc ani farm credit bank
product credit associ agricultur credit associ bank for cooper or ani
divis offic or employe thereof or of ani region agricultur credit corpor establish
pursuant to law or a feder land bank a feder land bank associ a feder reserv
bank a small busi invest compani as defin in section 103 of the small busi
invest act of 1958 15 usc 662 or the small busi administr in
connect with ani provis of that act a feder credit union an insur statechart
credit union ani institut the account of which ar insur by the feder deposit insur
corpor the offic of thrift supervis ani feder home loan bank the feder
hous financ board the feder deposit insur corpor the resolut trust
corpor the farm credit system insur corpor or the nation credit union
administr board a branch or agenc of a foreign bank as such term ar defin in
paragraph 1 and 3 of section 1b of the intern bank act of 1978 or an
organ oper under section 25 or section 25a of the feder reserv act upon ani
applic advanc discount purchas purchas agreement repurchas agreement
commit or loan or ani chang or extens of ani of the same by renew defer of
action or otherwis or the accept releas or substitut of secur therefor shall be fine
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2243
not more than 1000000 or imprison not more than 30 year or both the term state
charter credit union includ a credit union charter under the law of a state of the unit
state the district of columbia or ani commonw ealth territori or possess of the unit
state
conspiraci to defraud feder govern with fals claim 18 usc 286
thi section make it a crime for two or more person to agre or conspir to defraud the
unit state by obtain or aid in obtain payment or allow of ani fals
fictiti or fraudul claim the statut provid
whoever enter into ani agreement combin or conspiraci to defraud the unit state or
ani depart or agenc thereof by obtain or aid to obtain the payment or allow of
ani fals or fraudul claim shall be fine under thi titl or impri on not more than ten
year or both
fals fictiti or fraudul claim 18 usc 287
frequent refer to as the crimin fals claim act thi statut make it illeg to
present or make ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim against ani agenc or depart of
the unit state section 287 provid
whoever make or present to ani person or offic in the civil militari or naval servic of the
unit state or ani depart or agenc thereof ani claim upon or against the unit
state or ani depart or agenc thereof know such claim to be fals fictiti or
fraudul shall be imprison not more than five year and subject to a fine in the amount
provid in thi titl
to establish violat of thi statut the govern must establish that the defend
made or present a fals fictiti or fraudul claim to a depart of the unit
state
knew such claim wa fals fictiti or fraudul
did so with the specif intent to violat the law or knew that what he wa do wa
wrong
the major fraud act of 1988 18 usc 1031
the major fraud act cover conduct prohibit by exist statut and appli to contract
with the unit state of 1 million or more if convict the defend mai be imprison
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2244 2011 fraud examin manual
for up to 10 year and fine up to 10 million see the law relat to govern
contract section below for more inform
civil fals claim act 31 usc 3729 et seq
the civil fals claim act is the civil counterpart to the crimin fals claim act it
provid a separ civil caus of action that mai be taken in addit to a crimin
prosecut
the civil fals claim act provid in part that a person who commit the follow act is
liabl to the govern for trebl damag it sustain and a civil penalti of 5000 to
10000 per fals claim
knowingli present or caus to be present a fals or fraudul claim for payment or
approv 3729a1
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to get a
fals or fraudul claim paid or approv 3729a2
conspir to defraud the govern by get a fals or fraudul claim allow or
paid 3729a3
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to
conceal avoid or decreas an oblig to pai or transmit monei or properti to the
govern 3729a7
know and knowingli ar defin as the person have actual knowledg of the inform
act in deliber ignor of the truth or falsiti of the inform or act in reckless
disregard of the truth or falsiti of the inform no proof of specif intent to defraud is
requir
a claim is defin as ani request or demand whether under a contract or otherwis for
monei or properti that is made to a contractor grante or other recipi if the us
govern provid ani portion of the monei or properti which is request or
demand or if the govern will reimburs such contractor grante or other recipi
for ani portion of the monei or properti which is request or demand
on mai 20 2009 presid obama sign into law the fraud enforc and recoveri
act fera which enact sever chang that expand liabil under the fals claim act
among other signific chang fera amend the fals claim act in the follow wai
fera elimin the requir that a fals claim be present to a feder offici or
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2245
that it directli involv feder fund befor fera the fals claim act requir that
allegedli fals claim for payment be present directli to an offic or employe of the
govern the legisl broaden the definit of a claim under the fals claim
act to includ ani request or demand for properti even if the unit state doe not
have titl to the monei or properti
fera also reduc the intent requir to establish liabil under section 3729a by
remov the to get languag from the statut by remov the word to get fera
overturn the suprem court 2008 hold in allison engin co v unit state that a
defend must intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern as a result liabil can
attach even if the defend did not intend to get a fals claim paid by the govern
the fals claim act also allow a privat person to prosecut a civil action against the
perpetr on behalf of the govern thi is call a qui tam action onc the suit is
file the feder govern mai take over prosecut or leav the case to the privat
individu if the govern join the case the justic depart ha primari
respons but the plaintiff continu to be a parti to the action if the govern
successfulli prosecut the suit the privat parti mai be award 1525 percent of the
recoveri plu reason attornei fee and cost if the govern doe not take over
the prosecut and the qui tam plaintiff successfulli win the case on hi own the court
mai award the plaintiff 2530 percent of the recoveri plu reason attornei fee and
cost
program fraud civil remedi 31 usc 38013812
these provis provid for agenc administr adjud of rel small fals
claim less than 150000 and for which the agenc ha approv to prosecut from the
depart of justic the purpos of the fraud civil remedi is to provid the agenc with
the abil to prosecut those case that would otherwis not be prosecut in the court
becaus of the cost of a civil court action and rel low potenti recoveri
civil monetari penalti law 42 usc 1320a7a
the civil monetari penalti law cmpl wa pass to impos administr sanction
against provid who defraud ani feder fund program by file fals claim or other
improp bill practic ani person includ an organ agenc or other entiti
but exclud a beneficiari that present or caus to be present a claim for a medic
servic or other item or servic that the person know or should know is fals or fraudul
is subject to a civil monetari penalti
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2246 2011 fraud examin manual
the penalti is not more than 10000 per line item or servic and an assess of not more
than three time the amount claim in addit the person mai be exclud from
particip in govern program
some exampl of fals claim and statement includ
falsifi contractor qualif
fals certif or assur
fals record or invoic
invoic from nonexist compani
claim made in duplic or alter invoic
bill for fictiti employe
bill for good and servic not provid
inflat cost or substitut of cheaper good
other exampl of fals claim and statement might includ fals statement about
employe fictiti transact and falsifi document
insur fraud prevent act 18 usc 1033
the insur fraud prevent act crimin certain action by peopl who ar
engag in the busi of insur the statut make it a crime to provid fals
statement or report to ani insur regulatori agenc it also prohibit fals statement of
ani kind made to anyon regard the financi condit or solvenc of an insur
compani section 1033 also crimin the embezzl or misappropri of ani
monei fund premium or other properti relat to the insur busi
mispris of feloni 18 usc 4
even though citizen have no gener duti to report crimin activ 18 usc 4
recogn mispris of feloni as a crimin offens in gener term mispris of feloni
is a crime deal with the failur to report a crime where there is a legal duti to do so the
text of 18 usc 4 provid
whoever have knowledg of the actual commiss of a feloni cogniz by a court of the unit
state conceal and doe not as soon as possibl make known the same to some judg or other person in
civil or militari author under the unit state shall be fine under thi titl or imprison not more
than three year or both
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2247
under the feder statut the prosecut must prove the follow four element to obtain
a mispris of feloni convict 1 the princip commit and complet the feloni
alleg 2 the defend had knowledg of the fact 3 the defend fail to notifi the
author and 4 the defend took affirm step to conceal the crime of the
princip
even though the feder mispris of feloni is rare prosecut a recent briberi scandal
illustr it applic to white collar crime in juli 2008 attornei zach scrugg receiv
fourteen month in prison and a 250000 fine after plead guilti to mispris of feloni
specif scrugg commit a crimin offens becaus he fail to report a conspiraci
by other lawyer to bribe a mississippi judg
feder corrupt statut 18 usc 201 et seq
chapter 11 of 18 usc 201 ha 19 separ crimin provis that defin and prohibit a
wide varieti of conflict of interest and other corrupt and uneth conduct involv public
offici the statut of particular interest to fraud examin follow
briberi of public offici and wit 18 usc 201
section 201 is the princip feder anticorrupt statut and appli to virtual ani us
offici juror or wit the section contain two separ offens briberi of public
offici and illeg gratuiti
briberi of public offici 18 usc 201b
section 201b make it a crime for anyon to bribe a public offici more specif it
prohibit give or receiv someth of valu for the purpos of influenc the
perform of an offici act under section 201b briberi is punish by up to 15 year
imprison fine and disqualif from hold public offic
the element of an offici briberi offens under section 201b ar as follow
give or receiv
anyth of valu
with intent to corruptli influenc
an offici act
gratuiti 18 usc 201c
section 201c prohibit give a govern employe someth of valu becaus of hi
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2248 2011 fraud examin manual
offici posit the illeg gratuiti statut is a lesserinclud offens of briberi as state
a bribe is a payment made with the purpos of influenc chang offici conduct a
gratuiti is a payment made to reward or compens an offici for perform duti he
lawfulli is requir to perform moreov unlik the briberi offens there is no requir
for the govern to prove that the gratuiti wa given for the purpos of influenc ani
offici act illeg gratuiti violat carri onli a maximum twoyear term fine or both
the element of an illeg gratuiti offens under section 201c ar as follow
give or receiv
anyth of valu
for or becaus of
an offici act
briberi of a bank examin 18 usc 212213
titl 18 us code section 212 and 213 forbid the give of a loan or gratuiti to ani
examin or assist examin who examin or ha author to examin such bank
branch agenc organ corpor associ or institut the onli report
case constru these statut held that the prosecut need not prove that the loan or
gratuiti wa given or receiv with a corrupt or wrong intent the strict applic of the
statut ha been justifi by the public need for disinterest bank examin it is
import to note that examin in thi context refer to an individu who is appoint by a
feder financi institut regulatori agenc which is further defin in the statutori
languag pursuant to state law or on who is elect under state law to conduct
examin of financi institut thu the term examin in thi paragraph should not
be confus with a fraud examin
bank briberi 18 usc 215
titl 18 us code section 215 bar the corrupt give or receiv of anyth of valu to
influenc the action of an employe or agent of a feder connect financi institut
the statut is aim primarili at reduc corrupt influenc in loan make unlik section
212 and 213 abov a specif intent to influenc or be influenc through illeg payment
must be proven to obtain a convict a payment made after a loan ha been approv and
disburs mai be in violat of the law if it is part of a prearrang plan or agreement
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2249
antikickback act of 1986 41 usc 5158
the antikickback act outlaw the give or receiv of anyth of valu for the purpos
of improperli obtain or receiv favor treatment in connect with us
govern contract the act provid both civil and crimin penalti for violat
crimin violat can be punish by a fine up to 10 year in prison or both civil
penalti up to twice the amount of the kickback also mai be assess addition the
unit state mai offset the amount of ani kickback against the amount ow on the prime
contract
element of antikickback act violat
under the act it is prohibit for
ani person to
knowingli and willfulli
offer or solicit kickback or ani type of govern contract or subcontract
audit of record and prevent procedur
the antikickback act also provid for inspect by the inspector gener with access to
book and record and section 57 requir that the prime contractor have in place in it
oper reason procedur to prevent and detect kickback if a contractor ha
reason ground to believ that there ha been a violat the contractor is requir to
report the possibl violat the contractor also is requir to cooper fulli with ani
feder agenc investig
accord to the congression note follow the statut reason procedur to detect
and prevent kickback includ
educ program for employe and subcontractor
polici manual
special procur and audit procedur
ethic polici
applic screen
report procedur
the foreign corrupt practic act 15 usc 78dd1 78dd2 78dd3 78m
the foreign corrupt practic act fcpa wa origin enact in 1977 to prohibit certain
publicli held compani from make corrupt payment to foreign offici or polit
organ other amend to the act make it illeg for ani us citizen to make such
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2250 2011 fraud examin manual
payment the statut wa the result of disclosur from the waterg investig of
corpor greas payment to foreign to obtain busi oversea
the fcpa crimin the briberi of a foreign public offici in order to obtain or retain
busi and it requir publicli trade compani to keep accur book and record and
adopt intern control to prevent divers of asset or other improp us of corpor
fund
fcpa enforc action can includ crimin action by the depart of justic doj
civil action brought by either the secur and exchang commiss sec or the doj
or both and administr action file by the sec
sinc the fcpa wa enact there have been a number of intern initi to
strengthen antibriberi law around the world on of the most signific is the work of the
organ for econom cooper and develop oecd the oecd ha 30
member countri includ mani of the world largest econom powersth unit
state canada germani franc japan itali mexico spain australia and the unit
kingdom in respons to the articl draft by the oecd the member countri have or
ar in the process of draft new tougher transnat briberi law
antibriberi provis 15 usc 78dd
the antibriberi provis of the fcpa make it unlaw to bribe a foreign offici for
busi purpos
five element
there ar five element to a violat 1 regul parti 2 payment or offer 3 foreign
offici 4 corrupt intent and 5 busi purpos
first under the fcpa us jurisdict over corrupt payment to foreign offici depend
upon whether the violat is a regul parti regul person includ all of the follow
a domest concern ani citizen nation or resid of the unit state or ani busi
entiti that ha it princip place of busi in the unit state or that is organ
under the law of a state territori possess or commonwealth of the unit state
issuer a corpor that ha issu secur that have been regist in the unit
state or who is requir to file period report with the sec
the agent or other repres of domest concern and issuer
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2251
a foreign nation or busi that take ani act in further of a corrupt payment
within us territori
second the fcpa prohibit pai offer promis to pai or author to pai or
offer monei or anyth of valu under the fcpa payment can includ payment of
monei gift charit contribut or donat of benefit to foreign offici inkind
servic scholarship to foreign offici rel overpay for share and loan at
favor interest rate
third the prohibit extend onli to corrupt payment to a foreign offici the term
foreign offici is veri broad and includ
ani foreign depart instrument or agenc
ani entiti own or control by a foreign govern
ani offici or candid of a foreign polit parti
ani public intern organ
ani person act in an offici capac on behalf of ani of the abov entiti
fourth the person make or author the payment must have a corrupt intent that is
the payment must be intend to influenc the recipi to misus hi posit
final the payment must be relat to a specif busi purpos put differ the
payment must be relat to obtain busi retain busi or direct busi
the prohibit also cover payment to gain favor tax or custom treatment or to
obtain permit or licens
crimin enforc of antibriberi provis
the depart of justic doj is respons for all crimin enforc of the fcpa
under the antibriberi provis corpor and other busi entiti ar subject to a
fine of up to 2000000 while offic director stockhold employe and agent ar
subject to a fine of up to 250000 and imprison for up to five year fine impos on
individu mai not be paid by their employ or princip
civil enforc of antibriberi provis
civil enforc of the antibriberi provis of the fcpa is share by the secur
exchang commiss sec and the doj the primari civil enforc tool is an
injunct though the fcpa also provid for monetari penalti the maximum civil
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2252 2011 fraud examin manual
penalti for a violat by ani firm as well as by ani offic director employe or agent is
10000 per occurr in addit in an sec enforc action the court mai impos
an addit fine not to exce the greater of 1 the gross amount of the pecuniari gain to
the defend as a result of the violat or 2 a specifi dollar limit base on the
flagranc of the violat
account provis 15 usc 78m
in addit to outlaw briberi payment the fcpa also contain separ account
provis for certain entiti alreadi subject to the fcpa provis congress enact the
fcpa account provis as an addit deterr to briberi base on it conclus
that us compani conceal most bribe in their corpor book
under the account provis issuer ie compani with secur list in the us
trade market must 1 maintain accur book and record and 2 adopt intern
control to prevent the improp us of corpor fund
in addit the fcpa requir that a cover entiti make a goodfaith effort to ensur that
ani compani includ joint ventur in which the us compani or on of it subsidiari
hold 50 percent or less of the vote power compli with the fcpa account provis
book and record recordkeep provis
the first major requir of the account provis is that all issuer must accur
record all transact keep receipt and other support for transact and keep record in
a manner consist with overal document retent and recordkeep polici
in practic the book and record provis ar us to prevent three type of
improprieti
the failur to record improp transact
the falsif of record to conceal improp transact
the creation of record that ar quantit correct but fail to specifi the qualit
aspect of a transact that might reveal the true purpos of a particular payment
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2253
intern control provis
the intern control provis is design to prevent unauthor or unrecord
transact under the intern control provis a compani must maintain robust
complianc polici and must take reason step to ensur that it affili maintain
suitabl intern control
the sec ha consid sever factor to determin the adequaci of a system of intern
control the factor includ
the role of the board of director
commun of corpor procedur and polici
assign of author and respons
compet and integr of personnel
account for perform and complianc with polici and procedur
object and effect of the intern audit function
sec regul regard the account provis
the sec ha adopt two regul enforc the account provis first rule 13b2
1 make it unlaw to falsifi account provid that no person shall directli or
indirectli falsifi or caus to be falsifi ani book record or account requir to be kept
under the account provis of the fcpa second the sec establish rule 13b22
which make it unlaw to suppli fals inform to auditor thi rule state that
enforc of the account provis
the fcpa account provis ar enforc by both the sec and the doj the sec
ha author to initi civil enforc action and can impos civil fine and
disgorg on the compani and individu the sec ha brought enforc action of
the account provis both in case involv actual foreign bribe and in domest
transact the sec can seek civil penalti of up to 500000 for cover entiti and
100000 for individu
the doj is respons for crimin prosecut of will violat of the account
provis and crimin penalti can includ larg fine and imprison a will
violat of the account and control provis is punish by a fine up to 25 million
against entiti and a fine up to 5 million and imprison up to 20 year against
individu
natur person convict of will violat of the account provis mai be fine up
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2254 2011 fraud examin manual
to 5 million imprison up to 20 year or both corpor convict of will
violat mai be fine up to 25 million also the fcpa provid that an individu mai
be held crimin liabl for knowingli falsifi ani book record or account or
circumv or fail to implement a system of intern account control know
mai includ will blind or consciou attempt not to know but no crimin liabil is
impos for technic or insignific account error
in addit administr and civil relief also is avail a corpor or individu found
in violat of the fcpa mai be subject to debar befor mani govern agenc
and an indict under the fcpa can also lead to the suspens of on right to do
busi with the govern or the immedi suspens of export licens for militari
defens equip
theft or briberi concern program receiv feder fund 18 usc 666
under thi statut a person can be convict of a feder offens if he commit fraud or
theft against a compani that receiv feder fund the victim of the theft or bribe must be
1 an organ and 2 must receiv benefit in excess of 10000 within ani oneyear
period under a feder program involv a grant contract subsidi loan guarante
insur or other form of feder assist
in determin whether the organ receiv more than 10000 in benefit do not
includ ani of the follow salari wage fee or other compens paid or expens
paid or reimburs in the usual cours of busi
to sustain a convict under section 666 the follow condit also must be met
the defend must be an agent of an organ as defin abov a state or local
govern or nativ american tribal govern
who embezzl stole or otherwis obtain by fraud
properti valu at 5000 or more
the properti is own or is under the care or custodi of the organ or agenc
the organ or agenc must receiv more than 10000 in feder fund
the statut also make it a feder crime to solicit offer or accept or agre to offer or
accept bribe in relat to ani transact involv the feder fund organ or
agenc if the transact is valu at 5000 or more
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2255
feder secur law
becaus of sever high profil corpor scandal in 2001 and 2002 congress pass the
sarbanesoxlei act which wa discuss previous in thi chapter in addit to the
numer report and certif requir for financi statement the act also
creat a crimin statut relat to secur fraud 18 usc 1348 set forth below in
addit to thi statut there ar also numer other feder statut which prohibit fals
statement and other fraudul activ in connect with secur transact the most
commonli us ar section 17a of the secur act of 1933 popularli known as the 1933
act and rule 10b5 promulg under section 10b of the secur exchang act of
1934 the 1934 act both contain civil and administr remedi such as the power to
initi action to enjoin further violat enforc by the secur and exchang
commiss sec as well as crimin sanction enforc by the depart of justic
doj whether a particular violat is pro ecut civilli or crimin depend in larg
measur on the degre of will that can be prove
the 1933 and 1934 act
section 17a of the 1933 act make it unlaw to emploi fraudul devic or
misrepresent in connect with the offer or sale of secur through jurisdict
facil eg the us mail wherea rule 10b5 prohibit the same conduct in
connect with the purchas or sale of ani secur by ani person becaus rule 10b
5 ha the broadest reach includ insid trade it is the most often us
more specif a success 10b5 action requir the plaintiff to alleg and prove the
follow four element
the defend made a materi misstat or omiss
the defend act with scienter typic mean that the parti charg with the
violat act with a specif intent to defraud
the plaintiff reli on the misrepresent or omiss in the purchas or sale of a
secur
the plaintiff suffer econom loss caus by the purchas or sale of the secur
to bring a success insid trade claim under rule 10b5 howev the govern must
prove all of the follow element
the defend bought or sold secur in a compani
at the time of purchas the defend wa in possess of nonpubl materi
inform
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2256 2011 fraud examin manual
the defend wa an insid of the compani eg an employe a construct
insid ie someon who is temporarili en trust with confidenti inform a
tippe ie someon who receiv inform from an insid or an outsid who get
the inform from a temporari insid
the defend trade by the us of ani mean or instrument of interst
commerc or of the mail or of ani facil of ani nation secur exchang
to allow action under rule 10b5 the fals statement must be materi the test for
materi is whether there is a substanti likelihood under all the circumst that a
reason investor would have consid the misstat or omit fact signific in
decid whether to invest materi is most often express in dollar term or in term of
it effect on financi statement materi howev might relat to seriou question of
manag integr regardless of the dollar amount involv
specif intent to defraud is an essenti element of a violat of section 17a and rule 10b
5 howev intent to defraud is defin more broadli in secur regul than in other
area of commonlaw fraud and it includ reckless statement as well as the know
circul of halftruth and fals opinion or predict that elsewher might be
consid nonaction puf to prove liabil against a corpor a plaintiff must
show that an agent of the corpor made the alleg fals statement with specif intent
to defraud and both the fraudul act and requir mental state ar attribut to the
corpor
good faith is alwai a defens to a section 17a or rule 10b5 fraud action howev intent
can be and usual is prove by circumstanti evid as in ani fraud case violat
of other indirect antifraud provis of the feder secur law such as certain
registr and disclosur requir do not requir a show of fraudul intent
sec civil action often ar settl by consent decre in which the parti agre to stop the
offend practic without admit or deni he engag in it in the first place violat
of such decre mai be punish as contempt with jail term or fine
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2257
the sarbanesoxlei act
the sarbanesoxlei act pass in june 2002 made a number of import chang to
secur law on of the most signific chang wa the addit of a crimin offens
under section 807 codifi at 18 usc 13 48 section 1348 provid for fine up to
250000 imprison for up to 25 year or both
the fraud enforc and recoveri act of 2009 fera sign into law by presid
obama on mai 20 2009 contain a number of measur intend to combat fraud among
other provis the legisl expand the definit of secur fraud in section 1348 to
includ fraud scheme involv commod for futur deliveri or option on commod
for futur deliveri
tax evas fals return and failur to file
26 usc 7201 7203 72061 et seq
fraud and corrupt prosecut might includ tax evas fals return or failur to file
count if as is often the case the recipi of illeg payment ha not report them as
incom or if the payer ha attempt to conceal and deduct them as a legitim busi
expens
offshor tax avoid and evas
even though offshor bank is not illeg feder law requir individu to disclos ani
offshor account to the us govern gener the princip disclosur requir is
satisfi by file treasuri form 90221 the report of foreign bank and financi
account fbar specif treasuri depart regul requir us citizen and
resid alien to file a report when thei maintain a financi interest or signatur author
over a foreign bank account with a balanc of more than 10000 dure the calendar year
furthermor individu with report offshor account must acknowledg whether thei
have an offshor account on their tax return
violat of these report requir mai be punish by civil or crimin penalti
section 5321 of the bank secreci act set forth the civil penalti for noncompli
provid that a cover entiti that willfulli violat the abov report requir can
be hit with a penalti of up to the amount of the transact not to exce 100000 or
25000 whichev is greater in addit civil tax penalti mai be impos for fail to
disclos foreign account activ
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2258 2011 fraud examin manual
gener tax evas 26 usc 7201 failur to file a return or pai a tax 26 usc
7203 and make a fals tax return 26 usc 72061 ar the most common crimin
offens aris from hold a foreign account section 7201 carri a feloni charg of not
more than 100000 500000 in the case of a corpor andor imprison for not
more than five year a person convict under section 7203 can be fine up to 100000 or
sentenc to up to on year in prison in addit to ani other penalti a person found
guilti of section 7206 mai be subject to a fine of up to 100000 or 500000 in the case of
a corpor andor imprison of up to three year
recent the intern revenu servic ir and the depart of justic doj have
intensifi crackdown on offshor bank account attempt to locat and punish
individu that us offshor bank account to illeg shield incom thi develop ha
occur primarili becaus offshor tax haven result in lost revenu for the us
govern in fact accord to the senat perman subcommitte on investig
offshor tax evas cost the unit state an estim 100 billion in lost revenu each
year
bankruptci fraud 18 usc 151 et seq
two relat but somewhat differ type of crimin conduct fall under the gener head
of bankruptci fraud the first is the plan bankruptci or bustout scheme in which the
wrongdoer sell off for cash usual below cost inventori obtain on credit often through
fals or inflat financi statement and then abscond with the proce formal
bankruptci proceed often ar not initi and the crime mai be prosecut under
gener fraud statut such as mail or wire fraud
the second type of bankruptci offens involv misconduct by a person or entiti actual
involv or contempl be involv in a formal bankruptci proceed the feder
crimin law that regul bankruptci proceed ar set out in the financi transact
section of the fraud examin manual
financi institut fraud
thi section examin some common feder statut that prohibit fraud against bank or
other similar financi institut
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2259
bank fraud 18 usc 1344 1345
titl 18 us code section 1344 is the broadest of all bank fraud statut it punish those
obtain asset own or control by a bank by fals or fraudul pretens
represent or promis it cover both insid and all other person even if not
affili with the bank it also appli to check kite and to offshor fraud extraterritori
reach bank fraud is a predic offens under the racket influenc corrupt
organ statut penalti for bank fraud includ a fine of up to 1000000 andor
imprison of up to 30 year
in a relat provis section 1345 allow the govern to commenc a civil action in
feder court to enjoin fraudul activ that violat section 1344
as in the mail and wire fraud statut the term scheme and artific to defraud includ ani
misrepresent or other conduct intend to deceiv other to obtain someth of
valu the prosecut must prove onli an attempt to execut the scheme it need not show
actual loss that the victim institut wa deceiv or that the defend person
benefit from the scheme
fraud by bank personnel and receiv
fals entri 18 usc 1006
section 1006 of titl 18 of the us code is a typic conflict of interest prohibit it
make it a crime for offic agent or employe of financi institut to defraud
financi institut or the us govern by make fals entri or withdraw or
transfer fund without author the penalti ar sever up to 30 year in prison
andor a fine of up to 1000000
to prove illeg particip under section 1006 the govern must prove
the defend wa an offic agent or employe of a lend institut author by
and act under the law of the unit state
direct or indirect receipt of some benefit from the transact in question
the defend knowingli and willfulli made or caus to be made a fals entri
concern a materi fact in a book report or statement of the institut
conceal of asset from a receiv 18 usc 1032
section 1032 of titl 18 of the us code make it a crime for a conserv or receiv of a
financi institut to conceal or imped the recoveri of fund or properti
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2260 2011 fraud examin manual
theft embezzl and misappli cation 18 usc 656 657
section 656 of titl 18 of the us code is the princip feder bank embezzl statut
it prohibit theft embezzl and misappl of a bank fund by it offic
director or employe the essenti element of a typic section 656 violat ar
the defend wa an offic director agent or employe of
a feder insur bank
who willfulli
embezzl abstract purloin or willfulli misappli fund of the bank
with the intent to injur or defraud the bank
the term abstract purloin and misappli as us in the statut ar larg repetit and in
normal usag mean to take or to convert bank fund for on own us or the us of a third
parti for improp purpos without the bank knowledg or consent
section 657 prohibit the embezzl of fund from design feder connect
lend credit and insur organ the basic element of a violat ar the same
as those in section 656
financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act firrea 12 usc 1811 et seq
follow the save and loan crisi of the 1980 congress pass the financi institut
reform recoveri and enforc act firrea to enhanc the safeti of save
institut among other thing firrea greatli strengthen the govern
prosecutori arm against insid and outsid the law provis ar applic to ani
institutionaffili parti which includ but is not limit to director offic
employe and control sharehold institutionaffili parti can includ attornei
account and apprais
firrea provid for enhanc penalti for convict of sever bankrel statut
under firrea civil penalti rang from 1 million per dai a total of 5 million for
continu violat or the amount of wrong gain or loss
financi institut antifraud enforc act of 1990 12 usc 4201 et seq
the financi institut antifraud enforc act is also direct at the financi
servic industri thi act allow privat inform to notifi the govern about
violat that could give rise to civil action under firrea and it provid for privat civil
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2261
enforc in certain situat the statut also allow for the hire of privat counsel to
investig and prosecut civil claim
continu financi crime enterpris statut 18 usc 225
also known as the sl kingpin statut or the financi crime kingpin statut
congress enact thi law in respons to the late 1980 save and loan scandal in which
numer factor such as market forc and crimin activ within save and loan
institut led to the collaps of the save and loan industri primarili concern with
punish financi institut relat crime the financi crime kingpin statut
crimin the administr of a continu financi crime enterpris
a crimin enterpris is a seri of violat of enumer crime relat to financi
institut that were commit by at least four person act in concert accord to
most court a seri is three violat
punish under the financi crime kingpin statut is sever the law provid for fine
of up to 20 million for organiz defendan ts as well as fine of up to 10 million and
up to life imprison for individu defend receiv 5000000 or more dure a 24month
period from a crimin enterpris
particip in the affair of a financi institut by a convict felon 12 usc 1829
thi statut prohibit peopl convict of certain bank crime from particip in the
conduct of the affair of a financi institut with certain except a know violat
might result in fine of up to 1 million for each dai the prohibit is violat
imprison of up to five year or both
fraudul us of credit card 15 usc 1644
the feder govern us sever differ statut to prosecut credit card fraud
includ section 1644 of the truth in lend act the mail fraud statut and the wire
fraud statut but of these three statut onli section 1644 is specif design to
combat credit card fraud
section 1644 of the truth in lend act provid penalti for the us of counterfeit
fictiti alter forg lost stolen or fraudul obtain credit card specif
section 1644 prohibit an individu from us a fraudul obtain credit card to obtain
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2262 2011 fraud examin manual
monei good servic or anyth els of valu aggreg 1000 or more it also
prohibit a person from receiv conceal us or transport anyth of valu that
wa obtain with a counterfeit fictiti alter forg lost stolen or fraudul
obtain credit card a violat can be fine up to 10000 andor imprison for up to 10
year
the electron fund transfer act 15 usc 1693nb
congress design thi legisl to allow consum the eas and benefit of electron fund
transfer while defin the right and liabil of the parti involv in such transact
section 1693n appli to paperless monei transfer between account includ atm
transact debit and credit card transact pointofsal po debit transact
telephon transfer and accord to the feder deposit insur corpor fdic
ani other electron bank transact that can result in the withdraw of cash from
your bank account
gener thi statut attach crimin liabil to the act of
give fals or inaccur inform under the bank law and regul
fail to provid inform requir under the bank law and regul
section 1693n also prohibit certain action affect commerc includ
us attempt to us or conspir to us ani fraudul obtain debit
instrument with knowledg of fraudul charact to obtain anyth with an
aggreg valu of at least 1000 within a oneyear period
transport attempt to transport or conspir to transport a fraudul debit
instrument with unlaw or fraudul intent and knowledg
sell or transport in interst or foreign commerc of ani fraudul debit
instrument with knowledg
receiv conceal us or transport ani proce from a fraudul activ that
have a valu exceed 1000 within ani oneyear period
receiv conceal us sell or transport of on or more ticket for interst
or foreign transport that have a valu aggreg 500 or more and were obtain
by us of a fraudul debit instrument
furnish monei properti servic or anyth els of valu aggreg 1000 or
more within a oneyear period in conjunct with the us of a fraudul debit
instrument
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2263
as us in thi section the term debit instrument mean a card code or other devic other
than a check draft or similar paper instrument by the us of which a person mai initi an
electron fund transfer
law relat to health care fraud
health care fraud mai be defin as an intent act to defraud a health care benefit program
or to obtain through fals represent monei or other properti own by a health care
benefit program numer crimin and civil feder and state law ar avail in the
prosecut of health care fraud in addit regulatori agenc ar also avail for
licensur action
health insur portabl and account act of 1996
as part of the health insur portabl and account act of 1996 hipaa
congress made a number of chang to the feder crimin code the act establish
sever crimin statut relat specif to health care fraud specif under hipaa
there ar five feder crime direct at health care fraud
hipaa made it illeg for anyon to knowingli and willfulli
defraud ani health care benefit program or obtain by mean of fals represent ani
monei or properti of a health care benefit program 18 usc 1347
embezzl convert or steal ani fund properti or asset of a health care benefit
program 18 usc 669
make fals statement which crimin ani fals or fictiti statement in ani
matter involv a health care benefit program 18 usc 1035
obstruct delai prevent or mislead the investig of feder health care offens 18 usc 1518
the term health care benefit program as us in these statut is defin to mean ani public or
privat plan or contract affect commerc under which ani medic benefit item or
servic is provid to ani individu and includ ani individu or entiti who is provid a
medic benefit item or servic for which payment mai be made under the plan or
contract 18 usc 24b
hipaa also provid that a judg mai order a person convict of a feder health care
offens to forfeit ani properti that can be trace from the proce receiv from the
offens
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2264 2011 fraud examin manual
for inform on hipaa privaci protect for consum health care inform
see the ident theft section below
fals claim and statement
in addit to hipaa the feder fals claim statut includ the crimin fals claim
act fals statement under section 1001 and the civil fals claim act mai be us to
combat certain type of health care fraud
these statut ar discuss in more detail in the fals claim and statement section below
antikickback statut 42 usc 1320a7bb
also the antikickback statut also refer to in the healthcar industri as the medicaremedicaid
antifraud and abus statut mai be us to combat healthcar fraud thi
statut prohibit an individu from make payment to induc the purchas of healthcar
good or servic that will be paid for by a feder health care program
a violat of the antikickback statut carri crimin fine of up to 25000 per violat
imprison for up to five year and exclus from particip in feder health care
program the govern mai also impos civil penalti which could result in trebl
damag plu 50000 for each violat
the stark law 42 usc 1395nn
the stark law also known as the physician selfreferr law attempt to limit the abil of
physician to profit from their referr by prohibit physician from make referr of
certain design health servic dh to entiti with which the physician or hi
immedi famili member ha a financi relationship the dh includ physic therapi
servic occup therapi servic radiolog and ultrasound servic durabl medic
equip and suppli parent and enter nutrient equip and suppli prosthet
orthot and prosthet devic home health servic and suppli outpati prescript
drug and hospit servic
in contrast to the antikickback statut which is a crimin statut that target a wide rang
of transact the stark law is a civil law that specif target physician referr
an individu who violat the stark law can incur civil penalti and be exclud from
particip in feder health care program
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2265
ident theft
technolog advanc facilit the electron transfer of person and financi
inform have greatli contribut to the increas occurr of ident theft ident
theft occur when thiev wrongfulli obtain and us anoth person person data ie
name address social secur number date of birth or credit card number in a wai that
involv fraud or decept there ar two primari feder law that address ident theft
the ident theft and assumpt deterr act and the ident theft penalti
enhanc act in addit there ar a number of state feder and regulatori data
breach law that requir compani to inform consum of data breach without
unreason delai
there ar howev other ancillari feder law regard fraud in variou context that thi
section will not cover these ancillari law includ the feder mail and wire fraud statut
the access devic fraud statut feder statut that prohibit fraud against bank or other
similar financi institut and statut prohibit social secur fraud
ident theft and assumpt deterr act of 1998 18 usc 1028
the growth of ident theft led congress to pass the ident theft and assumpt
deterr act which make ident theft a feder crime the ident theft and
assumpt deterr act outlaw the intent and unauthor us of anoth
individu identif with the intent to commit a crime the act carri a maximum
term of 15 year of imprison a fine and crimin forfeitur of ani person properti
us or intend to be us to commit the offens the penalti is increas to a maximum
of 30 year of imprison if the offens is commit to facilit an act of terror
ident theft scheme mai also involv other violat such as mail fraud wire fraud credit
card fraud comput fraud or financi institut fraud
in addit thi legisl enabl the secret servic the feder bureau of investig
and other law enforc agenc to combat thi crime it allow the ident theft victim
to seek restitut if there is a convict it also establish the feder trade commiss
as a central agenc to act as a clearinghous for complaint against credit report agenc
and credit grantor referr and resourc for assist for victim of ident theft
ident theft penalti enhanc act 18 usc 1028a
in august 2004 congress pass the ident theft penalti enhanc act to deal with
the increas frequenc of ident theft scheme thi act strengthen feder law on
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2266 2011 fraud examin manual
ident theft by creat a crime of aggrav ident theft aggrav ident theft
occur when an individu us a stolen ident to commit other crime specif section
1028a provid that where on knowingli transfer possess or us without law
author a mean of identif of anoth dure and in relat to ani feloni violat
ofor relat to fraud embezzl fals statement and the like an addit term of
imprison of two year will be impos on the individu in april 2005 the unit
state sentenc commiss went a step further to impos consecut mandatori
minimum sentenc of two and five year depend on the underli offens of misus a
stolen identif the statut also impos a minim sentenc of two year of
imprison to ani punish for a feloni crime commit us a stolen ident
data breach and breach notif law
busi with inadequ secur safeguard not onli leav custom confidenti data
vulner to misus or theft but also increas their risk of regulatori or legal action direct
econom loss and loss of consum confid
exampl
in septemb 2009 tjx compani the parent compani of tj maxx marshal
homegood and other enterpris agre to pai 525000 to settl a classact suit file by
sever bank relat to the data breach of it comput system in which hacker compromis
94 million credit and debit card number accord to investig inadequ secur
safeguard allow hacker to access and steal thi inform thi settlement is on of sever
for tjx which ha estim that it will spend more than 250 million to address networksecur
weak and respond to lawsuit investig and other claim stem from the
breach
exampl
on novemb 20 2009 the hartford courant report that health net a health insur
provid lost a portabl extern hard drive with unencrypt person inform of
approxim 15 million custom the miss data includ social secur number and
bank account number of health net member in arizona connecticut new jersei and
new york although the hard drive reportedli disappear from health net offic in mai
2009 the compani wait six month befor disclos the breach accord to the
connecticut attornei gener health net mai be in violat of state notif law that
requir compani to inform consum of data breach without unreason delai
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2267
data breach ar on of the largest contributor to the escal problem of ident theft
which cost american more than 50 billion each year in fact the ident theft resourc
center a nonprofit organ dedic to understand and prevent ident theft
estim that in 2008 data breach left more than 35 million person record expos
although these case and statist illustr why strengthen informationsecur practic
should becom a high prioriti for manag in all type of organ compli with
us privaci law and regul is becom increasingli complex thi is primarili becaus
the unit state us a sector approach to protect inform thi approach which
reli on a mix of legisl regul and selfregul creat a system in which
privaci standard emerg from a complex interplai of overlap state and feder law and
regul as well as industri practic
in addit to a complex regulatori framework organ across variou industri have
experienc a signific increas in the number of inform privaci law and regul
affect their oper particularli due to an onslaught of databreach stori like the
on abov concern about the privaci of person inform have escal and thi ha
compel govern author to enact stronger consumerprotect legisl and
enhanc enforc effort to identifi and prosecut violat of law protect privat
consum inform
although busi have becom subject to a grow number of privaci law and
regul informationprivaci regul in the unit state is more preval in area
where abus of person inform ar most like to occur such as the financi and
health care industri
thi increasingli complex area of law pose signific complianc challeng for
organ oper in regul industri in thi environ manag must
understand the complic and expand area of privaci law and continu work to
ensur that their organ have and follow appropri procedur and protocol
address inform privaci
thi section seek to provid a gener overview on the subject by briefli examin some
import law regul and standard design to protect the privaci secur and
confidenti of custom data the discuss below is divid into the follow
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2268 2011 fraud examin manual
categori financi privaci privat health in format and privaci protect appli to
busi in other industri
privat financi inform
privaci protect in the financi servic industri ar primarili contain in the fair and
accur credit transact act facta and the grammleachblilei act
fair and accur credit transact act red flag rule
in 2007 the feder trade commiss ftc issu final rule and guidelin red flag
rule implement section 114 and 315 of the fair and accur credit transact act
factath red flag rule requir financi institut and certain creditor to develop
and implement a formal written program to identifi detect and respond to red flag of
possibl ident theft
see the chapter on financi institut fraud in the financi transact and fraud
scheme section of the fraud examin manual for more inform about the red flag
rule
grammleachblilei act
like facta red flag rule the grammleachblilei act which protect custom
financi inform held by bank work in person financ impos privaci oblig
on financi institut specif financi institut have privaci oblig under the
financi privaci rule and the safeguard rule of the grammleachblilei act
the financi privaci rule requir financi institut to provid their custom with
privaci notic explain the institut polici for collect and share person
financi inform the financi privaci rule also appli to compani whether or not
thei ar financi institut that receiv person financi inform
convers the safeguard rule requir all financi institut to design implement and
maintain safeguard to protect the confidenti and integr of custom person
inform the safeguard rule appli not onli to financi institut that collect
inform from their own custom but also to financi institut that receiv
custom inform from other financi institut
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2269
privat health inform
in addit certain busi mai need to consid adopt a set of polici and
procedur to safeguard privat health inform which includ ani identifi
inform that relat to a patient health health care or payment for health care feder
privaci protect for consum health care inform ar primarili locat in the
health insur portabl and account act hipaa and the health inform
technolog for econom and clinic health act hitech act
the health insur portabl and account act
although congress origin enact the health insur portabl and account
act hipaa to protect health insur coverag for worker and their famili it
expand the law to protect patient health inform the hipaa privaci rule appli to
health care provid health plan and health care clearinghous that electron transmit
health inform in connect with a cover transact and it govern access to and
us of protect health inform which includ ani identifi inform that
relat to a patient health health care or payment for health care
the hipaa privaci rule gener provid that cover entiti cannot us or disclos ani
protect health inform except as author by the subject of that inform or as
specif requir or author by the regul it also provid that when the us or
disclosur of such inform is permit cover entiti must make all reason effort
to us or disclos the minimum amount of protect inform necessari to accomplish
the intend purpos
if protect health inform becom an issu dure a fraud examin the examin
should immedi contact the human resourc hr depart the hr depart
should have inform about whether the entiti is subject to hipaa rule and can help
the examin compli with those rule
the most import thing to note is that if hipaa rule do appli examin ar restrict
as to the type of health inform thei can access without specif written author
examin should never contact the health care provid the healthplan administr or a
medicalbil servic for copi of employe record without first consult the
employ legal counsel or hr depart
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2270 2011 fraud examin manual
the health inform technolog for econom and clinic health act
the american recoveri and reinvest act of 2009 arra which wa enact on
februari 17 2009 contain mani complianc challeng for entiti that creat maintain
disclos or us health inform titl xiii of arra the health inform technolog
for econom and clinic health act hitech act impos addit requir for
notif of feder secur breach and ad numer privaci and data secur
restrict for cover entiti under hipaa the act also increas the maximum fine
under hipaa from 100000 to 1500000
busi outsid the financi and health care industri
even if manag believ their compani fall outsid of the financi servic or health care
industri thei should determin if thei ar creditor under the red flag rule and look to
state law and industri standard especi the payment card industri data secur
standard pci dss
state privaci law
in addit to the feder law summar abov specif state law mai regul the
collect and us of person inform by busi in the privat sector dure the
past few year state have been aggress in creat protect for person inform
and these protect typic appli to a broad set of person inform and extend to all
busi oper in the state
of particular concern for busi ar state law pertain to breach notif most
state have respond to the escal number of secur breach by enact these law
which typic requir busi to notifi their custom of a secur breach involv
person inform
although most state breachnotif law contain similar provis thei contain
vari definit of person inform and requir differ type of notif
therefor befor establish new polici and practic concern the handl of
2a of april 12 2010 46 state the district of columbia puerto rico and the virgin island have enact
legisl requir notif of secur breach involv person inform for a list of state breach
notif law visit the nation confer of state legislatur websit at wwwncslorg
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2271
person inform manag should consult with legal counsel to identifi what law
appli
payment card industri data secur standard
in addit to state law manag must be awar of it industryspecif data secur
standard such as the payment card industri data secur standard pci dss on of
the most import privateindustri datasecur standard
develop by the five major credit card compani american express discov jcb
mastercard and visa to prevent secur issu the pci dss is a comprehens set of
secur due dilig practic to help ensur the safe handl of payment card data all
compani that store process or transmit credit or debit card data must compli with thi set
of standard
the pci dss framework compris the follow 12 secur requir
instal and maintain a firewal configur to protect cardhold data
do not us vendorsuppli default of system password and other secur paramet
protect store cardhold data
encrypt transmiss of cardhold data across open public network
us and regularli updat antiviru softwar or program
develop and maintain secur system and applic
restrict access to cardhold data on a needtoknow basi
assign a uniqu id to each person with comput access
restrict physic access to cardhold data
track and monitor all access to network resourc and cardhold data
regularli test secur system and process
maintain a polici that address inform secur for employe and contractor
failur to compli with pci dss can result in sever consequ impos by the card
brand includ
fine up to 500000 per data breach if data is compromis
fine up to 25000 per month until complianc is obtain
liabil for all fraud loss incur from compromis account number
loss of abil to process payment card transact
and while the feder govern ha not mandat complianc with the pci dss some
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2272 2011 fraud examin manual
state law forc element of the pci dss into law and sever state have consid
amend their breachnotif law to includ liabil for an organ failur to
adopt certain safeguard requir by the pci dss
law relat to govern contract
govern contract refer to the acquisit of good or servic by the feder
govern at the best possibl valu sinc the primari object of an effect
procur polici is achiev the best valu of monei it is import that the
procur process avoid incid of fraud
the us legal system provid for both privat and public remedi for procur fraud
fraudul conduct relat to the procur process mai be challeng by feder
prosecutor state prosecutor or privat parti who have been injur by the fraudul
conduct and have stand to sue
thi section examin relev statut us to prosecut contract fraud and applic civil
remedi us to recov damag for fraudul activ the follow feder statut mai
be us to combat contract fraud
fals claim and statement
mail fraud and wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
briberi gratuiti and conflict of interest gener 18 usc 201208
antikickback act of 1986 41 usc 5158
procur integr act 41 usc 423
the clayton antitrust act of 1914 15 usc 1227 5253
truth in negoti act 10 usc 2306
feder acquisit regul
fals claim and statement statut
as previous discuss chapter 47 of titl 18 us code contain a number of relat
provis that punish fals or fraudul statement made to variou feder agenc and
depart includ 18 usc 1001 the crimin fals claim act 18 usc 287 the
civil fals claim act 18 usc 3729 and the major fraud act of 1988 18 usc 1031
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2273
fals statement 18 usc 1001
the principl feder fals statement statut is locat in section 1001 of titl 18 us code
section 1001 prohibit fals or fraudul statement oral or in write made to variou
feder agenc and depart
crimin fals claim act 18 usc 287
frequent refer to as the crimin fals claim act section 287 make it illeg to
present or make ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim against ani agenc or depart of
the unit state the crime is complet when the claim is present and payment of the
claim is not an element of the offens
civil fals claim act 31 u sc 3729 et seq
the civil fals claim act is the civil counterpart to the crimin fals claim act it
provid a separ civil caus of action that mai be taken in addit to a crimin
prosecut as a result the submiss of a fals claim to the govern can make a
contractor liabl to the govern both crimin and civilli
the fals claim act provid in part that a person who commit the follow act is liabl
to the govern for ani trebl damag it sustain and a civil penalti of 5000 to 10000
per fals claim
in addit to allow the govern to recov penalti and damag for fals claim
the civil fals claim act allow a privat parti to prosecut a civil action against the
perpetr on behalf of the govern thi is call a qui tam action and is discuss
in further detail below
major fraud act of 1988 18 usc 1031
the major fraud act prohibit ani scheme to de fraud the unit state or obtain monei or
properti from the unit state by mean of fals or fraudul pretens involv
procur contract worth 1 million or more
to establish a claim under the major fraud act the govern must show the follow
element
the defend knowingli execut or attempt to execut
ani scheme or artific
with the intent to defraud the unit state or to obtain monei by fals pretens
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2274 2011 fraud examin manual
on a contract with the unit state valu at 1 million or more
the fraud enforc and recoveri act of 2009 fera sign into law by presid
obama on mai 20 2009 contain a number of measur intend to combat fraud among
other signific chang fera amend section 1031 to cover fraud in connect with
fund provid under the troubl asset relief program and other government econom
stimulu or recoveri program
if convict the defend mai be imprison for up to 10 year and fine up to 10
million or twice the amount of the gross loss or gain involv in the offens the statut
contain a special sevenyear statut of limit compar to the normal fiveyear statut
applic to feder crime
the statut also contain a whistleblow protect claus thi claus provid that ani
individu who is discharg demot harass or otherwis mistreat as a result of the
individu cooper in the prosecut of offens under thi section mai obtain
reinstat two time the amount of back pai due and other damag includ litig
cost and attornei fee
anoth provis author the attornei gener to pai up to 250000 in certain
circumst for inform regard possibl prosecut under thi section thi and
the whistleblow provis do not appli to peopl who particip in the offens
mail fraud and wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
these law which ar broad enough to appli to mani instanc of contract fraud
prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti procur and contract fraud scheme
that have been prosecut under the mail fraud statut includ
fals represent of materi fact
fals claim
offici briberi
commerci briberi and kickback
conflict of interest
see the mail fraud and wire fraud section for more inform
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2275
briberi gratuiti and conflict of interest gener 18 usc 201208
these statut prohibit a wide varieti of activ which can be describ gener as
corrupt such activ includ give or receiv a bribe or gratuiti to or from a public
offici as well as engag in a conflict of interest section 201 is the princip feder anti
corrupt statut it appli to virtual ani us offici and contain two separ offens
briberi of public offici and illeg gratuiti in relat section 208 prohibit a feder
govern employe from act on a matter in which he ha a conflict of interest see the
feder corrupt statut section for more inform
briberi of public offici 18 usc 201b
in gener section 201b prohibit give or receiv someth of valu for the purpos of
influenc the perform of an offici act briberi is punish by up to 15 year
imprison fine and disqualif from hold public offic
gratuiti 18 usc 201c
gratuiti includ give a govern employe someth of valu becaus of hi offici
posit howev unlik the briberi offens there is no requir for the govern to
prove that the gratuiti wa given for the purpos of influenc ani offici act illeg
gratuiti violat carri onli a maximum twoyear term fine or both
conflict of interest 18 usc 208
thi statut prohibit those situat in which a govern employe engag in activ
that creat a conflict between hi person interest and hi duti to protect and serv the
interest of the govern violat of section 208 can result in civil penalti for the
govern employe not exceed 50000 per violat as well as two time the amount
of compens he receiv or wa offer and the govern contractor not exceed
500000 per violat in addit to two time the amount of compens the contractor
receiv or offer it also impos crimin penalti up to five year imprison
andor a fine
antikickback act of 1986 41 usc 5158
the antikickback act prohibit govern contractor from solicit accept or
attempt to solicit or accept ani kickback in connect with govern contract the
act provid both civil and crimin penalti for violat crimin violat can be
punish by a fine up to 10 year in prison or both civil penalti up to twice the amount
of the kickback also mai be assess addition the unit state mai offset the amount
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2276 2011 fraud examin manual
of ani kickback against the amount ow on the prime contract
procur integr act 41 usc 423
the procur integr act prohibit certain activ by feder employe involv in
the procur process failur to compli with the act can result in administr action
civil penalti and crimin penalti imprison of not more than five year andor a
fine
specif the act address offer of employ postemploy restrict and
disclosingobtain bid propos or sourc select inform concern offer of
employ employe who ar involv in procur over 100000 and have had
contact with a contractor regard futur nonfeder employ must report the contact
and either reject the employ or exclud themselv from further particip in the
procur process in addit the act prohibit certain employe who ar involv in a
procur action or contract either of which is valu at 10 million or greater from
accept ani compens from a contractor as an employe or consult of the
contractor within a period of on year follow their involv
the procur integr act also prohibit the releas of sourc select inform
ie inform that is prepar for us by a feder agenc for the purpos of evalu a
bid or propos and contractor bid or propos inform ie cost or price data
proprietari inform identifi as such by a contractor
the clayton antitrust act of 1914 15 usc 1227 5253
enact as an amend to the sherman antitrust act which wa design to combat
anticompetit practic the clayton antitrust act prohibit certain antitrust activ
includ a prohibit on anticompetit price discrimin and a prohibit against
certain exclus deal practic
the clayton antitrust act permit privat parti injur by an antitrust violat to sue in
feder court for three time their actual damag plu court cost and attornei fee and it
author state attornei gener to bring civil suit on behalf of injur consum in their
state
if success the plaintiff mai recov damag of up to three time the actual loss incur
the plaintiff need not prove the exact amount of damag sustain a reason
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2277
approxim base on the best evid avail is suffici the court can award
interest for the period of the lawsuit if it find that the defend unreason delai the
proceed a foreign countri plaintiff mai be limit to actual damag
a crimin prosecut for antitrust violat can be brought in addit to a civil action for
the same conduct the court mai regul such parallel proceed to prevent undu
prejudic to the defend and mai stai delai the civil case or discoveri in the case until
the crimin prosecut is complet a previou crimin convict of the defend
involv the same fact and parti mai be admiss to prove liabil in a civil action
leav onli the amount of the damag to prove
to recov damag under thi act the plaintiff must be a person which includ ani
individu busi or state govern capabl of hold a properti interest and the
plaintiff must establish that hi busi or properti wa injur by an antitrust violat
eg agreement to fix price collus bid divid market price discrimin
predatori price group boycott or concert refus to deal or commerci briberi
truth in negoti act 10 usc 2306
in 1962 congress enact tina to protect the govern from unscrupul contractor
that inflat cost by falsifi their cost propos with inaccur incomplet or noncurr
cost and price data
under tina if a govern contractor submit defect inform that result in the
price be artifici inflat and the govern reli on it the govern is entitl to
a reduct in the contract price to elimin the effect of it relianc on the defect data
in instanc where a contractor unknowingli submit defect data ie defect data
submit for nonfraudul reason such as neglig accid incompet or
mistak the govern is entitl to a dollarfordollar price reduct in the contract
price to elimin the effect of it relianc on the defect data if howev defect data is
knowingli submit tina provid for not onli a dollarfordollar price reduct but
an addit amount equal to the overpay
feder acquisit regul
the feder acquisit regul far is the system of regul that govern the
govern procur of good and servic it doe not regul the purchas
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2278 2011 fraud examin manual
activ of privat sector firm the far is found in chapter 1 of titl 48 of the code of
feder regul cfr and the offici electron version is avail at
wwwarnetgovfar
among other thing far regul disclosur requir for govern contractor and
provid administr remedi against person or entiti that commit govern
contract fraud
mandatori disclosur rule far 31003a2
on decemb 12 2008 a major revis to the far went into effect among other thing
the revis far provis requir all govern contractor to disclos credibl
evid of crimin fraud conflict of interest briberi or gratuiti violat found in titl
18 as well as violat of the civil fals claim act furthermor the mandatori disclosur
rule requir that the contractor make report to two differ offic the inspector gener
and the affect contract offic in addit the mandatori disclosur rule make the
failur to disclos violat a basi for suspens and debar
administr remedi
to help ensur that the govern is deal onli with respons contractor the
govern us suspens and debar of contractor for certain offens the current
regul govern the debar and suspens of feder govern contractor ar
set forth in subpart 94 of the far
suspens and debar ar administr sanction that disqualifi contractor from
govern contract and subcontract suspens refer to an action taken by a
suspend offici to temporarili disqualifi a contractor from govern contract the
govern mai suspend a contractor upon adequ evid that the parti ha
commit certain civil or crimin offens
debar is defin as the action taken by a debarr ing offici to exclud a contractor from
govern contract for a specifi period debar action requir that thi sanction
be establish by a preponder of the evid that the person engag in conduct
warrant debar
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2301
the law relat to fraud part 2
feder legisl relat to fraud cont
law relat to mortgag fraud
introduct to the mortgag industri
after the us hous market collaps dure the great depress congress creat the
nation hous act to strengthen the deepli troubl hous market an import
element of thi legisl wa to make mortgag fund avail to more american by
protect lender from the risk of default loan
to thi end the feder hous administr fha wa creat through thi act with
the follow goal
to provid mortgag insur on residenti loan thu afford lender protect
against loss as the result of homeown default lender would bear less risk becaus
the fha would pai claim to the lender in the event of a default
to regul the rate of interest and the term of mortgag that it insur
similarli the veteran administr va home loan guaranti servic wa found in
1944 to assist veteran in purchas home va loan were also insur against default by
the us govern
in 1937 the feder nation mortgag associ fanni mae wa charter by the
fha fanni mae wa creat to purchas fhaguarante loan in the secondari market
and pool them for sale as mortgageback secur mbss to investor on the open
market
howev as recent as 1968 there wa no secondari market for nongovern loan also
call convent loan bank still carri convent loan in their portfolio and
access to convent loan by homeown wa still larg dictat by local
economi and market a secondari market for convent loan wa need to stabil
the convent lend market thi could be done by ad liquid so that there would
be a steadi suppli of fund avail to lender who origin convent loan
in 1968 fanni mae charter wa amend to allow purchas of convent mortgag in
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2302 2011 fraud examin manual
the secondari market congress charter the feder home loan mortgag compani
freddi mac in 1970 as an addit resourc for purchas convent mortgag at a
time when demand wa high for savingsandloan financ
fanni mae and freddi mac ar shareholderown publicli trade profitmak
corpor or governmentsponsor enterpris gse regul by the offic of
feder hous enterpris oversight ofheo gse have loan limit establish by law
and set each januari by congress
in 1968 along with amend fanni mae charter congress establish the govern
nation mortgag associ ginni mae as a governmentown corpor within the
depart of hous and urban develop hud lender pool packag of
qualifi fha or va mortgag and convert them into secur and ginni mae
guarante investor the time payment of princip and interest on these secur
a final compon of the secondari market compris privat investor such as wall street
firm becaus gse typic underwrit prime loan onli privat investor ar the main
secondari market for subprim loan secondari market investor plai an import role in
dictat loan product as lender us secondari market underwrit guidelin to ensur
the abil to sell loan to these investor each investor guidelin vari
in 2007 howev an increas number of borrow particularli those with adjust rate
mortgag were unabl to pai their mortgag caus a sharp increas in home
foreclosur as a result real estat price began to fall caus an increas in loss for
fanni mae and freddi mac becaus of the potenti liabil face each compani
fanni mae and freddi mac were place into a govern conservatorship which is
similar to a chapter 11 bankruptci under the feder hous financ agenc a
govern agenc respons for overse the two entiti
the evolut of mortgag lender and broker
mortgag lender
todai the secondari market ha overtaken deposit gather as the sourc of fund for
mortgag lend loan ar sold in the secondari market at origin therebi provid
the bank with a steadi suppli of capit need to make addit loan without the need
for a lot of capit deposit on the book mortgag lender start to evolv
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2303
consequ a smaller percentag of banker ar keep their loan than in the past even
larg commerci bank with lend author and capit now sell the mortgag loan
transact thei origin and close few bank wish to reli on depositor monei to fund
mortgag loan
addition mani mortgag lender ar nondepositori institut rather than local
headquart depositori bank mortgag lender do not take deposit instead thei reli on
the stabil the secondari market ha provid to purchas loan at origin and to repai
the bank moni to us for futur mortgag loan origin
mortgag broker
histor mortgag loan were origin by the loan offic at the bank mortgag
lender howev start reli on thirdparti origin tpo to broker their loan
product broker could be paid a commiss rather than a salari an option that work
well for minim capit mortgag lender
as a result the industri ha seen the evolut of mortgag broker
as market for mortgag becam more competit bank with their own retail loan
offic also start emploi these thirdparti wholesal origin todai mortgag
broker ar the largest distributor of mortgag product for mortgag lender and bank it
is estim that twothird of all origin ar from wholesal tpo mortgag broker
rather than retail loan offic
legisl and regul in the mortgag industri
the increas in the incid cost and victim of mortgag fraud ha spur the
govern and the mortgag industri to respond lawmak have introduc addit
legisl at the feder and state level to curb mortgag fraud and other highrisk product
and practic such as predatori and subprim lend industri profession and regul
ar also react with wai to combat mortgag fraud
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2304 2011 fraud examin manual
feder legisl address mortgag fraud
the follow feder statut ar commonli us to prosecut mortgag fraud
18 usc 1341 mail fraud
18 usc 1342 us of fictiti name or address in fraud
18 usc 1343 wire fraud
18 usc 1344 bank fraud
18 usc 1014 fals statement on a loan or credit applic
18 usc 1028 fraud and relat activ in connect with ident theft
18 usc 1029 credit card fraud
18 usc 1030 comput fraud
18 usc 1349 conspiraci
18 usc 1519 obstruct of justic
18 usc 1956 monei launder
18 usc 1957 monetari transact with illeg proce
18 usc 1001 fals statement or entri gener
18 usc 1005 fals entri to feder insur institut
18 usc 1010 fals statement in hud transact
18 usc 408 fraud in connect with social secur identif document
18 usc 1961 crimin rico
18 usc 215 receipt of commiss or gift for procur loan
18 usc 371 conspiraci to commit offens or to defraud the unit state
18 usc 656 theft embezzl or misappl by a bank offic or
employe
18 usc 2314 transport of stolen good or secur
18 usc 1341 mail fraud
in addit on mai 20 2009 presid obama sign the fraud enforc and
recoveri act of 2009 fera into law thi comprehens legisl expand the reach of
feder law and increas fund for feder agenc to investig and prosecut mortgag
corpor and other financi fraud
concern it applic to mortgag fraud fera make a number of import chang
to feder law most importantli fera expand the definit of financi institut in the
crimin code 18 usc 20 therebi extend feder fraud law to mortgagelend
busi not directli regul or insur by the feder govern by amend the
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2305
definit of financi institut fera expand the depart of justic author to
prosecut mortgag fraud case as bank fraud and to seek enhanc penalti under the mail
and wire fraud statut as a result convict for mortgag fraud can now carri a 30year
maximum prison sentenc a maximum 1 million fine or both
fera also amend the fals statement in mortgag applic statut 18 usc 1014 to
make it a crime to make a materi fals statement or to willfulli overvalu a properti to
influenc ani action by a mortgagelend busi
predatori lend legisl
predatori lend is a term gener us to character a rang of abus and aggress
lend practic includ decept and fraud without ani benefit to the borrow
although a few feder law implic predatori mortgagelend practic the onli act
congress enact specif to address predatori lend wa section 32 of the truth in
lend act entitl the home ownership equiti protect act of 1994 hoepa 5 usc 1639
note the rule of hoepa protect refinanc and home equiti instal loan thei do
not protect loan to bui or build a home revers mortgag or home equiti credit line
hoepa attempt to regul certain highcost potenti predatori mortgag loan and it
protect ar trigger by home loan that 1 have an annual percentag rate apr that is
eight percent higher than an index ti to treasuri secur or 2 have fee that exce
eight percent of the loan total or 583 whichev is greater howev predatori lender
easili evad hoepa protect by impos charg and fee just below the threshold
thu veri few predatori loan ar subject to hoepa regul
on juli 18 2008 the feder reserv board approv a rule under hoepa to protect
consum from unfair or decept home mortgag lend and advertis practic the
rule will take effect on octob 1 2009 and will specif
prohibit creditor from extend credit without consid the borrow abil to
repai
requir creditor to verifi incom and asset thei reli upon in make a loan
restrict the circumst under which prepay penalti ar permit and
requir creditor to establish escrow account for tax and insur
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2306 2011 fraud examin manual
subprim lend legisl
subprim lend is the practic of extend credit to borrow who have certain credit
characterist such as a lower credit score or poor payment historythat disqualifi them
from loan at the prime rate current there is no feder legisl govern subprim
lend but congress ha recent introduc a varieti of legisl propos design to
address the problem face by subprim borrow for instanc the rule under hoepa
issu by the feder reserv board ar design to increas borrow protect from
abus lend practic the regul would among other thing limit variou act and
practic in mortgag loan with annual percentag of rate exceed a lower trigger
state legisl
as with feder law mani state have enact legisl relat to mortgag fraud and
predatori lend practic
mortgag fraud statut
in mai 2005 georgia becam the first state to make mortgag fraud a crime sinc then
alabama arizona california colorado connecticut florida georgia indiana kentucki
louisiana maryland minnesota mississippi missouri nevada new york north carolina
utah and washington have also pass mortgag fraud laws3
predatori lend law
in the past five year more than half the state in the unit state have taken step to limit
predatori lend practic and seven have place a ban on prepay penalti local
in some state have also pass ordin deal with predatori lend practic
victim of predatori lend practic should contact their state attornei gener offic
the us offic of the attornei gener consolid individu state action against
predatori lend practic two addit predatori lend resourc ar
the nation associ of attornei gener wwwnaagorg
the center for respons lend wwwresponsiblelendingorg
mortgag industri regul
the mortgag industri us to be highli regul howev current nondepositori
mortgag lender ar not feder regul or insur instead thei ar regul at the
3 nation confer of state legislatur mortgag fraud httpwwwncslorg
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2307
state level as a result some mortgag lender ar feder regul while other ar
regul by the state in which thei ar charter
feder regul
bank or depositori institut that maintain a mortgagelend function or subsidiari fall
under regul from on of the follow feder regul
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which charter regul and
supervis more than 2500 nation bank and their subsidiari as well as the feder
branch and agenc of foreign bank
the offic of thrift supervis ot a bureau of the us depart of the
treasuri which regul all feder charter and some statechart thrift
institut includ feder charter save and loan associ and save bank
and their subsidiari
the nation credit union associ ncua which regul feder charter
credit union and all credit union charter in delawar south dakota wyom and
the district of columbia
the board of governor of the feder reserv system which regul it state
charter member bank their subsidiari and hold compani as well as the
activ of foreign bank that oper within the unit state
nation licens system for mortgag loan offic
in 2005 the confer of state bank supervisor csb and the american associ of
residenti mortgag regul aarmr along with state mortgag regul began
creat a tool that would turn the tabl on crimin who exploit the complex mortgag
origin system state regul agre to a singl set of uniform applic includ
assign a uniqu identifi number that track the entiti or individu from state to state
and over time the result systemth nationwid mortgag licens system
nml offer the industri a singl locat for ascertain licens statu and find ani
enforc action the system began oper on januari 2 2008 by the end of 2010 49
of the us state as well as puerto rico will have implement us of the nml for
mortgag licens
state regul
new mortgag lender that ar nondepositori ar regul by the state of their charter
statechart mortgag lender ar exempt from feder regul and regul vari
from state to state in 1993 onli 18 state directli regul their mortgag lend industri
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2308 2011 fraud examin manual
howev todai all 50 state have statut directli regul the mortgagelend industri
in some capac
until recent there were no nation standard for the licens and oversight of mortgag
broker but on juli 30 2008 presid bush sign into law the secur and fair
enforc for mortgag licens act of 2008 safe act which is part of the hous
and econom recoveri act of 2008 design to provid uniform licens standard
nationwid the safe act requir all state to have in place a system of licensur meet
minimum standard for mortgag loan origin ie anyon who take a residenti
mortgag loan applic or who offer or negoti term of a residenti mortgag loan
applic for compens or gain by juli 31 2009
at a minimum the state licens system must meet all of the follow requir
screen individu for feloni in the last seven year
screen individu for previou licens revoc
requir proof of financi respons us a credit report
requir prelicens test and educ
requir continu educ
provid for licens renew on an annual basi
includ a bond net worth or recoveri fund
feder law relat to credit report
the loan approv process begin with the credit of the borrow lender reli on a credit
report to assess the creditworthi of a borrow and establish whether he will repai a
loan a credit report is typic on of the first thing that a loan offic will obtain when
qualifi a borrow typic a borrow credit is highli relat to the probabl that
the loan will go into default becaus higher credit score tend to rais fewer red flag
perpetr prei on borrow with high credit score
credit report ar provid by credit bureau also known as credit report agenc credit
bureau ar local or nation institut that collect data on individu consum
creditworthi and report that data to their member or subscrib howev their
member or subscrib mai onli request and us the inform provid for those
purpos allow by law
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the fair credit report act
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2309
15 usc 1681b thi act provid the permiss purpos for obtain a credit
report such as credit evalu insur employ or similar purpos more
specif it regul the type of inform that can be contain in a consum credit
report it restrict credit bureau from releas an individu credit inform to ani
third parti without author and it set forth the circumst under which a third
parti can obtain a copi of the report for more inform about thi act see the fair
credit report act section in the individu right chapter
in addit privaci rule implement as part of the grammleachblilei act 16 cfr
part 313 have been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform includ
name address phone number and social secur number thi prevent credit
bureau from sell such inform to privat investig direct market or other
inform broker
telemarket fraud
telemarket fraud refer to ani type of scheme that is perpetr over the telephon and
these scheme mai be prosecut under section 23252327 of titl 18 of the us code
for purpos of thi statut telemarket is defin as
a plan program promot or campaign that is conduct to induc
a purchas of good or servic or
b particip in a contest or sweepstak
by us of 1 or more interst telephon call initi either by a person who is conduct the
plan program promot or campaign or by a prospect purchas or contest or sweepstak
particip
the definit contain an exclus for the solicit of sale through direct mail catalog
when the call ar initi by the custom
the statut doe not specif outlaw telemarket fraud instead the statut provid
enhanc penalti for person convict of ident fraud fraud in connect with access
devic mail fraud or wire fraud if that offens wa commit in connect with the
conduct of telemarket if a person is c onvict of on of the list offens through
the us of telemarket then the statut provid that up to five year shall be ad to the
person sentenc it also provid that if the victim were over the ag of 55 then the
person shall be sentenc to up to 10 addit year section 2327 direct the judg to
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2310 2011 fraud examin manual
order mandatori restitut in all case the court ar also allow to seiz ani properti
us to commit the crime as well as ani proce of the crime
in addit to charg brought under these provis feder prosecutor often us other
fraudrel law to prosecut telemarket fraud includ charg of moneylaund
18 usc 1956 and 1957 credit card fraud 18 usc 1029 and bank fraud 18 usc 1344
access devic fraud 18 usc 1029
thi statut crimin the product us traffick or possess of unauthor or
counterfeit access devic access devic ar devic that allow access to account fund
most importantli section 1029 prohibit the fraudul us of credit card howev
becaus congress broadli defin the term access devic section 1029 also appli to crime
us other access devic number includ debit card atm card person identif
number pin comput password or ani other thing of valu or that can be us to
initi a transfer of fund other than a transfer origin sole by paper instrument
section 1029 includ penalti of up to 15 year up to 20 year for subsequ offens
andor fine addition forfeitur of person properti is avail in mani instanc
comput crime
comput crime is a rel new and somewhat amorph term refer to both case in
which a comput is the instrument of a crime and those in which it is the object as the
instrument for exampl a comput might be us to direct call in a scheme to sell share
in a nonexist gold mine or might be us to steal fund from a bank account as the
object of a crime the inform contain in a comput might be stolen or destroi
the financi transact section contain further inform on comput crime
most comput crime ar prosecut under tradit fraud theft and embezzl
statut but section 1030 of titl 18 us code make certain computerrel activ a
specif feder offens
fraud and relat activ in connect with comput 18 usc 1030
origin enact in 1986 thi section know n as the comput fraud and abus act wa
amend by the comput abus amend act of 1994 most relev to fraud
examin is subsect a which prohibit seven act involv protect comput
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2311
a protect comput under thi section includ
a comput that is us exclus by a financi institut or the us govern
ani comput whose us affect a comput us by a financi institut or the feder
govern
a comput that is us in interst or foreign commerc or commun includ
a comput locat outsid the unit state that is us in a manner that affect
interst or foreign commerc of the unit state
briefli put section 1030a prohibit us a protect comput
to commit espionag 18 usc 1030a1
to obtain without author certain govern financi institut or
commerci inform 18 usc 1030a2
to access without author a govern comput 18 usc 1030a3
to commit fraud 18 usc 1030a4
to transmit a program code or command to damag a protect comput or to access
a protect comput that result in damag 18 usc 1030a5
for traffick in password 18 usc 1030a6
to transmit extortion threat 18 usc 1030a7
section 1030a4 and section 1030a5 ar discuss in further detail below
feder and state legislatur ar move quickli to make crimin all manner of comput
fraud and abus such as hardwar theft and destruct misappropri of softwar
unauthor access of comput and data commun facil to steal data or
monei or to caus mischief
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a4
section 1030a4 outlaw fraud involv protect comput there ar three element of
the crime which includ
knowingli access a protect comput without author or exceed
author
with the intent to defraud
and therebi obtain anyth of valu more than 5000 over the cours of a year
furthermor violat of section 1030a4 mai implic other relat feder law
includ but not limit to
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2312 2011 fraud examin manual
wire fraud 18 usc 1343
theft of trade secret 18 usc 1832
fraud involv credit card and access devic 18 usc 1029
fals statement on a matter within the jurisdict of a feder agenc or depart 18 usc 1001
fals statement on feder insur loan and credit applic 18 usc 1014
fals claim against the unit state 18 usc 287
bank fraud 18 usc 1344
theft or embezzl by offic or employe of lend credit and insur
institut 18 usc 657
fals entri by bank offic or employe 18 usc 1005
fals entri by offic or employe of feder credit institut 18 usc 1006
copyright infring 18 usc 2319
monei launder 18 usc 19561957
racket 18 usc 1962
caus comput damag 18 usc 1030a5
section 1030a5 outlaw caus comput damag but it contain two categori of
offens depend on intent the first categori provid that it is illeg to knowingli
transmit a program code or command that intention caus damag to a protect
comput thi offens appli even if the individu had author to access the
comput
the second categori provid that it is illeg to access a protect comput without
author that result in damag unlik the first categori thi offens doe not requir
intent to damag onli the intent to access the inform
unlaw action under the first categori of section 1030a5 violat includ
imprison up to on year andor a fine violat under the second categori of section
1030a5 mai receiv up to five year of imprison not more than 10 year for repeat
offend andor a fine both categori provid a civil remedi for ani person who suffer
damag as a result of a violat of section 1030a5
to appli section 1030a5 requir that the defend conduct caus damag to a
comput due to it broad the definit allow section 1030a5 to appli in variou
situat includ instanc where an act caus inform to be delet or chang
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2313
where an intrud alter the wai a comput oper or where an act make inform
unavail even if an intrud did not make ani alter and the comput system work
as it did befor some court have rule that access and copi privat data from
protect comput mai caus damag to the data under section 1035a5 for exampl in
the case of shurgard storag v safeguard self storag 119 f supp 2d 1121 wd wash 2000 a
us district court held that the comput fraud and abus act could be us against an
employe who without permiss copi inform from hi employ comput and
sent it by email to a compani that subsequ emploi him
civil remedi avail under the comput fraud and abus act
section 1030g provid a civil remedi for ani person who suffer damag or loss under
the comput fraud and abus act under section 1030g an individu mai obtain
compensatori damag and injunct relief or other equit relief includ all cost
consequenti damag and lost revenu for purpos of establish loss the patriot act
made it clear that the term individu includ ani individu firm corpor educ
institut financi institut government entiti legal entiti or other entiti damag
under the comput fraud and abus act ar defin as ani impair to the integr or
avail of data a program a system or inform
employ have been increasingli take advantag of the comput fraud and abus
act civil remedi to sue former employe and their new compani who seek a
competit edg through wrong us of inform from the former employ
comput system pacif aerospac and elec tronic inc v taylor 295 f supp 2d 1188 1196
ed wash 2003 to recov under section 1030g the employ must show that the
employe access to the compani comput wa without author or exceed
author access
the lead case for us thi act against employe who steal compani data is intl airport
center llc v citrin 440 f3d 418 7th circ 2006 base on agenc principl the 7th
circuit held that when the defend breach hi duti of loyalti ie access hi
employ comput to steal data he termin hi agenc relationship and lose all right
and author to access the comput
at the time of thi write howev there ar sever report district court that refus to
appli the comput fraud and abus act to employe data thiev these court hold that
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2314 2011 fraud examin manual
the act doe not appli in these situat becaus employe have permiss to access the
compani comput
despit the split among feder court a method to avert reli onli on agenc principl in
file a section 1030g action is to establish unauthor access through employe
agreement and compani polici
common crime prosecut under the comput fraud and abus act
the comput fraud and abus act is the most notabl feder law us to prosecut
computerrel crime most commonli feder prosecutor us the act to prosecut the
follow crime
instanc in which a comput is the subject of a crime includ comput virus time
bomb trojan malici code spam botnet logic bomb rootkit hack
vandal wifi mooch extort and so forth
crime that target comput network eg hack worm and ddo
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a4
ident theft 18 usc 1028
monei launder 18 usc 19561957
intellectu properti crime
state law
at the state level statut that might be of us in prosecut comput crime would
includ the penal code violat of larceni in it mani form fals pretens forgeri
fraud embezzl vandal properti destruct malici mischief proprietari
inform theft commerci briberi and extort howev most state now expressli
provid penalti for crime perpetr by us of comput or perpetr against
comput
comput crime law specif state statut
alabama ala code 13a8101 102107
alaska alaska stat 1146200a3 114 6484a5 1146740 1146985 1146990
1181900a46 52
arizona ariz rev stat ann 132301e 132316
arkansa ark stat sec 541102 541 106 ark code 541101 to 107
california cal penal code 484j 499c 50 2 50201 5027h 503 1203047 2702
colorado colo rev stat ann sec 1855101 102
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2315
connecticut conn gen stat a nn sec 53a250 251261
delawar del code tit 11 sec 931 to 939
florida fla stat ann sec 81501
georgia ga code ann sec 16990 and sec 16143
hawaii haw rev stat 708890
idaho idaho code sec 182201
illinoi ill stat ann ch 38 sec 16d1 16d7
indiana ind code 354314 and 354323
kansa kan stat sec 213755
kentucki ky rev stat ann 434840434860
iowa iowa code ann sec 716a
louisiana la rev stat 1473114735
main me rev stat ann tit 17a ch 18 sec 367 431433
maryland md code ann art 27 sec 146 crim law 2745 a 27145 27340
massachusett mass gen l ch 266 sec 30 33a 60a 120f
michigan mich comp law ann sec 752791797
minnesota minn stat ann sec 60987
mississippi miss code ann sec 97451
montana mont code ann 456310
nebraska neb rev stat 281341 1343
nevada nev rev stat 205473
new hampshir nh rev stat ann 63816
new jersei nj rev stat sec 2a 38a1 2c2023 and 5217b193
new mexico nm stat ann 30451 3016a1
new york ny penal law art 156
north carolina nc gen stat 14453
north dakota nd cent code sec 12106108
ohio ohio rev code ann 290101j m 2901 1i 290112 29120 1f lr t
oklahoma okla stat ann tit 21 sec 19521956
oregon or rev stat 164377
pennsylvania pa titl 18 chap 76
rhode island ri gen law sec 11521
south carolina sc code sec 161610
south dakota sd codifi law 4343b1
texa tex penal code sec 33013305
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2316 2011 fraud examin manual
utah utah code ann sec 766701 through 705
virginia va code ann sec 1821521
washington wash rev code 9a52110 120 130 rev code wash 926a100
west virginia w va code 613c1 through 613c21
wisconsin wi stat 94370
wyom wyo stat sec 63501 through 504
internet crime
at the current time there ar no feder law aim specif at fraud or other illeg
activ conduct over the internet mani of the exist law howev can be us to
prosecut internet fraud as well as more tradit fraud scheme the tabl below
summar how exist law appli to common crime perpetr over the internet
type of unlaw
conduct
exampl of potenti applic feder law
internet fraud
15 usc 45 52 unfair or decept act or practic fals advertis
15 usc 1644 credit card fraud
18 usc 1028 1029 1030 fraud in connect with identif
document and inform fraud in connect with access devic and
fraud in connect with comput
18 usc 1341 et seq mail wire and bank fraud
18 usc 1345 injunct against fraud
18 usc 1956 1957 monei launder
18 usc 1037 spam and phish
onlin child
pornographi child
lure and relat
activ
18 usc 2251 et seq sexual exploit and other abus of children
18 usc 2421 et seq transport for illeg sexual activ
internet sale of
prescript drug and
control substanc
15 usc 45 et seq unfair or decept act or practic fals advertis
18 usc 545 smuggl good into the unit state
18 usc 1341 et seq mail wire and bank fraud injunct against fraud
21 usc 301 et seq feder food drug and cosmet act
21 usc 822 829 841 863 951971 drug abus prevent and control
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2317
internet sale of
firearm
18 usc 921 et seq firearm
internet gambl
15 usc 3001 et seq interst horserac act
18 usc 1084 transmiss of wager inform
18 usc 1301 et seq lotteri
18 usc 1952 interst and foreign travel or transport in aid of
racket enterpris
18 usc 1953 interst transport of wager paraphernalia
18 usc 1955 prohibit of illeg gambl busi
28 usc 37013704 profession and amateur sport protect
internet sale of alcohol
18 usc 1261 et seq liquor traffic
27 usc 122 204 shipment into state for possess or sale in violat
of state law
onlin secur fraud 15 usc 77e 77j 77q 77x 78i 78j 78l 78o 78ff secur fraud
softwar piraci and
intellectu properti
theft
17 usc 506 crimin copyright infring
17 usc 1201 et seq copyright protect and manag system
18 usc 545 smuggl good into the unit state
18 usc 1341 1343 fraud and swindl
18 usc 1831 et seq protect of trade secret
18 usc 23182320 traffick in counterfeit label for phonorecord
copi of comput program or comput program document or
packag and copi of motion pictur or other audio visual work
canspam act 18 usc 1037
the canspam act or the control the assault of nonsolicit pornographi and
market act attempt to reduc the amount of unsolicit commerci email which is
also known as spam by establish nation standard for send email solicit to
reduc the amount of spam the canspam act provid sever provis that appli to
individu or compani send spam more specif the act prohibit sever
decept andor fraudul practic commonli us in spam includ the prohibit of
us decept subject line us decept header inform and requir sender
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2318 2011 fraud examin manual
identif penalti under the canspam act includ punish by a fine andor
imprison for not more than five year
in addit to prosecut decept spam feder prosecutor have us the canspam act
to prosecut individu engag in phish phish occur when a sender dupe
individu or busi into provid sensit data by fals claim to be from an
actual busi bank isp or other entiti with whom the victim doe busi
mail and wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
as note abov a comput mai be the tool us to commit tradit crime includ
mail and wire fraud due to the broad reach of the mail and wire fraud statut prosecutor
mai us these tradit crimin statut to prosecut comput fraud in basic term the
law prohibit the us of mail or wire includ the internet in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti in fact sever case have held that the
feder mail and wire fraud statu appli to comput fraud
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 govern the illeg intercept of electron
commun and the unauthor access of electron store data
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act which govern the intercept of
electron commun the store commun act which cover access to store
commun and record and the pen regist act which regul pen regist and
trap and trace devic thi section focus on the wiretap act and the store
commun act
the wiretap act 18 usc 25102521
in respons to an increas in privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act which
prohibit anyon from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire oral or
electron commun under the ecpa electron commun ar defin as ani
transfer of sign signal write imag sound data or intellig of ani natur
transmit in whole or in part by a wire radio electromagnet photoelectron or photo
optic system that affect interst or foreign commerc
focus on it applic to comput fraud section 2511 prohibit covert spy on
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2319
voic and data commun extend protect from eavesdrop on mail and
telephon commun to includ digit data commun such as email and
remot comput it doe not govern store commun but becaus most court
agre that intercept doe not occur when an individu obtain access to an electron
store copi of the commun the wiretap act is often inadequ to protect electron
commun sent over the internet for exampl the wiretap act is often unsuccess
in combat spywar although spywar main function is to make unauthor
intercept of electron commun spywar develop typic design spywar to
evad the wiretap act reach by engin the softwar to record electron inform
while it is temporarili store befor after or dure transmiss
the wiretap act is discuss in more detail in the individu right chapter below
the store commun act 18 usc 2701
as part of the ecpa congress enact the store commun act sca to protect
store electron commun such as email and voicemail by prohibit the
unauthor access of such commun that ar in storag more specif the sca
prohibit unlaw access to a facil which provid an electron commun servic
and then obtain alter or prevent author access to a wire or electron
commun while it is electron store in such a system an electron
commun fall under the sca onc a system receiv and store it
the sca is discuss in more detail in the individu right chapter below
identifi and protect trade secret
in addit to recogn ownership right in materi possess us law grant right in
intang properti intellectu properti right creat incent for individu compani
and investor to alloc the requisit resourc to research develop and market origin
technolog and creativ work feder law protect intellectu properti in four specif
area copyright trademark patent and trade ecret trade secret will be the focu of thi
section
protect against trade secret theft also known as econom and corpor espionag
involv implement and increas control as well as establish defens to trade
secret intrus trade secret includ but ar not limit to custom list vendor
contract blueprint and construct plan bid system comput program test data
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2320 2011 fraud examin manual
price inform recip market plan manufactur process and busi form
essenti ani idea or inform that give it owner an advantag over it competitor
can be classifi as a trade secret as long as it gener meet the two criteria set forth
below
to qualifi as a trade secret inform must gener meet two criteria first it must
actual be a secret in other word a compani cannot sue an employe or competitor for
releas inform that wa alreadi well known and readili avail second
organ ar requir to take reason step to protect their trade secret from
disclosur trade secret protect for a piec of inform will not exist where the
inform ha been publicli disclos or where the organ that own the secret ha
not taken adequ step to protect it from disclosur
organ and individu can maintain legal protect over trade secret by take
reason step to keep all proprietari inform secret it is imper that plan ar
develop to reason guard trade secret from disclosur the us of nondisclosur and
noncompetit agreement can provid employ with legal recours against those who
misappropri proprietari inform
nondisclosur agreement typic stipul that all trade secret and other proprietari or
confidenti inform shall be kept confidenti without disclosur to anyon these
agreement should be sign at the outset and upon termin of employ
noncompetit agreement gener forbid a current employe from work for
compet compani within a certain period from termin mani state court void such
agreement as against public polici becaus thei limit futur employ of a person
those state that do allow noncompetit agreement requir the agreement to be part of
an otherwis valid employ agreement howev in case where an employe is hire at
will noncompetit agreement ar unenforc
congress ha recogn the sanctiti of trade secret in numer statut thi section will
provid an overview of the most relev legal instrument develop to combat thi form
of whitecollar crime specif thi section will examin the follow feder legisl
econom espionag act of 1996 18 usc 18311839
disclos govern trade secret 18 usc 1905
interst transport and receipt of stolen properti or good 18 usc 2314
mail or wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2321
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a
in addit thi section will examin the uniform trade secret act utsa
econom espionag act of 1996 18 usc 18311839
the econom espionag act of 1996 eea made the theft of trade secret a feder
crimin offens the depart of justic now ha sweep author to prosecut trade
secret theft whether it is in the unit state via the internet or outsid the unit state
section 1839 defin trade secret as ani secret pattern plan compil program
devic formula design prototyp method techniqu process procedur
program or code that have some independ ent econom valu and ar us to obtain an
econom advantag over competitor or custom furthermor the eea appli to
anyon who without author copi duplic download upload alter destroi
replic transmit deliv send mail commun or convei a trade secret
the eea outlaw two type of trade secret misappropri econom espionag and theft
of commerci trade secret section 1831 crimin the theft of a trade secret to benefit a
foreign govern instrument or agent section 1832 howev crimin the theft
of commerci trade secret to obtain an econom advantag both section ar examin in
more detail below
prosecutor can appli the eea to a wide varieti of misconduct becaus it crimin
attempt and conspiraci to violat the eea the same penalti appli to these offens
with increas penalti if the trade secret misappropri benefit a foreign govern
foreign instrument or a foreign agent
section 1834 of the eea allow crimin forfeitur to the unit state of 1 ani properti
constitut or deriv from the proce of violat of the act and 2 the forfeitur of
ani properti us or intend to be us in ani manner or part to commit or facilit a
violat of the act see 18 usc 1834 the crimin forfeitur provis enabl feder
prosecutor to dismantl entir internet network and seek crimin forfeitur of all the
comput printer and other devic us to commit or facilit the offens proscrib by
the act
the eea also author the attornei gener deputi attornei gener or assist attornei
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2322 2011 fraud examin manual
gener in the crimin divis of the justic depart to appli for a feder court order
author or approv the intercept of wire or oral commun by the fbi or
other feder agenc have respons for the investig of the offens these ar the
same investig tool avail in other feder crimin prosecut
the eea also appli to offens commit outsid the unit state if 1 the offend is
a citizen or perman resid alien of the unit state 2 if the corpor or other
organ wa incorpor or organ in the unit state or 3 an act in further
of the offens wa commit in the unit state see 18 usc 1837 these
extraterritori provis in the act will provid the justic depart with broad
author to prosecut the intern theft of trade secret and will prevent the will
evas of liabil for trade secret misappropri by us the internet or other mean to
transfer the trade secret inform outsid the unit state
moreov the eea author the attornei gener to commenc a civil action seek
injunct relief to prevent further disclosur of a trade secret by the defend or third
parti see 18 usc 1836 there is no requir in the act that crimin indict be
issu first therefor the justic depart mai commenc civil action for injunct
relief at ani stage of the investig in ani prosecut or other proceed under the act
the court is requir to issu protect order and to take such other action as be necessari
to preserv the confidenti of the trade secret consist with the feder rule of
crimin and civil procedur see 18 usc 1835
final violat under the eea mai implic other feder law includ
disclos govern trade secret 18 usc 1905
interst transport and receipt of stolen properti or good 18 usc 2314
mail or wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a
crimin copyright infring 17 usc 506 and 18 usc 2319
econom espionag 18 usc 1831
section 1831 of the eea is target at econom espionag conduct by or on behalf of
foreign govern or instrument in addit to the three gener element of an
espionag case that 1 the defend stole or with or without the author of the
owner obtain destroi or convei inform 2 the defend knew the
inform wa proprietari and 3 the inform wa in fact a trade secret there is a
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2323
fourth element that the govern must prove to successfulli prosecut under section
1831 the govern must show that the defend intend or knew that the offens
would benefit a foreign govern foreign instrument or foreign agent attempt and
conspiraci to commit these offens ar also punish under section 1831
the maximum punish under section 1831 is 15 year imprison and a fine of
500000 if the offens is commit by an organ the maximum fine is 10 million
theft of trade secret 18 usc 1832
section 1832 is concern with convent commerci theft and misappropri of trade
secret it princip cover domest crime in addit to three standard element of
espionag which were discuss abov a section 1832 action requir the govern to
prove the follow three addit element
that the accus intend to convert the trade secret to the econom benefit of
someon other than the right owner
that the accus intend to injur the owner of the trade secret and
that the trade secret wa relat to or includ in a product that is produc for or
place in interst or foreign commerc
as evidenc by the addit element the requir for prosecut under section
1832 ar somewhat stricter than under section 1831 for exampl section 1832 requir that
the defend have intend for someon to gain by the misappropri wherea section
1831 prosecut can succe even when the benefit of a theft ar noneconom
the maximum punish for an offens under section 1832 ar 10 year imprison a
fine or both if the offens is commit by an organ the fine can run as high as
5000000 attempt and conspiraci to commit the domest theft of trade secret ar also
punish under section 1832
order to preserv confidenti 18 usc 1835
trade secret theft victim often feel conflict about whether to report these crime to the
govern thei want punish but fear that their trade secret will be disclos dure
the trial process
congress address thi dilemma in section 1835 which give the govern procedur to
preserv the confidenti of trade secret throughout the trial section 1835 author the
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2324 2011 fraud examin manual
court to enter order and take action necessari and appropri to preserv the
confidenti of trade secret in addit section 1835 give the govern the right to
an interlocutori appeal from an order author a trade secret disclosur
construct with other law 18 usc 1838
section 1838 state that thi chapter shall not be constru to preempt or displac ani
other remedi whether civil or crimin provid by unit state feder state or to
affect the otherwis law disclosur of inform by ani govern employe under
section 552 of titl 5 commonli known as the freedom of inform act therefor
the eea doe not bar the govern from seek ani other remedi whether civil or
crimin
disclos govern trade secret 18 usc 1905
section 1905 of titl 18 of the us code make it a crime for a feder employe to disclos
confidenti govern inform includ trade secret
interst transport of stolen properti itsp 18 usc 2314
as note abov the interst transport of stolen properti itsp statut prohibit
the transport transmitt or transfer of fraudul receiv good ware
merchandis secur or monei in interst or foreign commerc when valu at 5000
or more prosecutor mai us the itsp to prosecut theft of commerci trade secret
proprietari inform or other type of intellectu properti in certain situat
gener if the stolen item in question qualifi as good ware or merchandis the court
agre that section 2314 appli when a defend steal a tangibl object that contain
intellectu properti
mail or wire fraud 18 usc 1341 1343
theft of a trade secret mai also be prosecut as mail or wire fraud as state earlier the
mail and wire fraud law prohibit the us of the mail or wire in further of a fraudul
scheme design to obtain monei or properti which often cover the misappropri of
confidenti and proprietari inform
comput fraud 18 usc 1030a
prosecutor mai also consid bring comput fraud charg in addit to or in lieu of eea
charg as previous discuss section 1030 of titl 18 of the us code commonli
known as the comput fraud and abus act provid crimin sanction and a civil action
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2325
for misappropri of trade secret store on protect comput ie comput us
by or whose us affect a financi institut or the us govern or us for interst
or foreign commerc
section 1030a includ seven type of crimin activ howev onli two section of the
act ar particularli relev to trade secret section 1030a2 make it illeg to access or
attempt to access a protect comput to obtain inform section 1030a4 make it
illeg to access or attempt to access a protect comput to commit fraud
the comput fraud and abus act provid both crimin and civil liabil crimin act
charg under the act ar punish by up to 20 year in prison a fine or both the act
also provid that ani person who suffer d amag or loss under the act mai maintain a
civil action against the violat to obtain compensatori damag and injunct relief or
other equit relief
the uniform trade secret act
the uniform trade secret act utsa wa promulg by the nation confer of
commission on uniform state law in 1979 the utsa is not a feder law but sever
state have adopt version of it in an effort to protect trade secret the utsa protect
against the theft of formula pattern compil program devic method
techniqu and process of inform
compani attempt to show that a competitor ha misappropri a trade secret under
the utsa must satisfi a twoprong test
it must be demonstr that the compani own a trade secret
the compani must prove that the defend us the trade secret in breach of an
agreement a confidenti relationship or duti or as a result of discoveri by improp
mean
for inform to qualifi as a trade secret under the utsa the owner of the inform
must show that
the inform deriv independ econom valu from it secreci
effort must have been taken to keep the inform secret the utsa doe not
requir the trade secret to have been us in busi
the inform doe not have to deriv actual independ valu from it secreci it is
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2326 2011 fraud examin manual
enough if there is potenti econom valu becaus of the inform be kept secret
thu for plan or innov that have not yet been put into effect by a compani the
utsa would still provid protect the second prong of the definit onc again
mandat that organ take reason step to guard their secret if inform is
not treat as a secret by it owner the organ cannot later seek protect under the utsa
the utsa defin a misappropri of a trade secret as either
the acquisit of a trade secret of anoth by a person who know or ha reason to
know that the trade secret wa acquir by improp mean
disclosur or us of a trade secret of anoth without express or impli consent by a
person who us improp mean to acquir knowledg of the trade secret or at the time
of disclosur or us knew or had reason to know that it wa a protect trade secret
the term improp mean includ such thing as theft briberi misrepresent breach of a
duti to maintain secreci or espionag through electron or other mean note that the
utsa not onli proscrib the steal of a trade secret but also the us of that trade secret
by those who know it wa stolen whether thei particip in the theft or not
becaus the utsa is not a feder law it ha fallen prei to certain difficulti first the fact
that the utsa wa adopt in differ version by differ state creat inconsist in
the interpret of it provis second the utsa is not a crimin statut the lack of
crimin sanction for violat of the utsa take some of the teeth out of it attempt to
deter the theft of trade secret these ar problem that congress sought to rectifi with the
passag of the econom espionag act
monei launder
there ar sever feder statut that appli to monei launder
the bank secreci act
the bank secreci act bsa which went into effect in 1970 wa the first major piec of
legisl aim at detect and prevent monei launder congress enact the bsa
to monitor financi transact and the act set forth a system of report and
recordkeep requir design to help track larg or unusu financi transact
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2327
the bsa which is enforc by the treasuri depart consist of two titl titl i
contain provis requir that financi institut and secur broker and dealer
keep extens record of the transact and account of their custom it is codifi in
titl 12 of the unit state code usc section 1829b and 19511959 the penalti for
failur to compli with these recordkeep requir ar sever ani insur depositori
institut and ani director offic or employe who willfulli or through gross neglig
violat ani regul can be subject to a 10000 civil penalti the statut further provid
that a separ violat occur for each dai the violat continu and at each offic branch
or place of busi at which the violat occur if a violat is commit in further
of a feloni crime crimin penalti can be impos of up to five year in prison andor a
fine of not more than 10000
titl ii of the bsa origin entitl currenc and foreign transact report act
requir bank financi institut which in clude casino secur broker and dealer
currenc exchang and other and in some case individu to report to the govern
certain transact titl ii is codifi at 31 usc 53115333 titl ii set forth civil
and crimin penalti for noncompli
titl 18 usc 195657 monei launder statut
in addit to the bsa congress enact section 1956 and 1957 of titl 18 which eman
from the antidrug abus act of 1986 to combat monei launder these complex
statut forbid monei launder in connect crimin activ includ but not limit to
narcot traffick
launder of monetari instrument 18 usc 1956
section 1956 address financi transact involv proce of crimin activ it
cover three type of monei launder which ar found in section 1956a1 1956a2
and 1956a3
section 1956a1 concern domest monei launder to establish an offens under
section 1956a1 the govern must establish that 1 the defend took part in a
financi transact 2 the defend knew that the properti involv in the transact
involv the proce of illeg activ 3 that the properti involv wa in fact the
proce of that illeg activ and 4 the defend knew that the transact wa design
in whole or in part to conceal or disguis the natur sourc locat ownership or control
of the illeg proce us v ruizcastro 92 f3d 1519 10th cir 1996
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2328 2011 fraud examin manual
individu who violat section 1956a1 mai be fine up to 500000 or twice the valu of
the monetari instrument or fund whichev is greater and imprison for up to 20 year
also asset acquir becaus of violat of thi provis ar subject to forfeitur by the
govern
section 1956a2 pertain to intern monei launder section 1956a2 prohibit
the transport transmiss or transfer of fund either into or out of the unit state
if the person know the fund ar the proce of unlaw activ and the transport
transmiss or transfer is done with the intent to promot the carri on of specifi
unlaw conduct is done to conceal the natu re locat sourc ownership or control of
the fund or is done to avoid report requir the penalti ar the same as those set
forth in section 1956a1
section 1956a3 prohibit a person from engag in financi transact involv
properti the person believ to be the proce of illeg activ thi is intend to cover
sting oper in which a suspect engag in monei launder activ with fund he
believ to be illeg deriv even though the fund ar actual suppli by govern
agent a person who violat thi provis can be imprison for up to 20 year andor
fine in accord with 18 usc 3571
properti qualifi as the proce of illeg activ if it is deriv from a specifi unlaw
activ which includ narcoticsrel transact transact relat to bankruptci
fraud briberi fals statement embezzl mail or wire fraud bank fraud
environment violat health care offens and a number of other crime
addition the usa patriot act of 2001 ad terror activ briberi of public
offici smuggl and export control violat to the list of unlaw activ that give
rise to violat of thi law
on mai 21 2009 presid obama sign into law the fraud enforc and recoveri
act of 2009 fera congress design fera to provid feder author addit
tool and resourc to prosecut fraudul financi practic among other measur the
legisl amend section 1956c to broaden the term proce to includ the gross receipt
of unlaw activ rather than mere it profit thi amend address a recent
suprem court rule that proce of crimin activ as treat by feder monei
launder statut includ onli the defend profit of such activ
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2329
engag in monetari transact in properti deriv from specifi unlaw activ 18 usc 1957
section 1957 make it illeg for ani person to knowingli engag or attempt to engag in a
monetari transact with crimin deriv properti greater than 10000 and is deriv
from specifi unlaw activ section 1957 appli in situat where the offens take
place in the unit state or within it special maritim or territori jurisdict or the
offens take place outsid the unit state and the defend is a us citizen or legal
alien violat of thi statut ar punish by fine up to 10 year of imprison and
forfeitur of illeg obtain gain
usa patriot act
congress extend the reach of the bsa and the monei launder statut when it enact
the usa patriot act in 2001 the act wa en act in respons to the tragedi of
septemb 11 2001 and reflect congression concern with the monei launder
activ of the terrorist who commit those attack
conspiraci
crimin conspiraci punish an agreement between two or more peopl to commit an
illeg act the crime of conspiraci is actual a separ crimin offens mean that the
underli crime eg bank fraud briberi secur fraud etc and the conspiraci to
commit the underli crime ar two separ offens the us code contain numer
specif conspiraci statut throughout it text and thi section examin some of the most
relev conspiraci statut
conspiraci to defraud the unit state 18 usc 371
although numer feder statut make conspiraci a crime the most commonli us
feder conspiraci statut is the gener conspiraci statut under section 371 of titl 18 us
code thi statut render it illeg to agre with anoth person or to take joint action to
defraud the govern section 371 provid
if two or more person conspir either to commit ani offens against the unit state or to
defraud the unit state or ani agenc thereof in ani manner or for ani purpos and on or
more of such person do ani act to effect the object of the conspiraci each shall be fine under
thi titl or imprison not more than five year or both
if howev the offens the commiss of which is the object of the conspiraci is a misdemeanor
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2330 2011 fraud examin manual
onli the punish for such conspiraci shall not exce the maximum punish provid
for such misdemeanor
the essenti element of thi statut ar
agreement to defraud
the defend knew the purpos of the agreement and intention join in the
agreement
that at least on of the conspir knowingli commit at least on overt act in
further of the conspiraci
under the first element the govern must prove that the defend reach an
agreement or understand with at least on other person the conspir must agre
about the precis fraud involv an agreement to defraud the govern without further
qualif about the natur of the fraud is not suffici to support a convict under
thi statut
the govern must also establish that the defend knew of the conspiraci exist
and it object the govern howev doe not have to establish that the defend
knew all the detail or object of the conspiraci and thei do not have to prove that the
defend knew the ident of all the particip in the conspiraci
final the purpos of the conspiraci need not be accomplish for a violat to occur but
at least on of the coconspir must have carri out at least on overt act in further
of the conspiraci the overt act need not be crimin and could be as innocu as make a
phone call or write a letter
conspiraci count ar favor by prosecutor becaus thei provid evidentiari and plead
advantag if a conspiraci is shown the act and statement of on coconspir mai be
admit into evid against all and each coconspir mai be convict for the
underli substant offens eg destroi govern properti commit by ani on
of it member
a corpor cannot conspir with on of it own employe to commit an offens becaus
the employe and employ ar legal view as on a corpor howev can conspir
with other busi entiti or third parti to violat the statut
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2331
the sherman antitrust act 15 usc 1 et seq
the sherman antitrust act is design to combat anticompetit practic that harm the
public by undermin econom growth specif the act prohibit competitor from
enter into ani agreement to restrain trade in interst commerc includ price fix
bid rig and bid rotat scheme
under the sherman antitrust act everi contract combin in the form of trust or
otherwis or conspiraci in restraint of trade or commerc among the sever state or with
foreign nation is declar to be illeg everi person who shall make ani contract or engag
in ani combin or conspiraci herebi declar to be illeg shall be deem guilti of a
feloni and on convict thereof shall be punish by fine not exceed 10 million if a
corpor or if ani other person 350000 or by imprison not exceed three year
or by both said punish in the discret of the court howev these maximum
sherman act penalti were increas in june 2004 for offens commit on or after june
22 2004 the maximum corpor fine is 100 million the maximum individu fine is 1
million and the maximum jail term is 10 year
the element of a crimin antitrust violat includ
an agreement or combin
of two or more entiti
that unduli restrain trade
in interst or foreign commerc
attempt and conspiraci to commit fraud 18 usc 1349
as previous note the sarbanesoxlei act ad a statut that allow prosecut of
attempt and conspiraci under the fraud statut in titl 18 thi appli to mail fraud
wire fraud secur fraud bank fraud and health care fraud
conspiraci to defraud feder govern with fals claim 18 usc 286
section 286 of titl 18 us code make it a crime for two or more person to agre or
conspir to defraud the unit state by obtain or aid in obtain payment or
allow of ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim ani person found guilti under thi
section mai be fine imprison not more than 10 year or both
under section 286 the govern must prove
the defend enter into an agreement to defraud the unit state by obtain or
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2332 2011 fraud examin manual
aid in obtain payment or allow of ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim
the defend knew or wa deliber ignor of the claim falsiti fictiti or
fraudul
the defend knew of the conspiraci intend to join and voluntarili particip in
the conspiraci
rico conspiraci 18 usc 1962d
section 1962d prohibit conspir to violat ani crimin provis under the racket
influenc and corrupt organ act rico unlik the gener conspiraci statut a
conspiraci under section 1962d doe not requir some overt act on the defend part
aid and abet 18 usc 2
the feder aid and abet statut provid that anyon who induc anoth to commit
an offens or who aid in it commiss mai himself be charg and convict of the
underli offens and subject to it penalti
obstruct of justic
the obstruct of justic statut punish effort to imped or obstruct the investig or
trial of other substant offens prosecutor usual ar pleas to discov such violat
becaus thei add a more sinist flavor to what might be colorless whitecollar charg and
help to prove underli crimin intent in mani instanc these charg draw the stiffest
penalti
there ar sever obstruct statut in the feder code includ 18 usc 1503
influenc or injur offic or juror gener 1504 influenc a juror through a
write 1506 theft or alter of a record or process 1509 obstruct relat to court
order 1512 tamper with a wit victim or an inform 1516 obstruct of a
feder audit and 1517 obstruct the examin of a financi institut
in addit the sarbanesoxlei act of 2002 set forth increasingli import obstruct of
justic provis concern fraud examin the act amend section 1512 to includ
document destruct by the accus and institut two of the most signific crimin
statut address obstruct of justic 18 usc 1519 and 18 usc 1520
an examin of everi obstruct statut howev is beyond the scope of thi text
therefor thi section focus on the obstruct statut most relev to fraud
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2333
examin includ section 1516 section 1517 and those enact or amend by the
sarbanesoxlei act
obstruct of feder audit 18 usc 1516
thi statut origin pass in 1988 make it a feloni for anyon to influenc obstruct or
imped a feder auditor in the perform of hi offici duti although the influenc
obstruct or imped languag emploi by the statut is broad the govern rare
emploi thi statut
obstruct examin of financi institut 18 usc 1517
a similar statut pass in 1990 make it a feloni to obstruct the examin of a financi
institut the statut provid
whoever corruptli obstruct or attempt to obst ruct ani examin of a financi institut
by an agenc of the unit state with jurisdict to conduct an examin of such financi
institut shall be fine under thi titl imprison not more than 5 year or both
sarbanesoxlei act of 2002
document destruct by the accus 18 usc 1512c
sarbanesoxlei amend section 1512 of the us code to make it a crimin offens to
corruptli alter destroi mutil or conceal a record or document with the intent to impair
it integr or us in an offici proceed or to otherwis obstruct influenc or imped
ani offici proceed or attempt to do so until congress amend section 1512 it wa
more narrowli focus on wit tamper violat of thi section ar punish by
fine up to 250000 and imprison for up to 20 year
destruct alter or falsif of record in feder investig and bankruptci 18 usc 1519
follow the enron scandal section 1519 of titl 18 us code wa ad to narrow the
scope of when destruct under a document retent polici must ceas unlik section
1512c which us the word corruptli section 1519 us the word knowingli
destruct of corpor audit record 18 usc 1520
section 802 of the sarbanesoxlei act ad a statut 18 usc 1520 to govern the
destruct of corpor audit record section 1520 make it a crime for account to
knowingli and willfulli fail to maintain certain audit record and work paper for five year
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2334 2011 fraud examin manual
from the end of the fiscal period in which the audit wa conclud in addit to provid
for prosecut of those who obstruct justic the statut is design to ensur that
import financi evid is maintain so that govern offici regul and
victim can determin whether a violat occur
perjuri
perjuri 18 usc 1621 and 1623 is an intent fals statement given under oath on a
materi point under a relat feder statut 18 usc 1623 the govern mai alleg
and prove perjuri if the defend make two irreconcil contradictori statement
without prove which is true and which is fals fals and fraudul statement oral or
in write made to a govern agenc on a materi matter also mai be punish as a
feloni under a varieti of statut even if not given under oath
fine under titl 18
sever section of titl 18 do not provid a specifi maximum fine in the section set
forth the offens instead these crimin statut usual provid that the offend mai be
fine under thi titl unless a section set fo rth anoth amount the section below should
be us to determin the maximum sentenc avail
sentenc of fine 18 usc 3571
in gener the statutori provis govern a sentenc of a fine ar set forth in section
3571 it specifi the maximum fine that court can impos against individu and
organ section 3571 provid
a in gener a defend who ha been found guilti of an offens mai be sentenc to pai a
fine
b fine for individu except as provid in subsect e of thi section an individu
who ha been found guilti of an offens mai be fine not more than the greatest of
1 the amount specifi in the law set forth the offens
2 the applic amount under subsect d of thi section
3 for a feloni not more than 250000
4 for a misdemeanor result in death not more than 250000
5 for a class a misdemeanor that doe not result in death not more than 100000
6 for a class b or c misdemeanor that doe not result in death not more than 5000
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2335
or
7 for an infract not more than 5000
c fine for organ except as provid in subsect e of thi section an
organ that ha been found guilti of an offens mai be fine not more than the
greatest of
1 the amount specifi in the law set forth the offens
2 the applic amount under subsect d of thi section
3 for a feloni not more than 500000
4 for a misdemeanor result in death not more than 500000
5 for a class a misdemeanor that doe not result in death not more than 200000
6 for a class b or c misdemeanor that doe not result in death not more than
10000 and
7 for an infract not more than 10000
d altern fine base on gain or loss if ani person deriv pecuniari gain from the
offens or if the offens result in pecuniari loss to a person other than the defend the
defend mai be fine not more than the greater of twice the gross gain or twice the gross
loss unless imposit of a fine under thi subsect would unduli complic or prolong
the sentenc process
e special rule for lower fine specifi in substant provi ion if a law set forth an
offens specifi no fine or a fine that is lower than the fine otherwis applic under thi
section and such law by specif refer exempt the offens from the applic of the
fine otherwis applic under thi section the defend mai not be fine more than the
amount specifi in the law set forth the offens
imposit of a sentenc of fine and relat matter 18 usc 3572
section 3572 set forth the factor court should consid in impos fine it provid
a factor to be consid in determin whether to impos a fine and the amount time
for payment and method of payment of a fine the court shall consid in addit to the
factor set forth in section 3553a
1 the defend incom earn capac and financi resourc
2 the burden that the fine will impos upon the defend ani person who is financi
depend on the defend or ani other person includ a govern that would
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2336 2011 fraud examin manual
be respons for the welfar of ani person financi depend on the defend
rel to the burden that altern punish would impos
3 ani pecuniari loss inflict upon other as a result of the offens
4 whether restitut is order or made and the amount of such restitut
5 the need to depriv the defend of illeg obtain gain from the offens
6 the expect cost to the govern of ani imprison supervis releas or
probat compon of the sentenc
7 whether the defend can pass on to consum or other person the expens of the
fine and
8 if the defend is an organ the size of the organ and ani measur taken
by the organ to disciplin ani offic director employe or agent of the
organ respons for the offens and to prevent a recurr of such an offens
b fine not to impair abil to make restitut if as a result of a convict the defend
ha the oblig to make restitut to a victim of the offens the court shall impos a fine
or other monetari penalti onli to the extent that such fine or penalti will not impair the
abil of the defend to make restitut
c effect of final of judgment notwithstand the fact that a sentenc to pai a fine can
subsequ be
1 modifi or remit under section 3573
2 correct under rule 35 of the feder rule of crimin procedur and section 3742
or
3 appeal and modifi under section 3742
a judgment that includ such a sentenc is a final judgment for all other purpos
d time method of payment and relat item
1 a person sentenc to pai a fine or other monetari penalti includ restitut shall
make such payment immedi unless in the interest of justic the court provid for
payment on a date certain or in instal if the court provid for payment in
instal the instal shall be in equal monthli payment over the period
provid by the court unless the court establish anoth schedul
2 if the judgment or in the case of a restitut order the order permit other than
immedi payment the length of time over which schedul payment will be made
shall be set by the court but shall be the shortest time in which full payment can
reason be made
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2337
3 a judgment for a fine which permit payment in instal shall includ a
requir that the defend will notifi the court of ani materi chang in the
defend econom circumst that might affect the defend abil to pai the
fine upon receipt of such notic the court mai on it own motion or the motion of ani
parti adjust the payment schedul or requir immedi payment in full as the
interest of justic requir
e altern sentenc preclud at the time a defend is sentenc to pai a fine the court
mai not impos an altern sentenc to be carri out if the fine is not paid
f respons for payment of monetari oblig relat to organ if a sentenc
includ a fine special assess restitut or other monetari oblig includ
interest with respect to an organ each individu author to make disburs
for the organ ha a duti to pai the oblig from asset of the organ if such
an oblig is impos on a director offic sharehold employe or agent of an
organ payment mai not be made di rectli or indirectli from asset of the
organ unless the court find that such payment is expressli permiss under
applic state law
g secur for stai fine if a sentenc impos a fine is stai the court shall absent
except circumst as determin by the court
1 requir the defend to deposit in the registri of the district court ani amount of the
fine that is due
2 requir the defend to provid a bond or other secur to ensur payment of the fine
or
3 restrain the defend from transfer or dissip asset
h delinqu a fine or payment of restitut ion is delinqu if a payment is more than 30
dai late
i default a fine or payment of restitut is in default if a payment is delinqu for more
than 90 dai notwithstand ani instal schedul when a fine or payment of
restitut is in default the entir amount of the fine or restitut is due within 30 dai
after notif of the default subject to the provis of section 3613a
mandatori victim restitut act of 1996 18 usc 3663a
the mandatori victim restitut act mvra expand the scope of mandatori
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2338 2011 fraud examin manual
restitut on the feder level it requir feder court to order restitut for each
defend without consider of the defend econom circumst who ha been
convict or plead guilti to charg for certain categori of offens includ fraud under
titl 18 us code thu victim corpor mai be entitl to victim compens just
like natur person
recent court have held that the mvra third parti have the right to recov not onli
the loss suffer as a result of the wrongdo but also the cost associ with
investig the offens specif the second circuit and the ninth circuit agre that
section 3663ab4 of the mvra provid for restitut of attornei fee and certain outofpocket
investig expens a victim compani incur as part of an intern investig
of suspect fraud
qui tam suit and the civil fals claim act
a qui tam suit is on in which a privat individu sue on behalf of the govern to
recov damag for crimin or fraudul action commit against the govern it is a
civil not a crimin suit most qui tam action ar brought under the fals claim act 31
usc 3729 et seq thi statut provid in part that anyon who commit the follow
act is liabl to the govern for three time the amount of damag it sustain plu a civil
penalti of 5000 to 10000 per fals claim
knowingli present or caus to be present a fals or fraudul claim for payment or
approv 3729a1
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to get
a fals or fraudul claim paid or approv 3729a2
conspir to defraud the govern by get a fals or fraudul claim allow or
paid 3729a3
make or deliv a document certifi receipt of properti to be us by the
govern without complet know that the inform on the receipt is true
3729a5
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to
conceal avoid or decreas an oblig to pai or transmit monei or properti to the
govern 3729a7
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2339
most qui tam action seek to recov damag and statutori penalti for fals claim made
to the govern by govern contractor such as defens contractor and health care
provid
sinc 1986 when congress substanti strengthen the civil fals claim act the unit
state ha secur more than 24 billion in settlement and judgment 24 billion in the
2009 fiscal year alon
file an action
if an individu ha knowledg that a fals claim wa submit to the govern the
individu should first retain an attornei the attornei will then draft a complaint and a
disclosur statement the whistleblow can file the complaint and the disclosur statement
under seal in us district court and copi ar serv upon the depart of justic
after the file of the complaint the justic depart ha 60 dai to investig the
alleg and determin whether it will join the lawsuit if the depart decid not to
particip in the lawsuit the individu ha the right to continu to pursu the claim on
behalf of the unit state if the depart doe not particip the whistleblow will
receiv a higher portion of ani recoveri receiv
if the justic depart elect to join the lawsuit it ha the primari respons for
prosecut the case and can limit the whistleblow particip in the action if the
govern successfulli prosecut the suit the privat parti mai recov from 1525
percent of the recoveri plu reason attornei fee and cost if the govern doe
not take over the prosecut and the qui tam plaintiff successfulli win the case on hi
own the court mai award the plaintiff 2530 percent of the recoveri plu reason
attornei fee and cost the judg normal determin the percentag
who can bring a qui tam action
the fals claim act provid that ani person can file a qui tam action as long as thei
have direct and independ knowledg of the fraud and such knowledg wa not obtain
from a public disclosur the definit of person includ not onli individu but also
busi and state or local govern entiti the most common plaintiff in qui tam
action ar employe of govern contractor health care employe and employe of
local state or feder govern
the us suprem court reaffirm thi definit in an opinion hand down mai 22
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2340 2011 fraud examin manual
2000 in the case of vermont agenc of natur resourc v us ex rel steven 120 sct 1858
the court resolv a conflict among some of the court of appeal by state firmli that
privat citizen do have the right to sue under the fals claim act howev the court also
held that state and state agenc ar not subject to liabil under the fals claim act
therefor if a state or state agenc submit fals claim to the feder govern thei
cannot be su by a privat individu under the provis of the fals claim act the
court did not address the issu of whether the us govern could file suit against a state
under the fca
the requir that a person knowledg of the fraud wa not obtain from a public
disclosur doe howev have on except even if base on public disclosur a qui tam
suit mai proce if the plaintiff is an origin sourc of the inform which requir the
plaintiff to have direct and independ knowledg of the inform on which the
alleg ar base and have voluntarili provid the inform to the govern
befor file a suit which is base on the inform
at the present time a controversi still exist over whether feder employe can file qui tam
action under the fals claim act when knowledg of the fraud wa obtain through their
offici duti at least two feder circuit court that have address the issu have
conclud that employe who ar requir and paid by the govern to disclos fraud
cannot bring qui tam action sinc their knowledg of fraud wa not obtain independ
in contrast two feder circuit have held that feder employe mai bring a qui tam suit
even if the action is base on inform obtain dure the cours of their employ
thu feder employe mai be prohibit from file qui tam action particularli if
detect fraud is part of their job duti
protect for whistleblow
mani whistleblow ar employe of the govern contractor on which thei ar
blow the whistl obvious employe might be reluct to report their employ to the
govern for fear of retali to address thi concern congress provid substanti
protect to whistleblow titl 31 usc section 3730h prohibit an employ from
take ani advers action includ discharg demot or harass against an
employe becaus of law act done by the employe on behalf of the employe or other
in further of an action under thi section includ the investig or initi of
testimoni for or assist in an action file or to be file under thi section
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2341
if an employ take advers action against the employe the employe can seek relief
against the employ includ reinstat at the same senior statu an award of two
time the employe back pai plu interest and ani other special damag requir to make
the employe whole the employe also can receiv reimburs for all the cost of the
litig includ attornei fee
although these provis provid necessari and justifi protect for employe in
some case thei have the unintend effect of prevent an employ from fire or take
ani other action against a whistleblow even if there is adequ caus employ often ar
unwil to implement ani neg employ decis no matter how justifi against
a whistleblow for fear that the employe will add a claim of retali to the suit
the fraud enforc and recoveri act fera which wa sign into law on mai 20
2009 enhanc the whistleblow protect under the fals claim act by make these
retali claim avail to govern contractor and agent
feder whistleblow statut
there ar numer feder law protect whistleblow or employe from retali or
illeg treatment thi section organ those whistleblow protect law which ar more
applic to cfe under specif industri and variou area of law even though everi
state ha some form of antiretali legisl protect whistleblow thi discuss
will primarili focu on feder law therefor befor take action under ani
whistleblowerantiretali law a fraud examin is alwai well advis to consult an
attornei for the law of a specif jurisdict
in focus on feder whistleblowerantiretali law that ar more applic to cfe
thi discuss exclud protect law concern asbesto aviat environment and
nuclear law feder grant maritim law migrant worker mine pipelin safeti railroad
and transport and ship in addit thi section organ the applic law under
the follow head
the sarbanesoxlei act
the whistleblow protect act
bank and financi institut
civil right act of 1871
feder govern contract
employe and member of the arm forc
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2342 2011 fraud examin manual
the sarbanesoxlei act
although the sarbanesoxlei act pass in 2002 is primarili an account reform statut
most peopl do not realiz that it made some extrem signific chang to the
whistleblow law
civil liabil for report of secur fraud 18 usc 1514a
sarbanesoxlei section 806 creat 18 usc 1514a a statut that creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 1514a make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud howev the statut requir that the employe must report
the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a member of
congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also protect against
retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a proceed file
or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect not onli cover retaliatori act by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
to assert a section 806 retali claim an employe must file a complaint with either the
secretari of labor or the occup safeti and health administr osha area
director within 90 dai of the alleg retaliatori action which gener occur when the
complain receiv notic of the advers action the act further provid that if a final
decis ha not been issu within 180 dai of the complaint file and there is no show
that the delai is due to the claimant bad faith the complain parti mai bring a privat
claim in an appropri feder district court
whether a complain 806 claim is heard through the administr channel or by a
district court the element of proof ar the same the complain must prove by a
preponder of the evid that 1 the employe engag in a protect activ or
conduct 2 the employ knew that the employe engag in protect activ 3 the
employe suffer an unfavor person action and 4 the protect activ wa a
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2343
contribut factor in the unfavor person action howev even if the complain
prove each of these element the employ mai avoid liabil by demonstr by clear
and convinc evid that it would have taken the same unfavor personnel action
even in the absenc of such protect activ
if a public compani is found to have violat section 1514a the act provid for an award
of compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti includ
reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag includ
litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction for report to law enforc 18 usc 1513
sarbanesoxlei section 1107 also amend section 1513 of titl 18 us code to make it a
crime to knowingli with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for
provid truth inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani
feder offens not just secur fraud thi protect is onli trigger howev when
inform is provid to a law enforc offic
violat of section 1513 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to 10 year in
prison for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to 500000
the whistleblow protect act 5 usc 12111215 12181219 12211222 7703
two piec of us legisl the civil servic reform act of 1978 and the whistleblow
protect act of 1989 defin the charact of whistleblow protect for feder
employe the civil servic reform act protect feder employe who disclos
inform about the govern misconduct or wast in 1989 the whistleblow
protect act wpa strengthen the protect provid in the civil reform act to
protect feder employe from workplac retali when disclos illeg or improp
govern activ specif the act prevent a feder agenc from take ani advers
personnel action against a civil servant w ho ha report wrongdo by the agenc
to receiv protect under the wpa employe must first file a complaint with the us
offic of special counselor osc an independ feder investig and prosecutori
agenc that investig whistleblow complaint there is no statut of limit for
initi file a complaint with the osc in addit the wpa provid feder employe
an independ right of action howev thi right is onli avail if the osc ha close the
matter at issu or ha not notifi the employe within 120 dai that it will pursu correct
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2344 2011 fraud examin manual
action thi right of action which is file with the merit system protect board mspb
must be file within 60 dai of an advers osc decis appeal under the wpa fall under
the us court of appeal for the feder circuit exclus jurisdict remedi that mai
be award to employe under the wpa includ reinstat back pai and attornei
fee
but it is import to note that there ar sever circumst that do not afford employe
protect under the wpa for exampl the wpa doe not protect employe who make
disclosur dure the cours of perform their job duti in addit employe cannot
claim protect under the wpa if thei make disclosur of wrongdo directli to the
wrongdoer or if thei make disclosur of publicli known inform
bank and financi institut
in 1989 congress pass three law that contain antiretali provis to protect
both feder and privat sector employe within the bank system the three primari law
cover the bank sector ar contain within titl 31 of the us code the feder
credit union act and the financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act
monetari transact 31 usc 5328
titl 31 of the us code outlin the role of monei and financ in the us code section
5328 contain an antiretali provis prohibit financi and nondepositori financi
institut from discharg or otherwis discrimin against ani employe who provid
inform to the secretari of the treasuri the attornei gener or ani feder supervisori
agenc about possibl violat of titl 31 or it regul or of specif antimonei
launder law and transact by unlicens monei transmit busi to bring a
claim under section 5328 an individu should file a civil action in feder court within two
year of the retali if an employe bring a success claim court mai grant relief
includ reinstat compensatori damag and other appropri action to remedi
ani past discrimin
feder credit union act 12 usc 1790b
the feder credit union act fcua establish the feder credit union system and
provid for the supervis of feder credit union the fcua contain antiretali
and antidiscrimin provis that protect credit union and nation credit union
administr employe who provid inform to a govern bodi about possibl
legal violat by credit union or by the director offic or employe of credit union
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2345
to bring an antiretali claim under the fcua an employe should file a civil action in
feder court within two year of the retali howev when initi such action the
employe must also file a copi of the complaint with the nation credit union
administr board if success employe ar entitl to reinstat compensatori
damag and other appropri action to remedi ani past discrimin
financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act of 1989 12 usc 1831j
follow the save and loan crisi of the 1980 congress pass the financi institut
reform recoveri and enforc act firrea to enhanc the safeti of save
institut among other thing firrea provid antiretali protect for
employe of depositori institut and feder bank firrea protect such employe
from discharg or discriminatori action with respect to compens term condit or
privileg of employ if the employe report certain conduct includ possibl
violat of ani law or regul gross mismanag gross wast of fund abus of
author or a substanti or specif danger to public health to a regulatori agenc bank or
the attornei gener to file an antiretali claim under firrea an employe should file
a civil action in feder court within two year of the retali
if success in bring an antiretali claim employe ar entitl to reinstat
compensatori damag and other appropri action to remedi ani past discrimin
court have also held that in appropri case punit damag ar permit
there ar also a number of statut that provid protect to employe who expos
violat of environment law the provis of these act ar substanti similar to the
antiretali provis under firrea thei includ the solid wast dispos act the
water pollut control act the toxic substanc control act the safe water drink
act and the clean air act
civil right act of 1871
civil right ar right that the us govern ha guarante and protect although the
civil right act refer to sever feder statut that allow individu whose civil right
have been violat to sue their violat thi section will examin the antiretali
protect under section 1983 of titl 42 us code
where state action is involv a whistleblow mai be abl to bring a claim under section
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2346 2011 fraud examin manual
1983 which allow individu to bring a claim against state actor act under color of
state or local law alleg a deprav of civil right guarante by the us constitut or
feder law section 1983 action mai be brought in either feder or state court state also
have jurisdict to hear section 1983 case howev if the plaintiff doe bring suit in state
court the defend ha the right to remov the case to feder court in a relat matter the
statut of limit for claim brought under section 1983 is select from the law of the
forum state
damag under section 1983 ar gener determin accord to damag award in
common law tort action therefor the damag that court mai award under section 1983
includ actual or compensatori damag nomin damag and punit damag
gener section 1983 claim brought by public employe concern whistleblow
protect alleg retali in violat of the first amend which provid
whistleblow protect for public employe that comment on matter of public concern
that trump an employ interest in an effici workplac howev in garcetti v ceballo
547 us 410 2006 the suprem court limit the extent of first amend
whistleblow protect for govern employe rule that there is no protect for
govern employe that make disclosur of wrongdo while in the cours of their
normal job duti
feder govern contract
employe of defens contractor 10 usc 2409
section 2409 of titl 10 u s code provid a measur of protect to employe of
defens contractor who report violat of law or regul relat to defens
contract under section 2409 an employe of a contractor mai not be discharg demot
or discrimin against for report violat of law relat to a contract award by the
head of certain feder agenc ie depart of defens or depart of the armi a
person mai submit a complaint to the inspector gener ig of the contract agenc if
an employe doe not receiv relief through the igag head rout which is gener
requir within 180 dai the employe mai bring a claim in feder court section 2409 doe
not contain ani statut of limit and under a success section 2409 claim employe
ar entitl to reinstat compensatori damag includ back pai and all cost and
expens includ attornei fee reason incur by the employe in bring the
complaint
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2347
fals claim act 31 usc 37293732
to counteract fraudul bill turn in to the feder govern the fals claim act
fca allow privat individu on behalf of the feder govern to bring claim
against feder contractor for commit fraud against the govern the fca contain
an antiretali provis under titl 31 usc section 3730h which prohibit an
employ from take ani advers action includ discharg demot or harass
against an employe becaus of law act done by the employe on behalf of the
employe or other in further of an action under thi section includ the investig
or initi of testimoni for or assist in an action file or to be file under thi
section feder court have jurisdict for section 3730h claim and sinc section
3730h doe not contain ani statut of limit court gener borrow the most close
analog state limit period which begin toll when the caus of action accru
if an employ take advers action against the employe the employe can seek relief
against the employ includ reinstat at the same senior statu an award of two
time the employe back pai plu interest and ani other special damag requir to make
the employe whole the employe also can receiv reimburs for all the cost of the
litig includ attornei fee
the fraud enforc and recoveri act fera a recent enact law design to
combat fraud make signific chang to the fals claim act among other signific
chang fera expand the antiretali protect under the fals claim act by
make these retali claim avail to govern contractor and agent
contractor employe of civilian agenc 41 usc 265
section 265a of titl 41 us code provid whistleblow protect for employe of
civilian contractor with feder agenc by prohibit govern contractor from
discharg or otherwis retali against an employe for report employ contract
violat to a member of congress or an author offici of an execut agenc or the
depart of justic section 265b provid that such complaint ar to be file with the
inspector gener of the execut agenc or if the agenc doe not have an inspector
gener to the offici design by the head of the execut agenc howev the statut
doe not includ ani right to privat action for individu who believ thei have been
aggriev and in fact indic that no privat right exist under the section
under thi law an employe who bring a success claim is entitl to reinstat and
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2348 2011 fraud examin manual
compensatori damag includ back pai addition section 265 permit ani aggriev
parti to appeal the agenc head order to the appropri unit state court of appeal
within 60 dai
major fraud act 18 usc 1031
congress enact the major fraud act to provid feder prosecutor with an addit
crimin statut that target major procur fraud commit against the unit state
the act contain a whistleblow protect claus in section 1031h provid that ani
individu who is discharg demot harass or otherwis mistreat by their employ
as a result of the individu cooper in the prosecut of offens under the act mai
obtain reinstat two time the amount of back pai due and other damag includ
litig cost and attornei fee there is no feder statut of limit expressli
applic to a feder caus of action under section 1031h and in such instanc court
gener appli the most close analog statut of limit under state law section
1031g1 of the major fraud act author the attornei gener to pai up to 250000 in
certain circumst for inform regard possibl prosecut under thi section
employe and member of the arm forc
nonappropri fund employe 10 usc 1587
section 1587 of titl 10 us code prohibit person subject to thi regul from take
retaliatori action against a civilian employe paid from nonappropri fund of the
arm forc for disclos inform of a violat or mismanag a gross wast of
fund an abus of author or a substanti and specif danger to public health or safeti
employe who believ thei were subject to retaliatori action should file their section 1587
complaint with the inspector gener of the depart of defens ig dod which will
then determin whether there is suffici evid to warrant an investig if
investig is warrant the ig dod conduct the investig of repris alleg
upon complet the investig the ig dod report it find conclus and
recommend to the director of administr and manag who is respons
for adjud repris complaint and direct appropri correct action
militari whistleblow protect act of 1989 10 usc 1034
the militari whistleblow protect act which provid whistleblow protect for
member of the arm forc prohibit ani individu from retali against a servic
member for make or prepar commun concern illeg conduct to certain
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2349
statutorili defin recipi to receiv protect under section 1034 servic member
should submit a complaint to the depart of defens inspector gener or to the
depart of the armi inspector gener within 60 dai of learn of the advers action
a servic member who bring a success claim is entitl to administr remedi onli
there is no privat right of action under section 1034
state statut
everi state ha some form of legisl protect whistleblow mani ar veri specif as
to the manner with which a report must be file as well as the particular agenc that must
receiv the report a particular state also mai requir that the first report made by an
employe be direct to the employ under the notion that the employ be given an
opportun to correct the circumst that give rise to a potenti violat
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2401
individu right dure examin
employe involv in investig of suspect fraud have certain right and oblig
whether the employe is mere a bystand to the fraud who mai have some inform
relev to the investig or is the person actual suspect of commit the fraud
mani of these right and oblig howev ar not perfectli clear and thei typic vari
from case to case gener depend on the employe contractu right applic law
and busi polici therefor fraud examin conduct investig into suspect
misconduct must be flexibl enough to adapt quickli to the uniqu situat thei
encount
employe duti to cooper
a duti to cooper exit in everi employeremploye relationship some state have
statut defin the scope of thi duti while in other the duti is found to be impli from
the basic natur of the employ relationship for instanc california labor code section
2856 state that an employe shall substanti compli with all direct of hi employ
concern the servic on which he is engag unless complianc is imposs unlaw
or would impos unreason burden on the employe
the duti to cooper extend to workplac investig therefor employe have a duti
to cooper dure an intern investig as long as what is request from them is
reason
what is reason will be determin by the fact and circumst of the particular case
and by the duti for which the employe wa hire for exampl if inventori item were
miss it would probabl be reason to request that a warehous supervisor review
inventori record becaus thi fall within the scope of hi work duti it might not be
reason to ask the same supervisor to review detail tape from the compani cash
regist it almost certainli would not be reason to ask the warehous supervisor to let
compani investig search hi person resid
the issu of whether an employe ha a duti to cooper often come up when
investig seek to interview employe about suspect workplac misconduct in gener
interview should be consid reason if the interview address matter within the
scope of the employe action or duti
individu right dure examin law
2402 2011 fraud examin manual
employe right dure the investig
while the employe ha a duti to cooper the employe also ha certain other right that
defin the scope of that duti employe right howev vari from case to case gener
depend on the employe contractu right applic feder and state statut and
constitut protect thu befor begin ani fraud examin it is import for
the fraud examin to determin the employe right
contractu right
an employe mai have contractu right that limit the abil of the employ to compel full
cooper in a fraud examin for exampl if the employe is a member of a union
the union contract or collect bargain agreement might contain certain restrict on
the compani investigatori procedur for instanc the compani might be requir to
notifi the union befor the interview and the employe mai have the right to have a union
repres present see nlrb v weingarten inc 420 us 251 1975 other employe
might have a written employ agreement which might contain provis concern
the employe right dure an investig
other employe might have a written employ agreement which mai contain
provis concern the employe right dure an investig in addit mani
court have held that compani polici employe manual and past practic can creat
impli contractu relationship between the employ and the employe therefor if
the compani deviat from these histor practic the target of the investig mai
claim that thei were singl out and investig differ than other in similar
circumst
whistleblow
feder law and mani state law provid protect to employe who report improp or
illeg act to govern author most of these law protect the employe from ani
advers employ action or retaliatori action from the employ for more inform
on whistleblow law see the feder whistleblow statut section in the the law
relat to fraud part 2 chapter abov
employe constitut right
the unit state constitut protect individu from abus of government power and
sever constitut provis can come into plai in the cours of a fraud investig
the fourth amend to the us constitut prohibit unreason search and
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2403
seizur the fifth amend provid that a person cannot be compel to give
inform that might incrimin him the sixth amend provid that a person ha
the right to an attornei and to confront the wit against him addition while the
constitut contain no express guarante of privaci court have found that individu
privaci right ar impli from mani of the express protect in the bill of right
the gener rule is that the unit state constitut onli limit govern action it doe
not limit the power of privat employ in conduct a corpor investig that rule
howev is subject to sever limit and although a privat employ usual cannot be
su for a violat of the fourth fifth or sixth amend these provis still have
import implic for the fraud investig
privat action versu state action
for an employe to sue an employ for the violat of a constitut right there must be
some form of state action involv state acti on is involv dure ani investig by a
state or feder entiti includ investig of their own employe
there ar no brightlin rule regard when an investig can be consid to involv
state action the follow exampl howev could be consid to involv state action
investig conduct by a privat compani but at the suggest of the state or
feder author
investig begun by a privat compani that later ar taken over or expand by state
or feder author
joint investig with or aid by state or feder author
investig conduct by a privat compani that ar requir by state or feder law
search or interrog conduct by outsid investig who ar offduti state
local or feder author
investig by a privat compani pursuant to a feder statut
if an investig is conduct by a privat compani in accord with feder law an
issu is rais as to whether the corpor intern investig could be consid state
action
for exampl in the case of skinner v railwai labor execut assn 489 us 602 1989 the
us suprem court found that a privat railroad act as an agent for the govern when
it compli with the provis of the feder railroad administr act in administ
individu right dure examin law
2404 2011 fraud examin manual
drug test to it employe under the regul at issu the railroad wa requir by law to
conduct the test and the feder railroad administr wa author to receiv the test
result
if a compani is conduct an investig pursuant to such feder law as the secur
exchang act of 1934 or the foreign corrupt practic act of 1977 the compani should be
awar of the possibl implic of state action therefor befor ani advers action is
taken against an employe legal advic should be obtain
employe protect from polygraph examin
the employe polygraph protect act prohibit the us of polygraph by most privat
employ unless the employ is engag in an ongo investig involv econom
loss or injuri to the employ in the employ busi and ha a reason suspicion that
the employe is involv in the incid
employ subject to thi act cannot us polygraph to screen applic for employ
and thei cannot discharg an employe for refus to take an exam thi act howev
doe not protect govern employe
in addit some court have found the us of polygraph action on common law
ground under certain circumst for exampl some state court have held that
polygraph test can constitut an invas of privaci
fair credit report act fcra
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra appli to the gather
of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra regul the type of inform that can be contain in a consum credit
report it restrict credit bureau from releas an individu credit inform to ani
third parti without author and it set forth the circumst under which a third
parti can obtain a copi of the report
if the fcra doe appli it mean that an examin cannot obtain certain inform about
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2405
a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and sign a consent form the
failur to do so can mean civil penalti also if an examin obtain a copi of a credit
report that fact will be note on the report
often fraud examin will need to obtain consum report for preemploy purpos
and workplac investig of fraud an misconduct
for more inform about the fcra see the obtain inform about employe
section below
interview
introduct
interview and especi admissionseek interview mai expos the compani and the
fraud examin to certain legal risk thu befor engag in an interview the examin
must understand the ramif of their action which requir an understand of
certain legal issu and how thei limit or affect the wai in which an interview mai be
conduct the follow is an overview of some of the most common legal issu that mai
affect interview situat
and sinc employe right vari from case to case fraud examin should alwai consult
with an attornei regard the specif law and regul for their state or local
restrict on employe interview
in the context of an intern investig employe of privat entiti gener do not
enjoi constitut protect howev thei mai possess contractu right that must be
respect dure the cours of an interview for exampl an employe cover by a
collectivebargain agreement mai have the right to have a repres present dure
the interview
thu it is in the compani best interest to review all aspect of the employeremploye
relationship includ compani polici contractu relationship and prevail law befor
conduct the interview
individu right dure examin law
2406 2011 fraud examin manual
employe right against selfincrimin
the fifth amend of the unit state constitut provid that a person cannot be
compel to give inform that mai incrimin him in a crimin case it provid
no person shall be held to answer for a capit or otherwis infam crime unless on a
present or indict of a grand juri except in case aris in the land or naval forc or
in the militia when in actual servic in time of war and public danger nor shall ani person be
subject for the same offens to be twice put in jeopardi of life or limb nor shall be compel in
ani crimin case to be a wit ag ainst himself nor be depriv of life liberti or properti
without due process of law nor shall privat properti be taken for public us without just
compens
the fifth amend right against selfincrimin contain two basic protect it
protect a person from be forc to give inform that could be us to convict him
of a crimin offens and it prevent the state from punish an employe for hi silenc or
otherwis us hi exercis of that right against him
public employ
as state abov constitut protect gener onli appli to public employe thi
mean that employe of feder state and local govern must be afford protect
under the fifth amend a public employ cannot fire employe for refus to
answer question that might incrimin them the lead case on thi issu is garriti v new
jersei 385 us 493 1967 in garriti sever new jersei polic offic were threaten with
dismiss from their job if thei refus to answer question relat to a conspiraci to
obstruct traffic law the offic face with termin answer the question and were
subsequ prosecut the us suprem court found that the statement had been
improperli coerc and thu thei were not admiss at trial
the fifth amend onli protect person against compel testimoni thu if an
employe voluntarili confess to a crime thei can be fire without violat their
constitut right the confess howev must be truli voluntari the employe cannot
be coerc in ani wai to give selfincrimin evid dure an interview
if a public employ or govern offici want to compel an employe to provid
answer with potenti crimin liabil and administr consequ thei mai get
written approv to offer the employe a kalkin warn kalkin warn ar a form of
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2407
immun that preclud prosecut against the employe for statement deriv from the
compel testimoni howev thi immun doe not prevent prosecut against the
employe where the govern receiv evid from a legitim independ sourc
and it doe not prevent prosecut of an employe for provid the govern with fals
statement or answer addition if an employe refus to answer question after
receiv a proper kalkin warn the public employ mai take disciplinari action
includ dismiss
it should also be note that the right against selfincrimin onli appli in crimin case
thu an employe public or privat can be fire for refus to answer a question when
the answer will onli lead to an administr punish or a civil suit but not to crimin
convict furthermor in a civil lawsuit it is permiss to draw an advers infer
from the fact that an employe refus to answer an incrimin question it is not
permiss to draw a neg infer in a crimin case from refus to answer such a
question
in practic howev it mai be veri difficult to draw the distinct between question that
will lead to crimin prosecut and those that will onli lead to civil or administr
punish if an employe is compel to answer a question and the answer provid
evid of crimin wrongdo that wa previous unknown that evid could be
inadmiss in a subsequ crimin case it is a better practic not to compel answer from
public employe in ani set so that constitut issu can be avoid
even if a set is deem noncustodi and miranda warn ar not requir thi doe not
elimin the public employe fifth amend right against selfincrimin
regardless of the set a public employ cannot compel it employe to choos between
their constitut right and their job
privat employ
the fifth amend gener doe not appli to privat employ becaus in the absenc
of a state action there is no constitut protect against selfincrimin therefor
an employe might be subject to dismiss by a privat compani if he fail to cooper in an
investig howev there ar situat as discuss abov where privat compani
mai be held liabl for violat their employe constitut right when there is a
suffici nexu between a regul compani and the govern such that the privat
compani essenti act as an agent of the govern then that privat compani action
will be treat as action of the govern itself in such a case constitut protect
for the privat compani employe ar trigger
the kei to the determin is whether the privat compani is act on behalf of the
govern as an agent of the govern for exampl if a privat entiti were direct by the
individu right dure examin law
2408 2011 fraud examin manual
polic to interview it employe in connect with a crime thi entiti would be act as
an agent of the polic in thi situat the privat compani employe could not be
termin for refus to answer question that might incrimin them
it should also be note that some state have expand the right of privat employe to
includ protect for certain constitut right thu an interview should consult with
an attornei befor take ani advers action against an employe who refus to answer
potenti incrimin question
miranda warn
design to protect an individu fifth amend right against selfincrimin
miranda warn advic suspect that thei have the right not to answer question and the
right to legal counsel dure interrog miranda warn ar requir onli if a person is
be interrog by public author in a custodi set custodi set refer to
question initi by law enforc offic after a person ha been taken into custodi
or otherwis depriv of hi freedom or action in ani signific wai as a result both
privat and public employ might interview employe in noncustodi set without
give miranda warn
in subsequ civil proceed an advers infer might be drawn from silenc in
respons to question
presenc of corpor attornei
although miranda warn might not be requir a compani attornei mai conduct or be
present dure the interview of compani employe becaus the compani lawyer
repres onli the interest of the compani and not those of the individu employe an
employe who is be interview must not be permit or misl to believ that the
compani lawyer repres hi interest dure an interview for thi reason if a corpor
attornei is present dure the interview it is good polici to inform the employe of sever
thing befor the interview begin counsel should inform the employe of the follow
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2409
counsel repres the compani not the employe
the purpos of the interview is to obtain inform to provid legal advic to the
compani
inform provid by the employe initi will be treat as confidenti but the
compani ultim will determin whether to disclos the inform to law
enforc agenc
the employe is expect to answer the question fulli and truthfulli
the employe should not discuss the interview with anyon either insid or outsid the
compani except hi attornei
depend on the circumst the attornei might also wish to advis the employe that
he is free to retain an attornei factor to includ in determin whether to give such advic
includ the degre of evid of the employe culpabl whether the evid is such to
draw a conclus concern a violat of the law the likelihood of crimin prosecut if
the result of the investig ar disclos the exist of a conflict of interest between
the employe and the compani and state ethic code
employe right to counsel
the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right to counsel the
relev text provid
in all crimin prosecut the accus shall enjoi the right to be confront with wit
against him to have compulsori process for obta in wit in hi favor and to have the
assist of counsel for hi defens
applic
if no state action is involv a privat employ can interview an employe without the
presenc of hi attornei howev the employe an individu alwai ha the right to
consult an attornei but there is typic no legal oblig to consult the employe lawyer
prior to the interview or allow the employe lawyer to sit in dure an interview
whether an employe will be permit to be accompani by a repres dure an
interview gener depend on the particular circumst if the employe is cover by a
collectivebargain agreement for exampl the term of the agreement will gener
control whether a repres can be present in the absenc of such circumst the
individu right dure examin law
2410 2011 fraud examin manual
gener rule is that it is at the compani discret whether it will allow the employe to be
repres dure an interview
employe right to due process
the fourteenth amend guarante the right to due process
all person born or natur in the unit state and subject to the jurisdict thereof ar
citizen of the unit state and of the state wherein thei resid no state shall make or enforc
ani law which shall abridg the privileg and immun of citizen of the unit state nor
shall ani state depriv ani person of life libert y or properti without due process of law nor
deni to ani person within it jurisdict ion the equal protect of the law
in the context of a fraud investig the constitut right to due process usual refer
to procedur right that must be observ befor the employe suffer ani advers
consequ again the right to due process usual is not applic to employe of
privat compani state or feder employ howev might be requir to provid the
wrongdo employe with the follow
written notic of the charg
adequ opportun to rebut ani charg brought prior to ani disciplinari action be
taken which might includ the right to call wit and the right to be repres by
an attornei
even in the absenc of constitut due process protect similar procedur to ensur
fundament fair mai be requir even of privat employ becaus of contractu
provis collect bargain agreement establish compani polici or applic
labor or employ statut thu privat employ might also wish to emploi the abov
procedur to avoid a possibl civil suit by the employe
state constitut
mani state have constitut provis concern selfincrimin right to counsel
and due process the law of your particular state should be examin close in some
instanc state constitut provid broader protect than the us constitut
feder statut
nation labor relat act
the nation labor relat act prohibit ani form of interrog by employ that
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2411
interfer with the right of the employe to organ bargain or otherwis engag in
concert activ for the purpos of bargain or other mutual aid or protect an
employ might not question an employe about ani of these protect activ either hi
own or that of other employe
rule regard nonunion represent dure interview
in june 2004 the nation labor relat board nlrb overrul a controversi
decis regard the right of nonunion employe to have a repres present
dure interview and reinstat the former 1975 rule that nonunion employe ar not
entitl to represent dure investigatori interview i bm corp 341 nlrb no 148
2004 the nlrb reason that allow cowork to sit in as repres dure
investigatori interview would compromis the requisit confidenti sensit and
thorough of the interview accordingli nonunion employ no longer have a legal
oblig to accept an employe request for such represent
union employe
sinc 1975 and the us suprem court decis of nlrb v weingarten 420 us 251 1975
union employe have had the right to union represent dure an investigatori
interview provid that the employe reason believ the interview might result in
disciplinari action thi right deriv from the nation labor relat act which
provid that employe have the right to act in concert for mutual aid and protect in
the year sinc weingarten thi right ha onli been appli in case where the employe under
investig wa cover by a collectivebargain agreement
former law nonunion employe
in the case of epilepsi foundat of northeast ohio 331 nlrb no 92 decid juli 10 2000
the nlrb extend the socal weingarten right to nonunion employe the case involv
two worker who were fire from the epilepsi foundat prior to their discharg the two
employe wrote a memo that wa critic of their supervisor later the execut director
request to meet with on of the employe and the supervisor the employe request to
meet with the execut director alon but the request wa deni the employe then ask
if the coauthor of the memo could be present at the meet thi request wa also deni
when the employe still express apprehens about the meet he wa told to go home
and he wa fire the next dai for insubordin
the nlrb rule that discharg the employe for refus to attend the meet violat
individu right dure examin law
2412 2011 fraud examin manual
the nation labor relat act a major of the board felt that the right set forth in
weingarten should appli equal in circumst in which employe ar not repres by
a union thei reason that the right to have a cowork present at an investigatori
interview greatli enhanc the employe opportun to act in concert to address the
concern that the employ doe not initi or continu a practic of impos punish
unjustli
current law nonunion employe
a repres mai be present where the employ allow for such
no longer must an employ allow a repres to be present where an employe
specif request represent howev an employ is not preclud from allow
the employe to have represent upon request
employ can alwai decid not to conduct an interview but refus to do so mai caus
problem of it own if the compani administ disciplinari action without first hear the
employe side of the stori then the compani mai be hand the employe a lawsuit for
wrong discharg or a discrimin claim as a gener rule it is difficult to defend a
termin action if the employ did not at least listen to the employe version of event
prior to take action
where the employ allow for employe represent the employ need not bargain
with the employe repres
presum the rule in weingarten will continu to control thi issu in weingarten the
suprem court state that the repres role is to assist the employe and he mai do
so by attempt to clarifi fact or suggest other employe who mai have knowledg of
them the court made it clear that the employ mai insist on hear the subject version
of event and the repres is not allow to direct the subject not to answer a question
or to tell the subject to answer question onli onc therefor the employ is allow to
conduct the interview without interfer by the repres
employe do not have a right to be repres at an interview by a privat attornei
under epilepsi where an employ fail to compli with the rule requir represent
upon employe request it could have been subject to an administr ceaseanddesist
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2413
order andor reinstat of the employe with back pai due to the overturn of
epilepsi and reinstat of weingarten howev these penalti will probabl not appli
unless the nonunion employ agre to allow employe represent
if an employe request ani type of represent at an interview you should immedi
consult your legal counsel you should also consult counsel to review your exist polici
and procedur to ensur that you ar awar of the legal duti ramif and remedi
surround employe represent
nondiscrimin statut
includ in the civil right act of 1866 and 1871 titl vii of the civil right act of 1964
and the ag discrimin in employ act of 1970 is the prohibit of singl out
employe for interview base on their race nation origin religion sex or ag
fair labor standard
the fair labor standard requir an employ to pai an employe for time spent in an
interview
common law protect in connect with interview
even though employe of privat organ do not in most case enjoi constitut
protect in connect with interview thei do have certain protect that aris out of
common law these protect also appli to employe of public organ fraud
examin must be awar of the relev commonlaw protect that relat to intern
interview and must be care not to expos themselv to legal liabil
invas of privaci
while modern tort law includ four categori of invas of privaci thi discuss onli
address the two most common form of invas of privaci applic to fraud
examin intrus upon seclus and public disclosur of privat fact
intrus into seclus
intrus upon seclus occur when an individu intention intrud upon the solitud
or seclus of anoth or hi privat affair or concern and the intrus would be highli
offens to a reason person question employe about activ not relat to job
perform might constitut an invas of privaci
individu right dure examin law
2414 2011 fraud examin manual
the element of thi tort includ
an intent intrus
into an area where an individu ha a reason expect of privaci
the intrus would be highli offens or objection to a reason person
public disclosur of privat fact
the tort of public disclosur of privat fact occur when on parti make public statement
about anoth parti privat life that ar not of public concern for instanc disclos
inform obtain in an interview to individu not involv in the investig
unlik defam claim which ar discuss below thi caus of action can aris even if
the statement ar true the kei is that the inform is privat in natur and it is not a
matter of public interest
intent inflict of emot distress
intent inflict of emot distress refer to ani unprivileg conduct that is so
outrag and egregi that it exce all bound usual toler by civil societi and
that is intend to caus injuri or wa commit with reckless disregard for the likelihood
of it caus injuri to anoth
for an employe to state a claim for intent inflict of emot distress he must
establish all of the follow element
the employ engag in extrem and outrag conduct
the employ conduct wa intend to caus sever emot distress or if not
intend would caus sever emot distress in a reason person
the employe actual did suffer emot or mental distress as a result of the
employ conduct
it is not enough that the employe is mere upset by the conduct for exampl
question alon even coupl with accus and rais voic probabl will not give
rise to such a claim
defam
defam is an unprivileg public of a falsehood about a person that tend to harm
the reput of that person the law of defam actual consist of two tort libel and
slander libel is basic defam that appear in written form while slander involv
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2415
defamatori remark that ar onli spoken
in gener the element of these two caus of action ar essenti the same to recov
for defam the plaintiff must prove the follow element
the defend made an untru statement of fact
the statement wa commun publish to third parti
the statement wa made on an unprivileg occas
the statement damag the subject reput
the threat of a defam lawsuit is alwai present when alleg of wrongdo ar
made against certain employe for exampl a claim of defam might aris in the
context of an interview as a result of unfound accus or statement made by the
interview where someon in addit to the employe and the interview is present
assum that an employe can establish that defamatori statement were made and
commun to a thirdparti the most import defens to a defam action for fraud
examin is that of qualifi busi privileg if thi privileg appli then no liabil can
attach to the speaker
the qualifi busi privileg gener appli if a person make a statement 1 in good
faith 2 regard a subject in which the person make the statement ha a legitim
interest or duti and 3 to those who have an interest in the matter
the privileg howev might be lost if the defamatori statement ar commun with
malic thi usual mean that the person commun the statement knew thei were
fals or made them without regard to whether thei were fals
some court have held that there can be no defam aris from an employ inquiri
of it employe concern their possibl involv in a violat of compani polici
the employ might even have duti to investig aris from it duti to protect it
busi it employe and the public from wrongdo employe
good faith and fair deal
sever state recogn a duti on the part of employ to deal with their employe fairli
and in good faith thi duti might includ abid by all provis in an employe
handbook for exampl it might contain a provis that interview will be conduct in a
individu right dure examin law
2416 2011 fraud examin manual
profession manner and onli concern job relat matter
breach of impli contract
employ and employe mai enter into contract that govern the length and term of
employ and if the employ violat the contract the employe can sue for breach of
contract
moreov employ contract can be express or impli just becaus the compani ha
not sign a written formal contract with an employe thi doe not mean that there is
no employ contract collectivebargain agreement employe handbook and even
oral promis can establish an employ contract and limit the compani abil to
disciplin or fire an employe befor take ani disciplinari action against an employe
make sure you ar awar of the true statu of the employ relationship
fals imprison
fals imprison is restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth without consent
or legal justif a claim of fals imprison might be made if an employe is
detain in ani wai dure a search either of the employe or of the employe desk locker
etc gener an employ is entitl to question an employe at work about a violat of
compani polici without incur liabil as long as the employe submit to the
question voluntarili that is not as a result of threat or forc howev the length
natur and manner of the interview will determin whether liabil aris
fals imprison factor includ
size and natur of the room where an interview take place small windowless not easili
access is a neg
light in roomsoft versu sever
requir the employe presenc or continu presenc by ani amount of forc
includ hold the employe arm to escort him
violent behavior of ani kind dure the in terview includ yell pound on desk
or kick furnitur or wall
refus to allow the employe to leav the room such as by push the employe into
a chair or lock the door
the number of peopl involv in the interview
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2417
search and surveil
workplac privaci is a rapidli evolv area of law that can aris in numer context
involv the employeremploye relationship such as surveil and monitor search
and polygraph test in most case an employ might investig it workplac for
wrongdo by mean of workplac search and surveil of workplac area or
employe howev an employe privaci mai be protect by the constitut state
constitut feder and state statut or common law limit
employe right under the fourth amend
the fourth amend is the princip constitut limit on search and seizur by
public author it state
the right of the peopl to be secur in their person hous paper and effect against
unreason search and seizur shall not be violat and no warrant shall issu but upon
probabl caus support by oath or affirm and particularli describ the place to be
search and the person or thing to be seiz
in short the fourth amend prohibit unreason search and seizur that is it
prohibit public employ from unreason invad their employe privaci to conduct
a workplac search and it prohibit unreason surveil of employe such as
videotap or wiretap where thei would reason expect privaci
the warrant requir
all search and seizur must be reason whether it is reason to conduct a search
and whether the activ were conduct in a reason manner is determin by the
total of the circumst a reason search is on carri out pursuant to a warrant
ie a court order that grant author the right to take a particular action issu upon a
show of probabl caus thu in some circumst the fourth amend requir
that the govern obtain a warrant befor thei conduct a search
moreov in katz v unit state 389 us 347 1967 the suprem court held that the
fourth amend protect peopl not place mean that it provis extend
beyond the properti line of the citizen that the amend appli wherev there is a
reason expect of privaci and that a search without a warrant is per se
unreason in the absenc of exig circumst thu the polic normal need to
obtain a warrant not onli to search a hous but also to intercept call from a public
individu right dure examin law
2418 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon booth or inspect the content of a safe deposit box or to otherwis intrud into
matter that the court would reason consid to be privat
in johnson v unit state 333 us 10 1948 the suprem court rule that all warrant must
be issu by a judg or magistr the latter a feder judici offic empow to hear
misdemeanor case explain that the point of the fourth amend is not that it
deni law enforc the support of the usual infer which reason men draw
from evid it protect consist in requir that those infer be drawn by a
neutral and detach magistr instead of be judg by the offic engag in the often
competit enterpris of ferret out crime
addition all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that
is all warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus
and thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz
the probabl caus requir of the fourth amend is the central restraint on the
power of the polic to search probabl caus ha been defin as those fact and
circumst suffici to caus a person of reason caution to believ that a crime ha
been commit and that the accus commit it it requir more than mere suspicion or
hunch but less than virtual certainti reason ground to believ is probabl as good a
definit as ani
furthermor all warrant must particularli describ the place to be search or the person
or thing to be seiz the particular requir wa intend to prevent prevent the
issuanc of warrant on loos vagu or doubt base of fact an abus that outrag the
constitut drafter gobart import co v unit state 282 us 344 357 1931 in
todai term the claus would prohibit a search warrant in a whitecollar investig or a
subpoena that command the product of all the defend book and record whether
or not relev to the investig or trial
but even if a warrant is technic requir there ar a number of recogn except to
the warrant requir princip
workplac search by govern employ
search incid to arrest
search of motor vehicl
exig or emerg circumst to prevent the destruct of evid or while in
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2419
hot pursuit of a suspect
when the search is conduct pursuant to a valid voluntari consent
when the evid is in plain view
border custom and prison search
workplac search by govern employ
public employ ar not gener requir to obtain a warrant when thei conduct search
for investig of workplac misconduct in oconnor v ortega 480 us 709 1987 the
suprem court held that requir warrant for all form of public workplac search
would be unwork and would impos intoler burden on public employ
therefor the court rule that workplac search should be held to a lower standard
in reach thi decis the court state that when public employ conduct a workplac
investig their interest is substanti differ from the normal interest of law
enforc the goal of public employ is to ensur that their offic run effici not
to enforc the law requir these employ to obtain a warrant for everi workplac search
would imped the effect administr of the govern work
the court also found that while public employe have some legitim privaci interest in
the workplac these interest ar less than in other place such as their home govern
offic ar provid to public employe for the purpos of do govern work and
employe can avoid expos truli person belong at work by simpli leav them at
home thu by balanc the strong govern interest in maintain an effici
workplac against the diminish privaci interest of govern employe the court
justifi the us of a lower standard for workplac search by govern employ
instead of a warrant requir base on probabl caus govern employ ar
gener held to a standard of reason under all the circumst
the reason standard
workplac search by govern employ ar subject to the reason standard in
two circumst
for noninvestigatori workrel purpos which ar wholli unrel to illeg
conduct such as retriev a file from someon desk
for investig of workrel misconduct
when a public employ conduct an investig of workrel misconduct and when
individu right dure examin law
2420 2011 fraud examin manual
that investig necessit a search of an employe workspac the employ is not
gener requir to obtain a warrant to perform the search nor is the employ requir to
make a show of probabl caus that the suspect ha commit a crime thi doe not
mean howev that there ar no restrict on the employ abil to conduct the search
it still must meet the test for reason under all the circumst
there is a twopart test to determin if a workplac search is reason
the search must be justifi at it incept
the search must be conduct in a wai that is reason relat in scope to the
circumst that justifi the interfer in the first place
a search is justifi at it incept if there ar reason ground for suspect that the
search will turn up evid that the employe is guilti of workrel misconduct or if the
search is necessari for a noninvestigatori purpos such as to retriev a file a search is not
justifi at it incept simpli becaus an employ think that the suspect might be
engag in workplac misconduct the employ must be abl to demonstr a reason
clear suspicion base on factual inform that the area to be search contain evid
of misconduct
the second part of the test requir that the search be reason in scope the fact that a
search is justifi at it incept doe not give the employ cart blanch author to intrud
upon the suspect privaci in all area the search must be no broader than is necessari to
serv the organ legitim workrel purpos
reason expect of privaci
the fourth amend onli appli to workplac search by govern employ
where an employe ha a reason expect of privaci thu to determin if a
workplac search will violat an employe fourth amend right an employ must
first determin if the employe ha a reason expect of privaci in the area to be
search there is no brightlin rule for determin whether an employe ha a reason
privaci expect in a particular area such a privaci interest can exist for a desk drawer a
file cabinet a locker or even an entir offic depend on the circumst the issu is
whether a reason person would expect the area to be free from intrus the employe
doe not have to have an ownership interest in the area to have a reason expect of
privaci in the area thu even though a public employ mai own the offic where an
employe work that employe can still have a privaci interest in the offic that prohibit
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2421
the employ from conduct a search
the kei factor to consid is whether the employe ha exclus control over the area in
question if so thi tend to show that the employe ha a reason expect of privaci
in that area for instanc assum that an employe ha a file cabinet in hi offic that he is
the onli person who us that file cabinet that the cabinet ha a lock on it that the
employe is the onli person with a kei and that the cabinet remain lock when the
employe is not us it these fact indic that the employe ha exclus control over
the content of the file cabinet and thu ha a reason expect of privaci in it
content in other word base on the circumst the employe would be justifi in
believ that other cannot and will not enter the file cabinet without hi consent the
employe in thi scenario ha a constitution protect privaci interest in the content of
the file cabinet a search of thi file cabinet by the public employ would have to comport
with the reason standard as discuss abov
but if the file cabinet doe not have a lock if sever employe store and retriev file from
that cabinet and if it is gener understood that thei can do so without employe
consent then the employe cannot reason expect that the content of the file cabinet
will be privat under these fact the employe would not have a reason expect of
privaci in the file cabinet therefor a search of that file cabinet would not violat the
employe fourth amend right
reason privaci expect can also attach to commun employe might
reason expect person phone convers or email messag to be privat and free
from monitor
in term of surveil employe ar like to have reason privaci expect in
bathroom chang room and other person area within the workplac
obvious there ar a lot of factor that go into determin whether an employe ha a
reason expect of privaci befor conduct a search or surveil employ
should consult legal counsel to make sure thei ar not intrud upon an employe privaci
interest
search incid to arrest
polic offic mai without a warrant conduct a limit search incid to an a law arrest
individu right dure examin law
2422 2011 fraud examin manual
the search howev must be limit to the arreste bodi and the area within hi
immedi control thi except is design to protect the offic and to prevent the
destruct of evid for the search to be valid the arrest must be valid ie base on
probabl caus and not mere a pretext to justifi a search if the arrest is unlaw when
made it cannot be justifi by the fruit of the subsequ search and all evid obtain
must be suppress
search of motor vehicl
an automobil airplan or vessel mai be search without a warrant if there is probabl
caus to believ it contain contraband or other evid of a crime thi is becaus of the
mobil of the vehicl henc the risk that evid mai be lost or destroi while a
warrant is be obtain and the lower expect of privaci associ with vehicl if
there is probabl caus to believ that the vehicl contain contraband the polic ar also
permit to remov the vehicl from the scene to a stationhous to conduct a search
without obtain a warrant furthermor the polic also mai conduct warrantless
inventori search of impound vehicl to secur and protect the owner person
properti and thei mai seiz contraband or other evid discov as a result
it mai also be permiss for law enforc to make warrantless search of contain
and luggag found within a vehicl thi appli if the polic have probabl caus to believ
there is contraband in the contain or if thei have probabl caus to believ there is
contraband in the car and that contraband could be hidden in the contain
the search incid to arrest except also appli in the motor vehicl context howev
the boundari of thi search have chang with time most recent on april 21 2009 the
suprem court impos new restrict on the except in arizona v gant 556 us
2009 for mani year the rule had been that the polic mai search the entir passeng
compart of a vehicl incid to the custodi arrest of an occup of the car in gant
howev the suprem court ad a new limit vehicl search follow an
occup arrest ar legal onli when the arreste is unsecur and within reach distanc
of the passeng compart at the time of the search or when the offic ha reason to
believ the vehicl ha evid of the crime that form the basi for the arrest
the motor vehicl except to the warrant requir doe not extend to passeng in
the car onc a passeng ha been arrest howev the polic ar permit to make a
warrantless search of the suspect and the area within hi control pursuant to the except
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2423
for search incid to arrest as discuss abov
exig or emerg circumst
there is also an except to the warrant requir for exig circumst which
mean where the offic must act quickli
consent search
individu ar alwai free to waiv their fourth amend right if a suspect consent to
a search by polic thi elimin the need for a warrant the court howev will close
scrutin ani such consent to make sure it wa truli voluntari particularli when it lead
to the seizur of incrimin evid consent obtain by deceit briberi or
misrepresent ar gener held to be involuntari and invalid howev when an
undercov polic offic conceal hi ident and as a result an individu allow the
offic to enter an area thi amount to consent even though the person did not know
permiss wa be grant to a polic offic consent might not be voluntari if it requir
a choic between exercis constitut right and continu employ there is also
no requir that suspect be inform of their right to refus consent
consent mai be impli in circumst in which the individu can choos between
enter an area and submit to a search or not enter as when on enter a secur
courthous board an airplan or cross an intern border consent mai be given by
third parti to search of properti over which the third parti have author such as a co
tenant in a leas apart
evid in plain view
evid in plain view of an offic who ha a right to be in a posit to observ it also
mai be seiz without a warrant thi situat usual occur when contraband or evid
of anoth crime is inadvert discov dure a search or arrest for anoth offens
the discoveri must be truli inadvert howev if discoveri of the evid is anticip
and no other except appli a warrant must first be obtain
border custom and prison search
border and custom search ar a longstand except to the fourth amend and
mai be conduct without probabl caus or a warrant search of prison cell and the
monitor of inmat telephon convers also mai be conduct without a warrant or
individu right dure examin law
2424 2011 fraud examin manual
probabl caus becaus of secur concern and the absenc of a realist expect of
privaci in prison
search an employe mail
an employ mai not conduct search of an employe mail befor it ha been deliv
under feder law ani person who take a letter postcard or packag from the mail befor
it ha been deliv to the person to whom it wa direct with design to obstruct the
correspond face up to five year imprison a fine or both see 18 usc 1702
onc the mail ha been deliv howev then ordinari rule regard search appli
surveil
an employ in certain circumst can us monitor and surveil method to
uncov employe wrongdo variou feder and state law govern the avail and
method of surveil techniqu becaus of the complex of these law and the
differ interpret of them by state and feder court counsel should alwai be
consult beforehand for exampl if an employ monitor employe phone call without
follow the proper legal procedur the employ might violat feder or state wiretap
law the employ might also expos itself to substanti legal liabil for invas of
privaci
to lower the expect of privaci and to preserv the right to search ani and all area and
to monitor and survei employe conduct the employ should adopt a written polici which
provid that to maintain the secur of it oper the compani might gain access to
and search all work area and person belong includ desk file drawer locker
briefcas handbag pocket and person effect includ in the polici that workplac
area ar subject to surveil and that busi phone call might be monitor in
addit as discuss below the polici also should state that the employ could monitor all
electron commun such as email as well as monitor what site ar visit over the
internet
electron commun privaci act of 1986
the electron commun privaci act of 1986 ecpa codifi at 18 usc
25102521 27012710 31213126 is the primari feder statut that offer worker
protect in commun privaci
under the ecpa electron commun ar defin as ani transfer of sign signal
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2425
write imag sound data or intellig of ani natur transmit in whole or in part by
a wire radio electromagnet photolectron or photoopt system that affect
interst or foreign commerc
the ecpa is divid into three part the wiretap act which govern the intercept of
electron commun the store commun act which cover access to store
commun and record and the pen regi ter act which regul pen regist and
trap and trace devic
the wiretap act 18 usc 25102521
in respons to an increas number of privaci breach congress enact the wiretap act
which prohibit anyon from intention intercept or attempt to intercept ani wire
oral or electron commun
section 2511 prohibit covert spy on voic and data commun extend
protect from eavesdrop on mail and telephon commun to includ digit
data commun such as email and remot comput it doe not govern store
commun under the wiretap act an intercept occur by the acquisit of the
content of ani electron commun through the us of ani devic most court have
held that intercept occur onli when the protect commun ar obtain
contemporan with their transmiss
remedi for violat the wiretap act includ crimin sanction and civil relief a crimin
violat under the act is a feloni and is punish by up to five year imprison
andor fine under a privat caus of action a court mai award the plaintiff equit relief
actual damag punit damag and attornei fee
the store commun act 18 usc 2701
as part of the ecpa congress enact the store commun act sca to protect
store electron commun such as email and voicemail by prohibit the
unauthor access of such commun that ar in storag more specif the sca
prohibit unlaw access to a facil that provid an electron commun servic
and then obtain alter or prevent author access to a wire or electron
commun while it is electron store in such a system an electron
commun fall under the sca onc a system receiv and store it
individu right dure examin law
2426 2011 fraud examin manual
the sca includ both civil and crimin penalti concern civil penalti the sca
provid a privat right of action and allow appropri relief includ equit relief
damag and attornei fee regard crimin penalti the sca provid that if the first
offens is commit for purpos of commerci advantag malici destruct or
damag or privat commerci gain punish mai includ a fine andor imprison
for up to five year for ani subsequ offens penalti includ a fine andor
imprison for not more than ten year in ani other case where it is a first offens
court mai impos a fine or imprison for not more than six month or both for all
subsequ convict court mai impos a fine andor imprison for up to ten year
the pen regist act
pen regist ar devic that can detect the telephon number from which an incom call
ha been made titl 18 section 3121 of the us code gener prohibit the instal of
pen regist without a court order
except
although the ecpa impos sever rule about electron commun it also contain
sever except to these rule the except most relev to the workplac ar
the ordinari cours of busi except
the provid except
the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
the ecpa definit of electron devic specif exclud devic that ar us by
an employ in the ordinari cours of busi ness therefor employ ar permit to
monitor their employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done
for a legitim busi purpos
the provid except
the provid except allow supplier of wire or electron commun servic eg
telephon voic mail email or internet servic to intercept or access electron
commun in the normal cours of busi for exampl telephon provid can
monitor phone call when it is necessari to maintain and protect the system run qualiti
control check or to protect the servic against theft or harass most court hold that
employ qualifi as provid with respect to their intern email and voic mail system
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2427
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept or access an electron commun if on of the
parti to the commun ha given prior consent thi except doe not appli if the
commun is intercept for the purpos of commit a crime
monitor employe phone call
to review the wiretap act provis of the ecpa limit an employ abil to monitor
employe phone call in addit to the ecpa a compani right to monitor employe
phone call is also limit by employe constitut and common law privaci right as
discuss abov
although intercept is gener forbidden under the wiretap act employ mai lawfulli
monitor phone call if thei fall under on of the statutori except includ the ordinari
cours of busi except and the consent except
ordinari cours of busi except
under the ordinari cours of busi except employ ar permit to monitor their
employe wire or electron commun includ phone call if done for a legitim
busi purpos
thi except could appli in variou scenario for exampl it would appli where the
employ routin monitor phone commun for purpos of qualiti control eg
monitor the phone call of oper telemarket custom servic personnel etc it
mai also appli where there is a legitim busi purpos for the monitor such as
prevent busi loss or employe misconduct keep in mind howev that there must
be a specif legitim busi purpos for the intercept blanket monitor probabl
will be found to violat the act in sander v robert bosch 38 f3d 736 4th cir 1994 an
employ who us a voic logger to record all telephon convers on certain
compani line did not fall within the ordinari cours of busi except becaus the
employ wa unabl to state a legitim busi purpos for the intercept
even if a compani ha a legitim busi purpos for monitor a phone call the
method us to intercept and monitor the call must be no more intrus than necessari to
achiev the purpos in deal v spear 980 f2d 1153 8th cir 1992 an employ who tape
record and listen to all call includ person call wa found to have violat the
statut even though the employ had legitim suspicion of theft onc it becom
individu right dure examin law
2428 2011 fraud examin manual
appar that a commun is person and not otherwis unauthor the employ
must immedi stop listen to the call overli broad effort to monitor employe call
mai give rise to a claim for invas of privaci
consent except
the ecpa allow an entiti to intercept an electron commun if that entiti is a parti
to the commun or if on of the parti to the commun ha given prior consent
to the intercept
for an employ to monitor an employe under thi except the employe must expressli
consent to the monitor gener employ must obtain written consent eg an
employ provid it employe with a written polici explain that phone call mai be
monitor and the employe sign the polici it is import to note that provid a
notif that employe might be monitor as oppos to be notifi that the phone
call or email will be monitor mai not satisfi the consent except for exampl in on
case notif to an employe that her phone call might be monitor wa not enough to
establish that she consent to the record of her phone call even when an employe
consent to monitor thi doe not give the employ unlimit access to the employe
commun monitor still should be c onduct onli for legitim busi purpos
and should be no more broad than necessari
us pen regist to monitor employe
in gener section 3121 prohibit the instal of pen regist without a court order but
there ar a number of except under which employ can us pen regist to track their
employe phone activ those except includ
phone servic provid can us pen regist to protect user employ from abus of
servic or unlaw us of servic
phone servic provid can us a pen regist to record the fact that a phone call wa
initi or complet to protect user of the servic employ from fraudul
unlaw or abus us of the servic
phone servic provid can us a pen regist where consent of the user of the servic
ha been obtain
monitor employe email and voicemail
the ecpa regul access to store email and voicemail it prohibit the unauthor
access of electron commun that ar in storag
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2429
although the sca gener prohibit third parti from access store commun
there ar two kei except the provid except and the consent except the provid
except exempt provid of electron commun servic from the restrict of
the sca in other word if a messag is store on an email or voic mail system that the
compani provid then the employ can access those messag as it see fit without
violat the ecpa note howev that thi except doe not allow the employ to
access messag store with an outsid provid such as yahoo googl or aol
the consent except permit access of store messag if such access is author by the
intend recipi of the commun thi mean that employ will be free to access
employe email and voic mail includ messag store with outsid provid as long as
the employe have given their consent thi except provid the safest haven for
employ who want to monitor their employe store messag to make sure the
consent except will appli compani should obtain express written consent from all
employe for such monitor as a condit of employ
in addit to the ecpa employ must also be awar of employe constitut and
common law privaci right in the content of their email as wa discuss abov it is a
good idea for all employ to establish a written polici which notifi employe that their
store messag ar the properti of the employ and that thei ar subject to monitor by
the employ at ani time
also keep in mind that as with other form of search and surveil the court will not
look kindli on overli broad monitor of store commun employ should onli
access their employe store voic mail or email when there is a legitim busi
purpos for do so and the access should be no more intrus than necessari to achiev
the purpos
monitor employe blog activ
becaus the blog trend is grow it is import for employ and employe to
understand their right and oblig with respect to such onlin activ as a gener rule
employ can monitor employe blog becaus employe have a limit expect of
privaci with respect to their blog post which ar post publicli howev the extent of an
employ right to monitor larg depend on whether the employe blog while onduti
us the employ comput system
individu right dure examin law
2430 2011 fraud examin manual
employe have no reason expect of privaci when blog on the employ
system becaus the system wa set up to provid busi commun if there is no
reason expect of privaci then there is no constitut or common law restrict
on monitor such activ therefor an employe who us an employ system to blog
about violat compani polici or illeg activ or who engag in other unaccept
conduct can gener be disciplin for such post howev employ should formal
their computerinternet us polici to cover blog and to effect maintain control
over such us
concern an employe offduti blog employ should carefulli examin the legal
consequ of us such conduct when discharg or disciplin an employe includ
those that ar at will becaus such action implic state and feder law in fact some
state california new york colorado montana and north dakota enact law that limit
an employ power to discharg an employe for offduti conduct furthermor an
employe who blog about certain topic relat to statu in a protect class mai also be
protect from discharg ie when employe reveal person inform about hi
disabl or religi belief or write about harass or discrimin in the workplac
therefor compani should enact and appli internetus polici consist and
uniformli
monitor employe internet activ
as with monitor employe email and blog activ employ should be awar of
feder protect against monitor employe internet us includ an employe
instant messag websit post etc thi is true even though feder law provid
employe littl protect from an employ electron monitor for exampl although
the ecpa prohibit the intent intercept of electron commun when
employe have a reason expect of privaci an employ mai monitor internet us
when there is employe consent when there ar legitim busi purpos or when an
employ ha reason to believ that the compani interest ar at risk in addit the
common law right to privaci also extend to employe in the workplac howev the
public natur of the workplac ha led mani court to reject most invas claim on the
basi that there wa no reason expect of privaci
video surveil of employe
in some scenario investig mai consid the us of video surveil equip as
part of an intern investig in gener video surveil is not permiss in area
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2431
where employe have a legitim expect of privaci for instanc an employ is not
allow to instal video camera in a restroom or dress room unless there ar special
circumst to justifi thi intrus on employe privaci convers an employ is
much more like to be allow to us video surveil in open area such as around cash
regist or in public hallwai these area ar open to the public and an employe could not
reason expect privaci there it is advis to provid written notic to employe
inform them that their activ ar subject to monitor in advanc of ani surveil
again the scope of the surveil should be no greater than necessari to fulfil the
employ legitim busi purpos
if video surveil were accompani by audio record then thi type of surveil
would be cover by wiretap act provis of the electron commun privaci act
which prohibit the intercept of wire electron or oral commun except in limit
circumst howev the ecpa doe not cover silent video monitor the question in
thi type of surveil is whether the surveil violat the employe constitut or
common law privaci right
effect of violat of employe right
illeg seiz evid will be exclud in crimin proceed a public employ cannot
us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe there is no fourth amend
prohibit against a privat employ us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an
employe howev the employ might be expos itself to litig for invas of
privaci trespass or other common law caus of action describ below
the exclusionari rule
under the exclusionari rule which is in effect in all feder and state court evid seiz in
violat of the fourth amend will be suppress that is it becom inadmiss in
ani prosecut against the suspect except under a few limit except in addit all
evid that is obtain as a result of the illeg obtain evid will also be exclud
an unlaw search and seizur doe not mean the suspect cannot be prosecut and it doe
not invalid a convict base on other evid but it doe prevent the wrongfulli
obtain evid and all evid deriv from it from be present at trial
gener thi rule appli onli in crimin case and doe not appli to privat individu
act for their own purpos howev the fourth amend doe appli to govern
individu right dure examin law
2432 2011 fraud examin manual
employ therefor a public employ cannot us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an
employe
there is howev no fourth amend prohibit against a privat employ us
illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe thu evid illeg obtain by a
privat employ mai be admit in court but the employ might be expos itself to
litig for invas of privaci trespass or other common law caus of action describ
below
furthermor evid that ha been suppress under the exclusionari rule might still be
admiss in a civil trial or an administr proceed such as an employe disciplinari
hear the primari goal of the exclusionari rule is to deter polic misconduct if the
deterr effect of exclud the evid from a civil or administr proceed is
outweigh by the cost that would result from exclud the evid and if the parti
whose right were violat ha other form of redress for the violat then evid that
wa suppress in a crimin trial mai be admiss in a noncrimin proceed howev
there ar some circumst in which wrongfulli obtain evid will be exclud from
civil proceed so public employ should not feel free to disregard their employe
constitut right under the assumpt that ani illeg obtain evid can still be
us against an employe in a noncrimin matter
civil liabil for damag 42 usc 1983
section 1983 of titl 42 us code provid a remedi for violat of feder protect
right where state action is involv to prevail in a claim under section 1983 the plaintiff
must prove two critic issu 1 that he ha been deni a right guarante by the
constitut and the law of the unit state and 2 that the defend depriv him of
that right while act under the color of state law
the defend howev can rais certain defens to a section 1983 claim includ
qualifi immun and consent for public employ there might be a qualifi immun
from liabil if thei act in good faith on the basi of unsettl law qualifi immun
shield govern offici from both suit and liabil if their conduct did not violat ani
clearli establish right which a reason person would have known
in addit valid consent is a wellrecogn except to the fourth amend
prohibit against warrantless search consent to search can be voluntari involuntari or
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2433
inform consent is not voluntari if it requir a choic between constitut right
consent might not be voluntari if it requir a choic between exercis constitut
right and continu employ court ar split on thi issu publish search polici
as a barrier to expect of privaci is us to diminish or elimin the expect
altogeth
state constitut and statut
most state have enact constitut provis similar to the fourth amend and
mani of the same issu aris under the state constitut as under the feder constitut
in most state standard similar to those appli under the feder constitut appli most
state have enact law govern an employe right to privaci in the workplac mani
state have enact statut that restrict surveil includ wiretap or electron
surveil camera pen regist twowai mirror or surveil in particular area such
as locker room loung and rest area
surreptiti record
all but 12 state allow you to record a convers to which you ar a parti without
inform the other parti to the convers that you ar record it feder wiretap
statut also permit oneparti consent of telephon convers in most circumst
employe be the most notabl except see the materi on the electron
commun privaci act discuss previous in thi chapter
the 38 state that allow such record ar gener refer to as oneparti state the
district of columbia is also a oneparti jurisdict the other 12 state ar incorrectli
refer to as twoparti state be awar howev that thi is a misnom becaus consent
of all parti to the convers is requir current the follow state requir the
consent of all parti to a convers in most circumst
california
connecticut
delawar
florida
illinoi
maryland
massachusett
michigan
montana
individu right dure examin law
2434 2011 fraud examin manual
new hampshir
pennsylvania
washington
there ar howev variat among state regard the detail of such record and
their admiss in court befor you record a convers make sure you consult an
attornei or check the law for your jurisdict
addition there ar a number of differ law regard videotap at least fifteen
state have outlaw the us of hidden camera in privat place in some state howev
there is no prohibit on videotap anyon as long as there is no audio record due to
privaci concern a number of state have propos legisl to outlaw surreptiti
videotap in certain circumst sinc thi area of the law is chang constantli make
sure you check the law in your jurisdict
feder and state nondiscrimin statut
nondiscrimin statut such as the feder civil right act of 1866 and 1871 titl vii
of the civil right act of 1964 and the ag discrimin in employ act of 1970 as
well as similar state statut protect employe from be singl out for search on the
basi of such characterist as race nation origin sex religion and ag these law also
protect employe against dispar disciplin assess as a result of a search
common law protect in connect with search and surveil
employe also enjoi common law privaci protect that limit an employ right to
search and us surveil techniqu these common law right appli to privat as well as
govern employ no state action is requir to trigger their protect
some of the common law protect that appli in the interview set also appli to an
employ right to search and us surveil techniqu
invas of privaci
employe also have common law privaci interest that limit an employ right to search
these common law protect which ar similar in natur and scope to the fourth
amend protect discuss abov cover both public and privat employe as long
as an employe doe not have a reason expect of privaci in an area the employ
can search that area without violat an employe common law right to privaci
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2435
while modern tort law includ four categori of invas of privaci thi discuss onli
address two of those tort public of privat fact and intrus upon seclus
intrus into seclus
intrus upon seclus is the caus of action that is most frequent rais with regard to
workplac search as state befor intrus upon seclus occur when an individu
intention intrud upon the solitud or secl usion of anoth or hi privat affair or
concern and the intrus would be highli offens to a reason person thu
where there is an expect of privaci on the part of the employe a search without caus
might give rise to a claim of invas of privaci the mere gather of inform is not a
tort howev the gather of confidenti inform where the intrus is unreason
might be a tort there is no invas of privaci if the inform is open to public view or
ha been disclos to other
as with constitut action an intrus upon seclus claim can be base not onli on
physic intrus but also on wiretap eavesdrop and other form of surveil
an employ can elimin the potenti for claim of invas of privaci by publish and
follow a search polici in addit the follow measur can be taken
have a written polici regard search surveil and telephon monitor
retain a kei to all desk locker etc
requir employe to provid kei to all person lock
obtain consent to search
public disclosur of privat fact
the tort of public disclosur of privat fact occur when on parti make public statement
about anoth parti privat life that ar not of public concern the disclosur of those fact
must be highli offens to a reason person thi tort can exist even if the statement
ar true becaus give unreason public to true but privat inform about an
employe can give rise to a claim for invas of privaci the need to commun
inform about the employe must be balanc against the intrus into the employe
privaci
intent inflict of emot distress
again intent inflict of emot distress refer to ani unprivileg conduct which is
so outrag and egregi that it exce all bound usual toler by civil societi
individu right dure examin law
2436 2011 fraud examin manual
and which is intend to caus injuri or wa commit with reckless disregard for the
likelihood of it caus injuri to anoth
thi tort is signific particularli to privat employ whose search might not be subject
to the fourth amend or similar state constitut provis becaus damag for
pain and suffer and punit damag might be award
good faith and fair deal
to review sever state recogn a duti on the part of employ to deal with their
employe fairli and in good faith thi duti might includ abid by all compani polici
and provis in an employe handbook includ those relat to search eg how and
when thei can be conduct and expect of privaci on the part of employe
breach of impli contract
as note abov mani state now recogn an impli contract between employ and
employe aris out of employe handbook or oral promis for exampl an employ
with an employe handbook contain provis relat to search or employe
expect of privaci might find itself contractu bound by those provis and in
breach of contract if the provis ar not follow to the letter
fals imprison
again fals imprison is the restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth
without consent or legal justif a claim of fals imprison might be made if an
employe is detain in ani wai dure a search either of the employe himself or of the
employe desk locker and so on for more inform on fals imprison see the
interview section in thi chapter
trespass
trespass is the unauthor intent or neglig entri upon the properti of other a
claim of trespass might aris from a search of an employe locker but it is particularli
applic to surveil at an employe home
reduc employe expect of privaci
the singl most effect method of elimin potenti problem involv employe
right of privaci includ workplac search and the monitor or read of electron
commun is for a compani to adopt a written polici which provid that to maintain
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2437
the secur of it oper the compani mai gain access to and search all work area and
person belong includ desk file drawer locker briefcas handbag pocket and
person effect
the polici should also notifi employe that comput system includ the internet e
mail commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the compani
reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the system or
place in storag includ in the polici that workplac area ar subject to surveil and
that busi phone call mai be monitor
polygraph examin
employe polygraph protect act
the employe polygraph protect act prohibit the us of polygraph by most privat
employ unless the employ is engag in an ongo investig involv econom
loss or injuri to the employ in the employ busi and ha a reason suspicion that
the employe is involv in the incid reason suspicion is an observ articul basi
in fact it is similar to predic
employ subject to thi act cannot us polygraph to screen applic for employ
and thei cannot discharg an employe for refus to take a polygraph exam
the employe polygraph protect act howev doe not protect govern employe
other feder statut
other statu te do not address the us of polygraph directli but nonetheless might give rise
to liabil if a polygraph test is administ in a discriminatori fashion eg base on race
sex or some other prohibit factor or us to ferret out union sympathi in connect
with a union organ campaign
state statut
sever state have enact law address the us of polygraph examin and some ar
more restrict than the feder statut court have recogn claim aris from
unlaw administr of polygraph exam and wrong discharg for refus to take an
exam after have been accus of fraud
individu right dure examin law
2438 2011 fraud examin manual
common law liabil from polygraph exam
in addit to the statutori restrict discuss abov some court have found the us of
polygraph action on common law ground under certain circumst
intent inflict of emot distress
most court have found that the circumst surround the give of a polygraph exam
do not in and of themselv rise to the level of outrag conduct as requir to state a
common law claim of intent inflict of emot distress
invas of privaci
in some state court have defin polygraph test as invas of privaci question
directli relat to job perform or the incid under investig gener ar held not
to be invas of privaci control question might be an invas of privaci though
circumst might warrant the intrus check with counsel
wrong discharg
polygraph exam mai also give rise to claim of wrong discharg for exampl a former
employe mai bring a wrong discharg claim if he is termin for refus to take a
polygraph exam after have been accus of fraud
obtain inform about employe
introduct
there is a surpris amount of inform about individu that can be access without
legal process eg a subpoena in fact the govern is bound by law to facilit the
public access to govern inform and to encourag a divers of sourc to acquir
and us thi inform but despit the public broad right of access there ar numer
law that limit access to certain type of inform and a number of risk to privaci ar
rais by the collect of inform therefor fraud examin must be certain that
inform obtain is done so legal
feder statut
privaci act of 1974
the privaci act of 1974 establish a code of inform practic that regul the
collect mainten consumpt and diffus of person identifi inform
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2439
that is maintain by feder agenc it restrict inform about individu both
employe and nonemploye and it appli to govern agenc and govern
contractor run a system of record on behalf of the govern the privaci act
prohibit an agenc from disclos such inform without the written consent of the
subject individu
an agenc for exampl might maintain record about a person contain inform that
is relev and necessari to accomplish a purpos of the agenc thi inform might
includ a person educ financ medic histori crimin histori employ histori
and identifi inform fingerprint voiceprint or photograph an agenc employe
might have access to the inform unless it is investigatori materi compil for law
enforc purpos statist record or materi compil sole for determin
suitabl elig or qualif for feder servic or promot
fair credit report act
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra now appli to the
gather of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas person inform
about an individu eg inform about the consum charact gener reput
person characterist or mode of live to third parti without author and limit
disclosur of credit inform to third parti with a purpos permit by the statut
the fcra appli in the employ context when an employ contract with a third parti
eg a privat investig or an onlin public record servic to collect credit inform
on current or potenti employe the fcra howev doe not appli if the person or
organ seek the inform gather it directli from the sourc
if the fcra doe appli it gener mean that an examin cannot us a third parti to
obtain certain inform about a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and
sign a consent form the failur to do so can mean civil penalti
individu right dure examin law
2440 2011 fraud examin manual
coverag under the fcra
coverag of the fcra howev turn larg on three term consum consum report
and consum report agenc
consum
at it core the fcra protect those that fall within it definit of consum the act
defin a consum as an individu that is onli individu have right under the fcra
consum report
for the fcra to appli the inform that is be obtain must be a consum report
a consum report is defin as ani written oral or other commun by a consumerreport
agenc bear on a custom cred it worthi credit stand charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fcra ha interpret thi to mean basic ani inform collect
on a person it doe not refer to just credit report it would also appli to public record
such as crimin record and dmv search
but in gener when face with the question of whether a specif report is a consum
report court have focus on the purpos for which the person or organ collect
the consum inform
consum report agenc
also for the fcra to appli the inform must be gather from a consum report
agenc cra a cra is defin as anyon who sell in format about peopl it could be
an onlin servic such as choicepoint or lexisnex is or it could be a privat investig
compli with the fcra
befor employ can get a consum report about a current or prospect employe thei
must compli with certain requir howev employ that ar gather such
inform in connect with a workplac investig of misconduct mai be exclud
from the fcra see the section workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
below
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2441
if the fcra appli the parti seek the inform must compli with the follow
requir
inform the consum report agenc that it will follow the fcra
provid the individu with a separ written disclosur
obtain the individu written author
the disclosur and the author can be contain in the same document
if howev an employ reli on a consum report for an advers action eg deni a
job applic reassign or termin an employe or deni a promot it must
provid the individu with a preadvers action disclosur befor take the advers action
thi disclosur must includ a copi of the individu consum report and a copi of a
summari of your right under the fair credit report act which is avail from the ftc
after advers action is taken the employ must notifi the individu via an advers action
notic that the action ha been taken that notic must includ the follow
name address and phone number of the consum report agenc cra that
suppli the report
a statement that the cra did not make the advers action decis and cannot explain
why the advers action wa taken
a notic of the individu right to di spute the accuraci or complet of the
inform furnish and hi right to an addit free consum report from the
agenc upon request within 60 dai
workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
furthermor the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 amend the fcra to
exempt certain report involv employe misconduct investig as a result of these
amend an employ who us a third parti to conduct a workplac investig no
longer ha to obtain the prior consent of an employe if the investig involv suspect
misconduct
violat of law or regul
violat of ani preexist polici of the employ
to qualifi for thi except the report from the third parti must not be commun to
anyon other than the employ an agent of the employ or the govern
individu right dure examin law
2442 2011 fraud examin manual
if howev advers action is taken against the employe base on the result of the
investig the fcra still requir that the employ provid the employe with a
summari of the report advers action is broadli defin as ani employ decis that
advers affect the employe the summari must contain the natur and substanc of the
commun upon which the advers action is base howev it doe not have to
identifi the individu interview or the sourc of the inform
investig consum report
the fcra also cover investig consum report under the fcra an investig
consum report is a report contain inform about an individu charact gener
reput person characterist or mode of live that is obtain through person
interview with neighbor friend or associ if such a report is made then other notic
and consent mai need to be obtain from the individu for exampl a separ
disclosur must be us to inform the employe that an investig consum report is
be obtain the form must also state what sort of inform will be collect
in addit the compani must disclos to the individu the natur and scope of the
investig if he request if ani advers action is to be taken against the person he can
ask to receiv a copi of the report befor such action is taken further the report given to
the individu must not be redact mean that if the report contain name of the peopl
provid the inform and what thei report such inform could not be delet
from the report the person must also be given an opportun to disput the find in the
report
contact your attornei
unfortun for fraud examin the fcra ha creat sever more hoop that
examin must jump through befor thei can obtain certain type of inform the
fcra is not clearli written but the feder trade commiss ha publish sever letter
give it interpret of the statut these letter and the text of the fcra can be
obtain through their websit at wwwftcgov
the most import thing for the fraud examin to rememb is to consult hi inhous or
outsid counsel your attornei will help you determin what procedur you need to
institut to compli with the fcra
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2443
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act glb wa pass in 1999 and the rule implement the
act becam final in 2001 glb wa origin enact to allow bank and other compani
to offer previous forbidden servic such as insur and secur brokerag servic
congress wa worri that these super bank would share custom financi data with
affili and other compani to hawk their new product therefor congress ad a
provis requir a financi intuit to tell custom about it privaci polici to notifi
them of privat inform the institut intend to share and to give custom the
chanc to block such informationshar
to implement the law congress order regul to defin financi institut in the
broadest possibl term thu financi institut includ not just bank but also insur
compani account tax prepar and real estat settlement servic and invest
advisor the text of the rule can be found at 16 cfr part 3131 addit inform
about the rule can be found at the feder trade commiss websit wwwftcgov
the problem for fraud examin is that the privaci rule implement as part of glb have
been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform under the ftc
interpret of the rule credit header inform cannot be sold except for the veri
limit purpos allow under the fair credit report act the agenc reach thi
decis by conclud that such basic person inform such as name and address is
financi inform and therefor must be protect under glb unfortun thi
prevent credit bureau from sell credit header inform includ name address
phone number and social secur number to privat investig direct market or
other inform broker
glb also made it a crimin offens to engag in pretext ie the practic of obtain
or attempt to obtain sell or bui privat inform through the us of fals pretens
some individu us pretext as a mean to gather financi inform about a subject
pretext would contact a financi institut and pretend to be the custom or someon
els author to obtain financi inform therebi trick the financi institut into
provid inform about the subject
section 6821 of titl 15 us code ad by glb make it an offens to
us fals fictiti or fraudul statement or document to get custom inform
from a financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
individu right dure examin law
2444 2011 fraud examin manual
us forg counterfeit lost or stolen document to get custom inform from a
financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
ask anoth person to get someon els custom er inform us fals fictiti or
fraudul statement us fals fictiti or fraudul document or us forg
counterfeit lost or stolen document
violat can under certain circumst be fine andor imprison up to 10 year
telephon record and privaci protect act of 2006
the telephon record and privaci protect act of 2006 trppa also crimin
pretext in 2006 pretext garner much critic after hewlettpackard admit that
to uncov board room leak it investig obtain phone record of journalist and
board member through pretext within four month of the scandal public releas
presid bush sign the trppa into law
specif the trppa crimin the practic of obtain and attempt to obtain sell
or bui confidenti phone record through the us of fals statement unless otherwis
permit by law violat of the act ar crimin and if convict a violat face up to
10 year in prison and up to 100000 in fine these fine and prison term mai be
increas in case of violat compound with other activ or some egregi crime
befor engag in ani type of pretext activ investig should consult with an
attornei to determin whether the inform sought is protect by state or feder law as
well as whether the plan imperson method is legal accept
health insur portabl and account act public law 104191 partial codifi in 45 cfr 160 164
the health insur portabl and account act hipaa institut sever privaci
rule concern person health inform while most of the rule do not directli affect
investig fraud examin should be awar of the rule becaus thei mai have an
impact on the type of inform that can be legal gather on employe
the hipaa privaci rule place restrict on the avail and us of protect health
inform the definit of thi term is extrem broad and cover ani inform
relat to an individu past present or futur physic or mental health payment for
servic or health care oper for exampl a cancer center employe who stole a
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2445
patient identif inform to obtain credit card violat hipaa thi case mark
a signific point in hipaa legisl becaus it had more to do with ident theft than
actual health inform yet it wa still cover under the statut
if inform about the health of an individu or payment for servic becom an issu
dure an investig the examin should immedi contact the human resourc
hr depart which should have inform about whether the entiti is subject to the
hipaa rule and can assist you in complianc with those rule
the most import thing to note is that if the hipaa rule appli the parti seek the
inform is restrict as to the type of health inform it can access without specif
written author examin should never contact the health care provid the health
plan administr or a medic bill servic for copi of employe record without first
consult the employ legal counsel or hr depart
avoid liabil for obstruct of justic and wit tamper
it is assum that no cfe would knowingli or intention suborn perjuri conceal
evid or otherwis attempt to undermin a govern investig or a judici
proceed but it is import to understand the potenti for liabil for these offens
dure a fraud examin
to understand what conduct could lead to accus of improprieti or crimin liabil
fraud examin should be familiar with the follow feder statut there mai be
addit state statut that prohibit similar conduct in connect with state investig
or even state civil lawsuit an attornei should be consult for the law of a specif
jurisdict
wit tamper 18 usc 1512 et seq
the victim and wit protect act 18 usc 1512 et seq make it a feloni to engag
in mislead conduct toward anoth person with the intent to influenc delai or
prevent a witnesss testimoni or to caus or induc ani person to withhold testimoni
or document
section 1512b2a make it a crime to 1 knowingli 2 us intimid or physic
forc threat or corrupt persuas 3 with the intent to induc anoth 4 to withhold
testimoni a record document or other object from an offici proceed or 5 alter
individu right dure examin law
2446 2011 fraud examin manual
destroi mutil or conceal 6 an object 7 with the intent to impair the object integr
or avail 8 for us in an offici proceed
section 1512b2a is the statut under which arthur andersen llp wa charg
follow the enron scandal dure the investig into enron misde it wa found
that andersen direct it employe to destroi document to prevent their retriev by the
sec dure the investig of enron howev the andersen convict wa overturn
in 2005 becaus of error in the juri instruct
crimin sanction have been ad to section 1512 for the corrupt alter or destruct
of document section 1512c make it a crime to 1 corruptli 2 alter destroi mutil
conceal or attempt thereto 3 a record document or other object 4 with the intent to
impair the object integr or avail for us 5 in an offici proceed or 6
otherwis obstruct influenc imped or attempt thereto ani offici proceed
section 1512c origin crimin those who knowingli and corruptli destroi or
direct other to destroi relev evid howev the us suprem court in arthur
andersen llp vs unit state narrow the statut to exclud the term knowingli
section 1515 provid definit for certain provis under obstruct of justic statut
for exampl it defin mislead conduct as includ among other thing
knowingli make a fals statement
omit or conceal inform that render a statement mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a write that is fals forg alter or otherwis lack
in authent with intent to mislead
knowingli invit relianc on a materia lly mislead sampl specimen map
photograph or other object with intent to mislead
knowingli us a trick scheme or devic with intent to mislead
unlik obstruct of justic see below the victim and wit protect act statut can
be violat without ani corrupt purpos to obstruct justic even if there is no grand juri or
other judici proceed pend section 1512 onli requir proof that the defend act
intention with intent to influenc delai or prevent testimoni or the withhold of
evid the act appli to wit in a prospect or anticip proceed as well as a
pend on
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2447
in light of the victim and wit protect act fraud examin must take care as to how
he instruct a wit with regard to the confidenti of the investig confidenti is
a legitim concern and the investig need to instruct a wit concern how to
preserv privileg and confidenti howev instruct a wit not to speak with
govern investig or other parti to litig or give instruct that could be
misunderstood in that wai expos the investig and the compani to potenti wit
tamper liabil
the victim and wit protect act also make it a misdemeanor to harass anoth
person and therebi hinder delai prevent or dissuad ani person from attend or
testifi in an offici proceed report a feder offens caus an arrest for a feder
offens or caus a crimin prosecut
obstruct of justic
to review obstruct of justic statut punish effort to imped or obstruct the
investig or trial of other substant offens there ar sever feder crimin statut
that prohibit obstruct of justic mani ar specif to a particular set or industri or to
a particular kind of proceed such as the prohibit against obstruct a feder audit 18
usc 1516 or obstruct the examin of a financi institut by a feder agenc 18 usc 1517
these statut ar contain in chapter 73 of the us code and prohibit imped
influenc or obstruct virtual ani type of feder proceed includ crimin
investig through the destruct of document threat bribe or wit tamper
for more inform see the obstruct of justic section in the law relat to fraud
part 2 chapter abov
spoliat of evid
spoliat of evid is broadli defin as the act of destroi evid or make it
otherwis unavail the act of spoliat can surfac in just about ani type of case
crimin or civil and by ani parti plaintiff or defend the theori behind spoliat of
evid presum that the individu who make evid unavail follow the
probabl initi of a lawsuit is awar of it detriment effect upon a case
although few jurisdict have a separ caus of action for spoliat of evid almost
everi jurisdict allow for sanction result from such act some court requir the
individu right dure examin law
2448 2011 fraud examin manual
spoliat to be intent though other mere requir neglig or reckless spoliat
intent spoliat claim usual involv element similar to the follow 1 the
exist of a potenti lawsuit 2 the defend ant knowledg of the potenti lawsuit 3
the destruct mutil or signific alter of potenti evid 4 intent on the
part of the defend to disrupt or defeat the lawsuit 5 a causal relationship between the
act of spoliat and the inabl to prove the lawsuit and 6 damag
neglig spoliat claim gener occur when a parti unintention lose evid
valuabl to hi claim or a third parti lose or destroi evid in a suit an exampl of the
requir element for a neglig spoliat claim includ 1 exist of a potenti civil
action 2 a legal or contractu duti to preser ve evid which is relev to the potenti
civil action 3 destruct of that evid 4 signific impair in the abil to prove
the lawsuit 5 a causal relationship between the evid destruct and the inabl to
prove the lawsuit and 6 damag
perjuri and suborn of perjuri
perjuri is the will give of fals materi testimoni under oath and includ fals
claim that on cannot rememb a materi fact there ar three gener feder perjuri
law first section 1621 of titl 18 us code is the gener feder perjuri statut it make
it a crime to present materi fals statement under oath in feder proceed section
1621 appli in ani case in which a law of the unit state author an oath to be
administ all state have similar statut
second section 1623 of titl 18 us code make it a crime to present fals testimoni or
produc other fals inform under oath befor or ancillari to a feder court or grand
juri
third section 1622 of titl 18 us code crimin suborn of perjuri it make it a
feder crime to induc or caus anoth to commit perjuri a person violat section 1622 if
he induc anoth to commit perjuri in violat of either section 1621 or section 1623
the most obviou exampl of suborn of perjuri is tell a prospect wit to lie or
to conceal the conduct that is the subject of the investig similarli suborn also ha
been found to exist where a person counsel a wit to give testimoni the truth of which
he recklessli disregard even though he did not know for certain that the inform wa
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2449
untru suborn is onli an offens when the perjuri ha in fact occur proof of
suborn requir proof of the perjuri
discharg a suspect wrongdoer
mani employ when confront with a possibl wrongdoer or an employe who refus
to cooper in the investig immedi want to fire the employe whether the
employe can or should be discharg depend on the fact of the case and the law in the
employ state public employ ar govern by stricter standard than privat employ
constitut and statutori law govern the investig and termin of public
employe for exampl a public employe cannot be termin for exercis hi fifth
amend right against selfincrimin
employ ar gener permit to disciplin or termin an employe who refus to
cooper with a reason request to provid inform but if the employe ha an
employ contract for a specifi term or is emploi under a collect bargain
agreement that requir the employ to have good caus to termin employ then the
question will be whether the refus to cooper amount to good caus for the termin
thi in turn depend on the natur and reason of the request for inform the
reason for the refus and the overal impact that the refus ha on the investig a
good caus requir can also aris if the compani polici and practic creat an
impli employ contract
in contrast employe who do not have an employ contract that impos a good caus
requir socal atwil employe can be discharg at ani time and for ani reason
that is an employ doe not need good caus to discharg an atwil employe in some
state employ is consid at will in the absenc of an employ contract
an employ howev doe not have a right to fire ani employe includ an atwil
employe if the fire contraven a fundament public polici for instanc fire an
employe who refus to commit an illeg act or if it violat the compani establish or
customari disciplinari practic and procedur for more inform see the discharg in
violat of public polici section below
individu right dure examin law
2450 2011 fraud examin manual
good caus
befor discharg an employe it is best to document in the employe file that the
employ ha good caus to termin employ although there is no exact definit
of good caus there ar sever question that the compani should ask befor termin
an employe
did the employe know that the conduct would be subject to disciplin
wa the rule the employe violat reason relat to the safe effici or orderli
oper of the busi
did the compani investig to discov whether the employe violat the rule
did the compani conduct a fair and object investig
did the compani obtain signific evid of a violat
wa the decis nondiscriminatori
wa the disciplin relat to the serious of the offens and the prior record of the
employe
if the compani feel that discharg of the employe is like it should make sure that the
employe action and the compani action ar well document and place in the
employe personnel file
neglig discharg
at least on state ha recogn the right of an employe to sue for the employ failur to
properli investig charg against the employe befor discharg him most of the court
that have address thi issu have refus to recogn the claim
breach of impli contract
even if there is no express employ contract between an employ and employe mani
state recogn that an impli contract mai be creat under certain circumst an
impli contract aris out of the conduct of the parti even without ani formal written or
oral agreement if a court find that an impli contract exist then the employe who is a
parti to the contract can usual onli be fire for good caus
impli contract can be found to exist even when the employ wa not awar that there
wa a contract in fact mani state now recogn that an impli contract between
employ and employe can aris out of employe handbook handbook provis
might limit the right to discharg for just caus and the issu might be whether the
employ ha enough evid of wrongdo to constitut just caus
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2451
breach of the duti of good faith and fair deal
a few state recogn a duti on the part of the employ to deal with it employe fairli
and in good faith thi duti is impli in most contract includ contract of employ
the scope of thi duti might also be shape from specif oblig found in the
provis of an employe handbook or from compani personnel polici or practic
document that the employ had good caus to termin the employe should defeat
thi claim
discharg in violat of public polici
some state recogn a public polici except to atwil employ under thi except
an employ doe not have the right to discharg an atwil employe if it contraven a
fundament public polici to qualifi under thi except the employe must prove that
hi conduct is favor by a relev public polici and that the employ retali against
him for engag in thi protect activ agai n to counter thi claim the employ will
need to show that it had good caus to fire the employe and that it wa not retali
against the employe becaus of the protect conduct
for exampl if an employe is fire becaus he support a particular polit candid in
the last elect a court or juri might find that hi termin is in violat of the gener
public polici allow peopl to vote for whomev thei pleas but if the employe wa
conduct fundrais activ on compani time the compani would like have good
caus to termin the employe and such termin would not be in retali of the
employe support of a particular candid
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2501
crimin prosecut for fraud
basic principl of crimin law
wherea civil law is that bodi of law that provid remedi for violat of privat right
crimin law deal with offens of a public natur a crimin defend in a feder or state
court is presum innoc he also ha the right to remain silent to confront accus to
be advis by counsel to have a speedi trial in front of peer as well as other protect
and under the us crimin justic system the govern bear the burden of prove the
accus guilti beyond a reason doubt and it is expect to scrupul observ the
right of the defend
also in the crimin system the govern must adher to the princip guarante of
individu right which ar establish by the fourth fifth and sixth amend these
amend ar appli to the state under the due process claus of the fourteenth
amend
the procedur describ in thi chapter primarili refer to feder rule individu state
procedur might differ
fourth amend
to review the fourth amend guarante the right of all citizen to be free from
unreason search and seizur it provid the right of peopl to be
secur in their person ho us paper and effect against unreason search and
seizur shall not be violat and no warrant shall issu but upon probabl caus support
by oath or affirm and particularli describ the place to be search and the person or
thing to be seiz
fifth amend
the fifth amend guarante subject of a crimin investig the right to refus to
answer question or to provid certain person inform that might be incrimin
the text of thi amend state
no person shall be held to answer for a capit or otherwis infam crime unless on a
present of indict of a grand juri except in case aris in the land or naval forc or
in the militia when in actual servic in time of war or public danger nor shall ani person be
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2502 2011 fraud examin manual
subject for the same offens to be twice put in jeopardi of life or limb nor shall he be compel
in ani crimin case to be a wit against himself nor be depriv of life liberti or properti
without due process of law nor shall privat properti be taken for public us without just
compens
sixth amend
the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right to counsel the
right to confront crossexamin the wit against them and the right to a speedi trial
in all crimin prosecut the accus shall enjoi the right to speedi and public trial by an
imparti juri of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been commit which
district shall have been previous ascertain by law and to be inform of the natur and caus
of the accus to be confront with the wit against him to have compulsori process for
obtain wit in hi favor and to have the assist of counsel for hi defens
fourteenth amend
the due process claus of the fourteenth amend incorpor these feder right
and make them applic to the state the fourteenth amend provid
section 1 all person born or natur in the unit state and subject to the jurisdict
thereof ar citizen of the unit state and of the state wherein thei resid no state shall
make or enforc ani law which shall abridg the privileg or immun of citizen of the
unit state nor shall ani state depriv ani person of life liberti or properti without due
process of law nor deni to ani person within it jurisdict the equal protect of the law
arrest and interrog
the fourth amend guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason
search and seizur thi mean that the govern cannot make an arrest unless there is
probabl caus to believ that the suspect commit an offens the probabl caus
requir of the fourth amend is the standard by which a polic offic is
author to make an arrest to obtain an arrest warrant
an arrest occur whenev a reason person would not feel free to leav although the
fourth amend doe not necessit warrant for all arrest thei ar requir under
some circumst
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2503
arrest in privat home
arrest for minor offens that ar not commit in the arrest offic presenc
although a warrant is requir in some circumst the suprem court ha identifi
situat in which warrant ar not requir for exampl a polic offic or privat citizen
mai make an arrest in public without a warrant if a feloni is commit in hi presenc thi
except is design to remov the intol abl burden a uniform warrant requir
would creat for law enforc
in addit the suprem court ha held that a person arrest without a warrant is entitl
to prompt judici determin of probabl caus befor that person can be detain for
ani extend period
not all polic stop ar arrest that requir probabl caus in terri v ohio 392 us 1 1968
the suprem court held that the polic mai briefli detain and question a person for
investig purpos if there ar specif articul reason to do so a valid stop mai
yield evid to effect an arrest if the polic arrest or detain unlawfulli ani statement or
evid obtain as a result will be suppress the suspect mai still be prosecut
howev if other untaint evid of wrongdo exist
interrog of suspect
after the arrest the suspect is place in custodi while in custodi the polic can interrog
the suspect to obtain inform or a confess but there ar limit on such
interrog
the fifth amend provid that a person cannot be compel to give inform that
mai incrimin him in a crimin case but it appli onli to
compel testimoni statement the fifth amend appli onli to testimoni
statement ie ani testimoni or commun evid that might tend to incrimin
the individu either directli or indirectli by lead the govern to incrimin
evid nontestimoni conduct such as compel a suspect to appear in a lineup
give handwrit sampl or submit to blood or alcohol test is not bar by the fifth
amend
individu the fifth amend appli onli to individu busi entiti includ
sole proprietorship and other organ do not have a fifth amend privileg
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2504 2011 fraud examin manual
the fifth amend protect an individu person paper that ar not voluntarili
prepar includ tax return if incrimin document such as appoint book
correspond and other record that the subject prepar without govern
compuls ar not cover by the amend and must be produc
to ensur that everi citizen ha the opportun to exercis thi fundament right the
suprem court rule in the landmark case of miranda v arizona 348 us 436 1966 that
the polic must give the follow warn known as the miranda warn befor
interrog ani suspect held in custodi
that the suspect ha the right to remain silent
that ani statement can be us against him at trial
that the suspect ha a right to the assist of an attornei
that an attornei will be appoint to repres the suspect if he cannot afford to retain
on
miranda warn ar requir onli if the suspect is 1 interrog 2 while held in custodi
3 by public author certain except to the warn requir appli such as when
immedi question is necessari to ensur public safeti the warn gener ar not
requir when a person is be question by privat parti
onc a suspect assert the right to remain silent all question must ceas until counsel is
provid if the defend thereaft decid to make a statement the govern must
show that it wa the result of a voluntari know waiver of hi right
the suprem court howev made major revis to the miranda warn in three
separ case decid in 2010 in on case the court upheld a version of the miranda
warn that told a suspect of hi right to a lawyer befor rather than dure
interrog in a second case the court rule that a suspect request for a lawyer is good
for onli 14 dai after the suspect is releas from custodi final in a third case the court
held that suspect must tell polic that thei ar go to remain silent if thei want to invok
their right to remain silent and stop an interrog
4 florida v powel 130 s ct 1195 feb 23 2010
5 maryland v shatzer 130 s ct 1213 1223 feb 24 2010
6 berghui v thompkin 130 s ct 2250 june 1 2010
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2505
apart from the miranda requir a confess also must be voluntari not coerc by
physic or psycholog mean some induc is permiss such as inform the
suspect that a confess might result in treatment that is more lenient us deceit and
trickeri to extract a confess such as tell the suspect that an accomplic had confess
when in fact he had not is treat differ by differ court some permit such
confess other not no confess will be admit if the circumst under which it
wa obtain render it unreli
for more inform on the applic of the fifth amend to investig
conduct by nongovern personnel pleas refer to the individu right chapter
the charg process
onc the govern ha arrest someon for a crime the person under arrest must be
brought befor a magistr without unnecessari delai thi is known as the initi
appear at thi time the arrest offic must swear to a complaint establish
probabl caus if the arrest wa without a warrant the defend will then be advis of
the natur of the complaint of the right to retain counsel or to appoint counsel and of
the gener circumst under which pretrial releas mai be obtain
for most offens individu that ar in polic custodi can post bail and be releas
pend trial bail is a monei bond to ensur that defend will show up for trial if a
defend fail to show up the bond is forfeit and a warrant for the defend arrest is
issu
the eighth amend howev prohibit excess bail the suprem court ha held
that the eighth amend doe not absolut requir pretrial releas onli that if bail is
appropri it be set no higher than necessari to assur the defend presenc at trial if
under the circumst the presid judg decid that releas would pose a seriou threat
to the safeti of the commun or to a particular individu or that no amount of bail or
particular condit of releas would prevent the defend from flee the judg can
deni bail to keep the defend in custodi
at the initi appear a defend who ha not yet been indict also is inform of hi
right to a preliminari examin thi is a formal adversari hear befor a judg where
the defend mai be repres by counsel and can crossexamin wit the purpos
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2506 2011 fraud examin manual
of the hear is to determin whether there is probabl caus to hold the defend for
further proceed not to establish guilt or innoc becaus of it limit purpos
hearsai and even illeg obtain evid can be admiss motion to suppress must be
made to the trial court
if the magistr determin at the preliminari examin that there is no probabl caus
the complaint will be dismiss and the defend releas but the govern mai
institut a subsequ prosecut for the same offens presum with better evid
preliminari examin often ar us by defens counsel as an opportun to get free
discoveri of the detail of the prosecut case
becaus some defend mai us preliminari examin to obtain inform some
prosecutor prefer to obtain a grand juri indict a grand juri indict is held to
satisfi the probabl caus requir of the fifth amend and preclud the need for
the preliminari examin everi state in the us ha provis for a grand juri but not
all us the option
the grand juri
the grand juri is an investig bodi that is empow to issu subpoena for testimoni
and document to determin whether a violat of the law ha occur the grand juri
consist of 16 to 23 peopl sworn as juror who meet in secret deliber usual in
biweekli or monthli session to hear wit and other evid present by prosecutor
and to vote on indict an indict or true bill must be agre upon by at least 12
juror vote without the prosecutor present
the hear is a nonadversari proceed the accus ha no right to be inform of it
deliber to know the evid against him or to confront the accus the accus
also ha no absolut right to appear and if he doe mai not be accompani by counsel
howev the accus mai period leav the grand juri to consult with the attornei
these sever limit on the right of the accus ar thought by some to be justifi on
the ground that thei ar necessari to investig crimin activ effect and that the
grand juri ha onli the power to accus not to convict the defend the defend if
indict ha full constitut protect at trial the grand juri power ha been sever
critic by mani legal and public interest group abus of it process can do sever
damag to innoc parti particularli public figur to whom an indict alon can be
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2507
devast for thi reason defens counsel in major whitecollar case now often begin it
defens at the grand juri stage to try to convinc prosecutor not to indict rather than
wait as wa tradition the case until an indict is return
the grand juri ha the right to subpoena wit and document refus to appear or
produc mai be punish as contempt with fine or jail term until the subpoena is
compli with or the grand juri term expir a wit or target of the grand juri retain
the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
a grand juri mai be us to obtain evid of possibl violat of the crimin law and
it process mai not be us as a ruse to obtain evid for parallel civil action a common
exampl of such parallel proceed would be investig of possibl antitrust violat
the grand juri mai howev with the appropri court order make evid avail to
the proper govern author for a civil proceed as long as the primari purpos of
it inquiri wa to enforc the crimin law access by privat parti via court order to
grand juri evid for us in privat civil proceed is unlik to be grant becaus of
secreci requir unless substanti need is demonstr
immun
in the cours of a grand juri investig or a crimin trial the prosecut mai appli for a
court order compel testimoni from a wit under a grant of immun becaus
immun testimoni cannot be us against the wit in ani crimin proceed such an
order doe not violat the fifth amend right against selfincrimin
an immun order protect the wit onli from prosecut from past crime about which
testimoni is compel other undiscov crime ar not cover nor is the wit
immun from prosecut for perjuri base on the immun testimoni such testimoni
also mai be us against the wit in a civil proceed
although it is legal permiss to prosecut an immun wit on the basi of other
testimoni and evid as a matter of practic thi is seldom done becaus of polici
consider and the difficulti of demonstr as the law requir that the
subsequ prosecut wa not in ani wai base on the compel testimoni
a decis to immun a wit is sole within the discret of the prosecut if the
applic meet statutori requir the court must grant the order if the immun
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2508 2011 fraud examin manual
wit refus to testifi out of fear of repris or for ani other reason the wit will be
found in contempt and jail until he agre to testifi or the grand juri term expir the
wit can then be summon befor a new grand juri and the process repeat indefinit
or until a judg decid that there is no possibl that further incarcer will induc
cooper
indict and inform
in the feder system all offens punish by death must be charg by indict all
feloni gener crime punish by imprison for a year or more must be
prosecut by indict unless the defend waiv the requir in which case the
prosecut mai proce by the file of an inform an inform is a charg sign
onli by the prosecutor without the involv of the grand juri a misdemeanor mai be
charg by either an indict or inform
arraign
onc the defend is formal charg he is brought befor the court to enter a plea thi
process is call the arraign a defend name in an indict if not alreadi in
custodi mai be arrest on a warrant alternativelymor often in whitecollar crime
case the defend is summon to appear befor a magistr at a state time and place
to be arraign
the arraign must take place in open court and it consist of read the indict or
inform to the defend and call on him to enter a plea the defend mai plead
guilti not guilti or nolo contender if the defend plead guilti the sentenc phase of the
crimin justic process begin a plea of not guilti set in motion the adjud process as
describ below a plea of nolo contender mean the defend doe not contest the charg
without formal admit or deni them a defend mai plead nolo onli with the
consent of the court if accept a nolo plea is the same as a plea of guilti for purpos of
punish but it cannot be us as a formal admiss of guilt thi make it a favor
plea for corpor defend face subsequ civil litig
befor the court will accept a guilti plea it must follow procedur to ensur that the plea is
voluntari and accur that is that there is a factual basi for the plea thi usual mean
that the defend must admit to commit act that satisfi each element of the offens in
some circumst howev a defend mai be allow to enter an alford plea name
after the suprem court case that upheld the practic under which he plead guilti
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2509
although continu to assert innoc such a plea mai be made to obtain the benefit of a
plea agreement and to avoid potenti more dire consequ such as the death penalti if
the defend is convict after trial befor the court accept an alford plea it must
determin that there is strong evid of guilt and that the defend understand the
consequ
prosecutori discret and plea bargain
whether crimin case ar actual brought to trial might depend on prosecutori discret
mean that the decis to prosecut is left to the discret of the appropri
jurisdict author prosecutor exercis thi discret consid issu like the
potenti for deterr the strength of the avail evid and the resourc time
labor monei incur by go to trial in gener the question is about the chanc for
obtain a guilti verdict but it is also about the cost and demand of achiev that verdict
accord to feder statist about 84 percent of the peopl arrest ar prosecut 62
percent of these ar convict and 34 percent ar incarcer case can be handl
through plea bargain or cooper agreement which ar discuss below in exchang for
assist so it is difficult to sai statist how success prosecutori effort have
been howev when public offici take a case to court thei ar gener arm and
readi of those case that do go to trial more than 90 percent end in convict
highlevel crime especi those involv public figur mai requir special approv
from the us depart of justic befor it mai be tri whitecollar crime is sometim
prosecut on the basi of declin guidelin that set out dollar amount below which case
ar not accept a prosecutor offic might decid for exampl that secur fraud of
less than 500000 will not be brought to trial becaus of the immens effort requir to
prosecut mani fraudul act prosecutor have to weigh the cost and exert of go to
court versu the amount avail for recoveri accordingli mani busi ar turn to
civil action to redress fraud as the crimin court becom more and more jam
compani can often speed up the process by file their own civil action although the
perpetr cannot be given jail time as a result of a pure civil action he can be order to
pai back the illgotten fund
prosecut attornei also have the power to settl charg with a plea bargain arrang
avoid the expenditur of time and effort involv at trial about 90 percent of crimin
defend never go to trial opt instead for a deal critic have charg that the plea
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2510 2011 fraud examin manual
privileg is abus by cynic prosecutor and lead to danger offend be releas
quickli and without retribut
the us suprem court disagre a major decis in 1971 declar that the plea
bargain is a highli desir part of the justic system becaus it lead to prompt and
larg final disposit in most case it a void much of the corros impact of enforc
idl suffer by defend who arent releas on bail it reduc the chanc that an
accus person will commit a crime while free on bail and it enhanc whatev mai be the
rehabilit prospect of the guilti by shorten the time between charg and
disposit santabello v new york 404 us 257 261 1971
plea bargain also can be a boon to offend a plea bargain is a negoti between the
parti that settl a crimin case after enter a plea bargain some offend ar releas
from ani prosecut whatsoev and other receiv lesser charg in a studi of white
collar crimin more than 42 percent of cooper defend were charg with just on
violat of the law while onli 30 percent of noncooper defend were so lucki
onc charg ar file against them whitecollar defend ar more like to insist on a
trial than other offend ar on averag consid all feder indict onli about 10
percent of those accus of commit a crime plead not guilti and proce to trial but
more than 18 percent of defend in whitecollar case nearli doubl the averag insist
on their trial peopl accus of secur fraud ar especi like to demand their dai in
court with well over half of these defend plead not guilti
corpor defer prosecut agreement
gener defer prosecut agreement occur when prosecutor file crimin charg
against a compani but then agre not to prosecut the claim as long as the compani
successfulli compli with the deferr agreement term essenti defer prosecut
agreement help compani avoid indict trial and convict while provid
prosecutor with anoth channel for dispos a corpor case that punish malfeas
and effectu chang in a compani cultur
the burden of proof in crimin trial
in crimin case the verdict must be base on assur beyond a reason doubt convers
civil trial requir onli a preponder of the evid to support a decis therefor
crimin trial ar tougher plainli put beyond a reason doubt requir that juror and
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2511
judg hear crimin case to be as sure as thei possibl can that the defend commit
the act as charg in pure philosoph term there might alwai be room for doubt
well did he realli fraud charg can be especi hard to prove becaus the
evid is by it natur overwhelmingli circumstanti ie compos of document and
their interpret versu the testimoni of eyewit but arch skeptic is hardli
practic in make necessari legal decis decid beyond a reason doubt entail
make the most assur judgment possibl base on the evid as present the appeal
process recogn that more than on examin of the charg might be necessari to
ensur an accur fairmind verdict
the prosecut is respons for prove the charg against the defend the
constitut guarante that the accus is presum innoc until the prosecut show
otherwis the presumpt of innoc mean that until the prosecut prove everi element
of a charg beyond a reason doubt the defend must be found not guilti even if he
offer no evid in hi defens
pretrial motion in crimin court
crimin trial like civil proceed often begin with pretrial motion some of these ar
the same regardless of the type of court civil or crimin for exampl both crimin and
civil defend can make motion in limin to exclud certain evid can ask that the charg
or complaint be made more definit and certain or can request a postpon of the trial
date other motion ar particular to the crimin process
some pretrial motion typic us in crimin trial ar discuss below
motion for sever
thi motion occur in case involv multipl defend that ar to tri at the same trial
thi motion ask that the defend be tri separ or at least that thi particular
defend trial be conduct separ
motion to suppress evid
a motion to suppress evid argu that evid that wa improperli obtain is
impertin or unduli prejudici or violat some other right and it ask the court to issu
an order that the evid be exclud from consider in mani case motion to
exclud evid decid at a suppress hear ing where the judg without a juri rule
on the proprieti of the govern conduct ar more import than the trial itself if
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2512 2011 fraud examin manual
the defens is abl to exclud certain piec of evid eg seiz narcot a taint
confess or critic book and record the prosecut might be forc to dismiss the
charg at least temporarili for lack of adequ proof but an unsuccess suppress
motion might be follow by renew interest by the defend in a plea bargain
motion for a chang of venu
thi motion ask the judg to move the trial to anoth court becaus the defend cannot
receiv a fair trial due to public prejudic
motion to dismiss
a motion to dismiss ask a judg to throw out the lawsuit becaus the oppos parti
argument is legal unsound there ar sever ground upon which a defend mai request
that the indict be dismiss the most common reason support motion to dismiss
ar discuss below
violat the defend right to a speedi trial
the indict mai be dismiss for violat of a defend right to a speedi trial when
the trial date exce a certain amount of time after the charg usual 70 dai a relat
basi for the motion is alleg preindict delai when for exampl the prosecut
took an excess long time in bring the indict
select prosecut
when multipl perpetr ar involv in a crimin act a defend mai claim select
prosecut accus the author of target some individu and exoner other
without caus defend also mai alleg vindict prosecut if after be
exoner on on charg a person is charg with anoth more seriou charg the
individu mai claim vindict prosecut
violat the doubl jeopardi claus
the doubl jeopardi claus of the fifth amend which prevent someon from
be tri for the same crime twice mai be us to request a dismiss dismiss motion
also mai claim that the indict is invalid becaus it is base on taint evid
insuffici evid or illeg seiz evid
a motion challeng the suffici of the indict
rule 7 of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir the indict to contain a plain
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2513
concis and definit statement of the essenti fact constitut the charg against the
defend as discuss previous the indict must therefor alleg all of the essenti
element of the crime charg includ the requisit crimin intent where requir by
statut if the indict is defici then the defens can challeng it the defens mai
challeng the indict if the prosecut fail to plead an essenti element of the fraud
offens or plead the necessari fact but even if an indict is dismiss for insuffici
the prosecut is usual free to refil the indict
exampl
if a defend is charg with mail fraud the indict must specif describ the detail of
the fraudul scheme perpetr through the us of the mail and must set forth the fals
represent see unit state v hess 124 us 483 1888 if the indict fail
to do thi the court will dismiss the indict howev the victori might be shortliv even
though the indict is dismiss the prosecut usual is free to refil the indict
duplic
rule 8a of the feder rule of crimin procedur requir that each count of an
indict state on and onli on offens a count that charg two or more offens is
duplicit unfortun what constitut a singl offens often is hard to determin with
whitecollar crimin statut singl and continu offens commit for sever
object or by multipl mean like mail or wire fraud or conspiraci mai be charg in on
count although thei altern could be charg as separ and distinct count
gener howev if the separ violat ar all a part of the same crimin scheme thei
can be alleg in the same count thi is sometim prefer for the defend becaus if
all of the violat ar alleg in on count it look to the juri as if the defend ha
commit on fraud rather than 50 separ fraud
multipl
multipl is the opposit of duplic multipl occur when two or more count charg
essenti the same offens therebi expos the defend to cumul punish for
on offens in essenc multipl occur when a defend is charg twice for the same
offens expos him to doubl the punish
discoveri
discoveri refer to the formal process wherebi the parti to litig collect evid and
learn the detail of the oppos side case both the defend and prosecut have
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2514 2011 fraud examin manual
statutori right to certain pretrial discoveri the defend mai inspect copi of all
relev statement made by him or if a corpor by it employe in the custodi of the
govern a copi of the accus prior crimin record and all document item test
result and other evid the govern intend to introduc at a trial or that ar
necessari to the defens but the defend doe not have an absolut right to see copi of
prior statement made by a wit against him until such wit testifi at trial in mani
case howev particularli fraud prosecut where there is less risk of repris or
tamper with wit the govern mai voluntarili produc these statement befor
trial
discoveri under rule 16
feder rule of crimin procedur 16 identifi the inform that each side must
disclos gener the defens is entitl to inspect and copi statement made by the
defend the defens also mai inspect the defend prior record materi document
tangibl object and examin and test report
if and onli if the defend request discoveri of document and object or of
examin and test report the govern mai seek similar kind of materi from the
defens ani item that must be disclos ar requir to be disclos as soon as
reason possibl the court mai regul the discoveri process by enter protect
order or punish the failur to time provid the proper inform
the rule allow the defens to obtain statement the defend made to third parti as well
as govern agent if the statement were reduc to write therefor ani written
statement made by the defend to the cfe investig the case if the statement were
turn over to law enforc or the govern must be produc but oral statement
made to third parti ie nongovernment agent gener ar protect from discoveri
summari of rule 16 disclosur requir
statement of the defend upon the defend request the govern must disclos
ani relev written or record statement made by the defend thi includ written
record of ani relev statement made by the defend to a govern agent either
befor or after arrest as well as ani record testimoni of the defend made befor a
grand juri which relat to the offens charg
the defend prior record upon the defend request the govern must furnish a
copi of the defend prior crimin record if it exist
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2515
document and tangibl object upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi or photograph ani book paper document
photograph tangibl object build or place which 1 ar materi to the
prepar of the defend case 2 ar intend for us as evid at trial by the
govern or 3 were obtain from the defend or belong to the defend
report of examin and test upon the defend request the govern must allow
the defend to inspect and copi ani result or report of physic or mental
examin scientif test or experi that ar materi to the prepar of the
defens or that the govern plan to us as evid at trial
expert wit upon the defend request the govern must provid a written
summari of the testimoni to be given by it expert wit thi summari must
includ the expert opinion the basi of those opinion and the qualif of the
expert
while the state ha a broad duti to disclos evid in crimin case there ar limit to
what it must turn over to the defens the defend doe not have a right to the work
product of the state which includ report memoranda and other intern document
made by the govern attornei in prepar for and prosecut the case in addit the
defend doe not have a right to inspect statement made by govern wit prior
to the time the wit actual testifi
the jenck act 18 usc 3500
the jenck act permit the defend to obtain prior to crossexamin a govern
witnesss prior statement or portion thereof that relat to the subject matter of hi
testimoni on direct examin howev the statut also protect statement from
discoveri until after the direct examin ha been complet the statement that must be
produc includ not onli the written statement sign by the wit but also mai includ
note or memoranda of govern agent or prosecutor which set forth what the wit
said dure interview
exculpatori inform bradi materi
the prosecutor ha an ethic respons not to us evid that is fals and must correct
testimoni that he know is fals in 1963 the suprem court in the case of bradi v
maryland 373 us 83 expand the prosecut duti further under bradi the
prosecut must disclos all evid request by the defend that is materi to guilt or
punish ie evid that would tend to exculp him or reduc hi penalti the
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2516 2011 fraud examin manual
govern is expressli forbidden from conceal evid that would call the charg into
question
disclosur by the defend
prosecut ha similar privileg to learn the substanc of the defens case and the basi
for the accus person notguilti plea if the defend request disclosur of the
prosecut document and tangibl object report of examin and test and it
expert wit then the prosecut is correspondingli entitl to disclosur of these
item from the defens the prosecut is not of cours entitl to disclosur of the
defend work product nor is it entitl to statement made by prospect wit to
the defend or hi attornei
the trial process
under the sixth amend the accus is entitl to a speedi and public trial by an
imparti juri in the state and district wherein the crime wa commit in feder
court the speedi trial act mandat that the defend be indict within 30 dai of arrest
and tri within 70 dai of notic of the charg exclud delai caus by certain
enumer circumst if the time limit ar not adher to the court mai dismiss the
case with or without prejudic depend on the circumst
juri select
the constitut requir that the trial of all crime except in case of impeach shall
be by juri in the feder system the defend mai waiv the right with the consent of
the court and prosecut petti offens do not requir a trial by juri
most crimin case ar tri by a juri of 12 with at least two altern but the parti mai
stipul to a lesser number the juri is expect to be imparti for the juri select
process call voir dire the prospect juror ar brought into the courtroom and thei ar
question by the parti or the court to determin their suitabl juror ar ask about
their background employ gener belief and principl knowledg of the actual case
or case like it whether thei know ani of the parti in the case or their attorneysvirtu
anyth that might elucid the potenti juror state of mind is fair game provid of
cours the materi is relev to the case outright charact assassin is not part of juri
select though some juror have felt otherwis especi in highpubl trial
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2517
there ar three wai potenti juror ar dismiss in the first instanc the judg exercis
discret and dismiss a juror upon hi own initi thi happen when a juror fail to
meet the minimum qualif or is otherwis unabl to serv
the second method dismiss individu for caus ie a request that a prospect juror be
dismiss becaus hi predisposit make him unfit to serv as a juror each parti mai
remov ani number of prospect juror for caus such as admit bia or prejudic
challeng for caus ar not limit in number
the third wai to dismiss juror is by exercis a peremptori challeng a peremptori challeng
allow a litig to remov someon from the juri panel without comment or justif
peremptori challeng allow a parti to remov a juror for virtual ani reason a parti
howev cannot us it peremptori challeng in a wai that is sole influenc by race
ethnic or gender and unlik challeng for caus peremptori challeng ar limit in
number
addition the defend mai challeng the entir juri pool call the venir if the
select procedur systemat exclud certain group such as minor women or
young peopl
the juri that hear the case the petit juri is not requir to reflect a crosssect of the
commun or contain individu of the same race or ag as the defend
open statement
onc the juri is select and sworn and after some introductori remark by the judg the
actual trial begin with the open statement the open statement allow each side to
present their posit to the juri it let them outlin the evid thei will present and
what the evid will prove in gener the prosecut present it open statement first
in it the prosecutor usual explain the charg outlin the evid he intend to
produc and tell the juri that the prosecut will ask for a verdict of guilti the
prosecutor is not permit to argu the case at thi point that will be done at the end the
defens counsel then give an open statement although on occas it will wait until the
defens case begin
present evid
after the open statement each side present it case that is each side present
wit and exhibit to build it case
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2518 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener the side with the burden of proof present it case first thu in crimin trial the
prosecut present it case first becaus it bear the burden of prove everi element of
the offens beyond a reason doubt the defens is under no oblig to produc ani
evid at ani time
the trial begin by call wit to the stand for direct examin the initi question
by the side that call the wit after the direct examin the oppos parti can
submit these wit to crossexamin refer to question of on side wit by
the oppos side but the oppos parti mai waiv thi right and proce without
question after crossexamin is complet the parti that call the wit can if it
choos reopen direct refer to as redirect examin which mai be follow by recross
question by the oppos parti at the end of question each wit is dismiss
though the person can be call again later by either side
most evid present in court come from di rect testimoni as a gener rule a witnesss
testimoni must be confin to fact within person knowledg rather than conjectur or
opinion a duli qualifi expert wit howev mai give an opinion if the court
determin that it will assist the juri to understand the evid or to determin a fact in
issu account and fraud examin mai be and often ar call to testifi in fraud case
as lai wit expert or both see the chapter on testifi as an expert wit for
more inform
the sixth amend guarante a defend the right to confront and crossexamin
wit thi is a princip reason why hearsai evid statement made out of court
and not base on a wit direct knowledg gener is exclud under the sixth
amend confront claus a witnesss outofcourt statement ar not admiss at
trial unless the wit is testifi at trial and is subject to crossexamin when hearsai
is us instead of live testimoni the defend can argu that the hearsai declar wa a
wit and that the defend wa not afford the opportun to confront the wit if
a judg unduli restrict a defend right to probe the prosecut wit credibl
or knowledg of the fact a convict mai be revers
dure trial a parti mai object to the admiss of evid the admiss of evid and
object thereto ar rule on by the trial judg the rule of evid ar complex but can
be summar as follow thei intend to limit the evid present to the juri to onli
matter relev to the specif charg and to exclud unreli or unduli prejudici
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2519
evid the same piec of evid howev mai be admiss or inadmiss
depend on the specif reason for which it is be offer for exampl evid of
other similar crime or wrong act by the defend mai not be offer by the
prosecut mere to show that the defend is more like to have commit the crime
charg but the same evid mai be introduc to prove intent if disput by the
defend to rebut a claim of accid or mistak or to impeach fals testimoni by the
accus
at the close of the prosecut case the defens usual move for a judgment of acquitt
on the ground that the prosecut evid even if believedi legal insuffici to
convict if the judg grant the motion the trial end and the defend is acquit if the
motion is deni the defend mai elect to present evid or mai rest
after the prosecut ha present it case the defens will make it case if the defend
elect to testifi he is subject to crossexamin and the prosecut mai impeach the
defend credibl by show prior convict thi usual is a deathblow to the
defens and is the reason mani defend do not testifi the judg howev mai exclud
such evid as unduli prejudici particularli if the prior crime is remot in time or did
not involv dishonesti or fals statement
a defend is entitl to call charact wit on hi behalf who often have no
knowledg of the charg or fact in issu but who ar prepar to testifi to the defend
charact such testimoni must be given in the form of the witnesss opinion or testimoni as
to the defend gener good reput testimoni as to specif incid of good
conduct is not permit becaus such would prove too confus and timeconsum
moreov becaus ani charact evid is ci rcumstanti at best it is consid
permiss to limit the testimoni to reput or opinion charact wit mai be
ask on crossexamin if thei have heard about alleg wrong or dishonest act by
the accus includ a prior convict
common legal issu in fraud case
two gener type of legal issu on subst antiv the other procedur ar often
encount in fraud examin the substant issu includ the prove of each
element of the offens beyond a reason doubt includ the element of intent if intent
in fact is an element the procedur issu includ the right to counsel and the manner in
which fraud examin emploi by law enforc have conduct arrest search and
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2520 2011 fraud examin manual
seizur and interrog fraud examin ar most like to encount legal problem
over such issu as the condit organ and sanctiti of their work paper and their
audit assumpt if the case is base on an account hypothesi net worth method for
exampl
often account data us as evid is challeng as not meet the hearsai except
in gener the issu that aris with such evid is whether the proffer documentari
evid is the best evid and whether secondari evid is admiss when the best
evid is unavail
similarli question about the busi record except to the hearsai rule often aris that
is a parti question whether a record wa made in the ordinari cours of do busi or
wa made in book of account contemporan with a busi transact
anoth issu often encount is the expert of a fraud examin call to provid
expert testimoni opinion evid a parti mai challeng an expert witnesss credenti
and thei mai call anoth expert to question the first expert opinion
legal defens
a defens is an assert by a defend in a crimin or civil suit that seek to explain awai
guilt or civil liabil for damag the more common defens includ
alibi
consent
de minimi infract trivial
duress
entrap
ignor
mistak
infanc
insan
necess
protect of properti
selfdefens
public duti
legal imposs
protect of other
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2521
a defend might also rais a defens base on statut of limit proper venu and
proper jurisdict
in crimin fraud case where intent is an element of the crime defens attornei mai
advanc a number of smoke screen theori to excus their client of guilt ie by alleg
some inhibit factor to the formul of intent for exampl while ignor of the law
might be no excus it can persuad a juri particularli if the crime is complex and financi
in natur eg an incom tax evas case where the net worth method of incom
reconstruct ha been util some type of computer embezzl fit thi
categori too as doe bank fraud secur fraud and pricefix conspiraci in short
while ignor of the law might not be an excus it sometim induc piti or sorrow
likewis a defend might us innoc mistak e advanc ag sick and illiteraci to
evok sympathi and while thei mai not work as defens thei mai persuad the judg or
juri to be lenient in sentenc
insan mai be us as a defenseand often isin crime of violenc but to make an
insan defens the defend gener must provid notic of the insan defens befor
trial
the defens that caus prosecutor the most headach ar assert of poor investig
work eg improp arrest search seizur and interrog improp handl and
document of evid privaci invas and libel slander and defam the
defend dure the investig in fraud examin a defend might make
alleg of sloppi audit and mishandl of work paper
also the increas us of the undercov approach in crimin investig ha led to an
increas in the us of entrap defens entrap occur when law enforc
offic or govern agent induc a person to commit a crime that he is not previous
dispos to commit to make thi defens the defend claim that the peac offic or
undercov agent solicit encourag or incit the crimin act and without that
incit the defend claim that he would not have commit the act
rebutt wit
after the defens rest the court mai permit the prosecut to call rebutt wit and
permit the defens to put on rebutt evid at the close of all evid the defens mai
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2522 2011 fraud examin manual
make or renew it motion for a judgment of acquitt the court mai reserv it decis
submit the case to the juri and decid the motion befor or after the juri return with a
verdict the motion mai be made for the first time and grant even after the juri bring in
a guilti verdict
propos juri instruct
at the close of the evid the juri usual is temporarili discharg and the parti meet
with the judg to submit propos juri instruct to the court usual juri instruct
ar read to the juri after close argument and the instruct will includ such matter as
the basic element of the charg the definit of reason doubt the prosecut
burden and if request by the defens the warn that no advers infer mai be
drawn from the failur of the defend to testifi some defens attornei howev do not
request advers infer instruct becaus thei believ it mere remind the juri of the
accus failur to explain or defend hi conduct
each side is entitl to instruct on the law support it theori of the case if there is
ani credibl evid in it favor even if there is substanti evid to the contrari if a
request to instruct the juri is deni a parti must object and state the ground for it
object befor the juri retir to preserv it right to appeal thi is an extrem
import point for defens counsel becaus juri instruct error provid fertil ground
for revers on appeal
close argument
after both side have present their evid thei make their close argument the
close argument provid the juri with a final opportun to hear each side posit the
prosecut argu first the defens follow and the prosecut ha the opportun for
final rebutt
the remark in close argument ar limit to issu pertin to the case and confin to
evid present dure the trial improp comment dure close mai be object to
by the oppos attornei and the judg mai strike them from the record if the object is
sustain in extrem situat a close argument deem improp mai result in a
mistrial the present proceed ar termin and if the plaintiff or prosecutor choos a
new trial date set
the prosecutor is held to a particularli high standard in close argument he mai not
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2523
misstat the evid express a person opinion as to the defend guilt or the credibl
of wit or otherwis make prejudici or inflammatori remark the prosecutor is
expect to stick to the fact and to the reason infer that can be drawn therefrom
in most case the defens close argument focu on attack the motiv and credibl
of the govern wit and emphas the heavi burden of proof the govern
bear
instruct to the juri
after both parti have present their close argument the next step is for the judg to
instruct the juri in a juri trial the judg present a charg or instruct to the juri again
the instruct state the legal issu to be consid in a case defin ani unusu term
and tell the juri specif what it must decid review the complaint or indict
count by count if necessari a verdict charg form will state the decis issu in a questionandansw
format the juri us the question to focu their deliber
juri deliber
after hear instruct the juri retir for it deliber and select a foreperson
gener the verdict must be unanim but in some state such as oregon and
louisiana a juri can return a convict with onli 10 of 12 vote if the juri is unabl to
reach a verdict the judg will declar a mistrial if there is a mistrial the defend can be
retri if the prosecut elect to do so doubl jeopardi doe not attach unless the
defend is acquit after the juri is sworn
verdict of the juri
if the juri reach a verdict the foreperson or the bailiff announc the verdict in open
court either parti mai request that the juri be poll that is that each juror be ask
individu whether he concur in the verdict if ani juror answer no the juri must
return for further deliber or mai be discharg
sentenc
follow a guilti verdict the judg must impos a sentenc without unnecessari delai
prior to the sentenc hear a probat offic will prepar a present report that
will review the defend charact background associ prior crimin record and
other factor relev to set an appropri sentenc the report will recommend a
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2524 2011 fraud examin manual
particular sentenc or rang of sentenc the feder rule of crimin procedur requir
that the present report contain a victim impact statement that is an assess of the
financi social psycholog and medic impact upon and cost to the victim of the
crime thi inform mai be us to set the punish or to support a possibl
restitut order the defend and hi counsel ar allow to review all or part of the
probat report except the sentenc recommend
at the sentenc hear the defend counsel and the prosecutor mai be heard befor a
sentenc is impos the court mai impos a fine a term of imprison or both or place
the defend on probat for a specifi period and under certain condit the court
mai order restitut to the victim in addit to a fine or prison term or as a condit of
probat a feder statut provid that a defend who ha been found guilti of fraud
mai be order to give notic to the victim appar to protect the public from further
fraudul act by the defend and to alert the victim to the possibl of civil recoveri
sentenc of imprison for two or more offens mai be order to run consecut
or concurr depend on the natur and sever of the offens and other factor in
feder court a defend mai be fine up to twice the pecuniari gain realiz from the
crime or twice the loss sustain by the victim as an altern to the statutori amount
sentenc guidelin
the sentenc reform act of 1984 provid for the develop of guidelin for the
sentenc of individu and organiz offend the individu guidelin becam
effect in 1987 and the guidelin for organ in 1991 in april 2010 the us
sentenc commiss modifi sentenc guidelin for organ especi as thei
relat to complianc program the chang will becom effect on novemb 1 2010
bar ani congression modif or reject
individu guidelin
under the guidelin sentenc determin ar made by crossreferenc the base offens
level assign to a particular offens with the defend crimin histori categori there
ar 43 basic offens level murder and treason be level 43 offens and six crimin
histori categori adjust mai be made up or down in each tabl base on the
particular fact and circumst of the case for exampl the base offens level for crime
involv fraud or deceit is six but if the fraud involv a loss of more than 2000 more
than minim plan or other aggrav circumst the base offens level can be
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2525
substanti increas the final applic offens level is then coordin with the
crimin histori categori of the defend which is comput on a point basi accord to
the number and type of previou convict and other factor to arriv at the final
sentenc level the court mai depart from the recommend sentenc if uniqu factor
ar present but ani such departur must be support by specif reason
as an exampl a defend with no prior convict convict of fraud involv the loss
of 10000 would be sentenc to a term of four to 10 month absent unusu
circumst if the fraud result in the loss of 1 million involv more than minim
plan and wa perpetr by a defend who had a previou convict punish by
more than a year in prison the recommend term of imprison would be 41 to 51
month under the sentenc act the defend will serv a substanti amount of the
sentenc he receiv a small reduct is possibl for good behavior the sentenc act
abolish parol in feder case
sentenc of organ
the sentenc guidelin for organ were design to reconcil the wide dispar in
feder sentenc
corpor and other organ mai be crimin liabl for offens commit by
their agent if commit in the scope of the agent duti and with the intend purpos of
benefit the organ
sentenc guidelin for organ indic that
the court must whenev practic order the organ to remedi ani harm
caus by the offens
if the organ oper primarili for a crimin purpos the fine should be set
suffici high to divest the organ of all asset
the fine rang for ani other organ should be base on the serious of the
offens and the culpabl of the organ culpabl gener will be determin
by the step taken by the organ prior to the offens to prevent and detect crimin
conduct the extent of involv in or toler of the offens by the organ
personnel and the organ respons after an offens had been commit
set the amount of the fine
when an organ is convict of a feder offens the fine it must pai is determin by
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2526 2011 fraud examin manual
calcul the base fine and ani culpabl multipli first the base fine is arriv at by
determin the greatest of
the amount from the offens level fine tabl
the pecuniari gain to the organ from the offens
the pecuniari loss from the offens caus by the organ to the extent the loss
wa caus intention knowingli or recklessli
the fine amount on the base offens level fine tabl rang from 5000 to 72500000
next the court calcul the appropri multipli for the base fine level depend on the
particular circumst factor that ar consid includ
involv in or toler of crimin activ
histori
whether the organ violat a judici order or injunct dure the offens
the exist of an effect program to prevent and detect violat of law
ani selfreport cooper and accept of respons
obstruct of justic by the organ
the culpabl score is then convert to a multipli that gener the recommend fine
rang the court will consid a number of addit factor to determin where in the
rang the actual fine will be impos an organ must be order to serv a period of
probat if the court find that
it is necessari to secur payment of restitut to enforc a remedi order or to ensur
complet of commun servic
if a monetari penalti is order and ha not been paid at the time of sentenc and
probat is necessari to ensur payment
it is necessari to ensur that chang ar made to reduc the likelihood of crime
it is necessari to accomplish sentenc act purpos
if the defend organ sentenc doe not includ a fine
the length of probat mai not exce five year in addit the court ha discret to
order the defend organ to public it convict and the natur of the offens
the court also mai order the organ to make period report to the court or the
probat depart and subject itself to unannounc examin of it book and
record final the court mai order the organ to develop and submit for court
approv an effect complianc program
law crimin prosecut for fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 2527
effect program to detect and prevent violat of law
under the guidelin if a convict organ ha an effect complianc program in
place at the time of the offens the sentenc judg will consid the organ act of
due dilig in try to prevent the illeg when decid whether to increas or mitig
the sentenc the guidelin defin effect complianc program as on that is reason
design implement and enforc so that it gener will be effect in prevent and
detect crimin conduct
the most signific chang under the modifi sentenc guidelin for organ
concern the sentenc reduct credit for have an effect complianc program befor
the guidelin were modifi organ were disqualifi from receiv a reduct in
sentenc for maintain an effect complianc program if a highlevel person wa
involv with the fraudul activ under the modifi guidelin howev involv
of a highlevel person is no longer an automat bar from effect complianc program
credit but the amend impos sever condit to receiv a reduct under these
circumst includ a direct report requir to the govern author board or
audit committe
see the chapter on fraud prevent program in the fraud prevent and deterr
section of the fraud examin manual for more inform about develop a corpor
complianc polici
due dilig
the organ must take at least seven minimum step to meet the requir of due
dilig
implement polici defin standard and procedur to be follow by the
organ agent and employe
assign specif highlevel personnel ultim respons to ensur complianc
us due care not to deleg signific discretionari author to peopl whom the
organ know or should have known had a propens to engag in illeg activ
commun standard and procedur to all agent and employe and requir
particip in train program
take reason step to achiev complianc eg by the us of monitor and audit
system and by have and public a report system where employe can refer
crimin conduct without fear of retribut hot line or ombudsman program
crimin prosecut for fraud law
2528 2011 fraud examin manual
consist enforc standard through appropri disciplin rang from reprimand to
dismiss
after detect of an offens the organ must take all reason step to
appropri respond to the offens and to prevent further similar offens includ
modifi it program and appropri disciplin for the individu respons for the
offens and for those who fail to detect it
appeal
a convict individu ha the right to appeal the trial court decis the defend is
advis of hi right to appeal at the sentenc hear a notic of appeal must be file
within 10 dai or absent a show of excus neglect the right is lost
gener an appeal mai be made onli for error of law to which the defend made time
object at trial or in pretrial proceed the failur to object is said to waiv ani claim
of error the underli rational for thi rule is that a time object permit the trial
judg to correct ani error when it occur elimin the delai and expens of an appeal and
possibl new trial
although the gener rule provid that a defend can onli appeal error he object to
dure trial veri seriou error that ar plain on the record and affect the defend
substanti right mai be rais on an appeal even without a time object
an appel court will revers a convict onli if it find error that deni the defend a
fair trial essenti an appel court will not revers a convict unless it find error that
affect the substanti right of the defend harmless error that doe not affect the
juri decis is toler
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2601
the civil justic system
in thi part we will review the legal aspect of action by privat parti includ fraud
examin auditor account secur personnel privat investig and attornei to
investig and recov loss due to fraud mani of these case will end up in the civil
justic system
civil litig
civil action to recov damag for fraud or to enjoin further fraudul activ can be file
by privat plaintiff in state or feder court most commonlaw fraud action usual style
misrepresent claim ar file in state court suit involv parti from differ state
and involv more than 75000 in controversi known as divers case or action brought
on the basi of feder statut such as the civil rico provis can be brought in feder
court feder court gener is prefer by plaintiff in larger case becaus feder court
provid better access to wit and document locat in differ state the procedur
describ below ar larg drawn from the feder rule
begin the civil action
a civil action begin with the file of a complaint in the appropri court usual in the
jurisdict in which the defend or the plaintiff resid or where the claim aros
the feder rule provid that the complaint should be a short and plain statement
show the court jurisdict to hear the case e g in feder court that there is divers
of citizenship and more than 75000 in issu the ground for relief and a demand for
judgment rule 9b of the feder rule of civil procedur requir that the fact entitl
the plaintiff to relief be state with particular thu wherea a plaintiff in a neglig
case might get into court by mere allegingwithout ani detail or support evid
that the defend oper hi automobil in a neglig manner at such and such place and
time a fraud plaintiff must plead the alleg fraud in detail the actual misrepresent
that were made to whom how thei were fals and so on depend on the type of fraud
claim
the 9b requir often creat a catch22 for fraud plaintiff a compani for
exampl might have good ground to believ that it is the victim of a kickback fraud but it
might need access to the discoveri system subpoena for document and wit etc to
the civil justic system law
2602 2011 fraud examin manual
prove the illeg payment in such circumst particularli where the specif inform
need is within the sole control of the defend the court might relax the 9b
requir somewhat
the complaint togeth with a summon must be serv on the defend the summon
advis the defend that a civil action ha been commenc against him in court and that
he ha a certain time to answer usual 20 dai or suffer a default judgment thi procedur
is call servic of process a corpor mai be serv through ani offic manag agent or
other agent author by law to receiv process process mai be serv on a defend
outsid the state where the court sit if the defend ha signific contact within the
state such as a corpor conduct busi there
onc serv the defend must then file an answer within the specifi period a
defend answer mai deni liabil add counterclaim against the plaintiff or rais
motion to dismiss the action base on ground such as failur to state a claim expir of
the statut of limit and improp servic in major litig these procedur
challeng might consum a year or more and result in enorm legal fee befor the case
reach the merit of the issu if the defend doe not file the answer befor the deadlin
the defend forfeit the case and is held liabl for damag as the court deem fit thi
type of judgment is call a default judgment
the discoveri stage
if the legal hurdl requir to begin a civil action ar overcom the case enter the
discoveri stage to review discoveri refer to the formal process wherebi the parti collect
evid and learn the detail of the oppos case under feder rule either parti mai
take discoveri regard ani matter not privileg that is relev to the subject matter of
the action or that might lead to admiss evid
discoveri can be an extrem expens and timeconsum process often take year to
complet particularli in complex litig such as fraud action propos to reform and
streamlin the system ar constantli advoc but seldom adopt in larg measur
becaus trial lawyer ar unwil to give up or to limit their opportun to learn about
and look for weak in their oppon case
due to the growth of document in electron format coupl with the difficulti court
have had in determin how electron document should be introduc as evid
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2603
sever discoveri rule in the feder rule of civil procedur frcp were amend in
2006 to acknowledg electron inform as a necessari compon of discover
evid wherea the frcp onc us the term data compil to refer to electron
evid the 2006 amend replac thi term with electron store inform esi
the rule appli to parti in ani civil disput in feder court howev mani state will
adopt or have adopt similar chang
the princip mean of discoveri whether tradit paper document discoveri or
electron discoveri includ prediscoveri disclosur pretrial confer oral
deposit written interrogatori request to produc document request for admiss
request a physic or mental examin and request for inspect of properti
prediscoveri disclosur
frcp 26a and similar state rule requir parti to make prediscoveri disclosur these rule
requir parti to disclos certain inform befor formal discoveri begin such as the
disclosur of wit ident materi that mai be us to support claim or defens
comput of damag and insur agreement that mai cover the claim as amend
in 2006 rule 26a includ electron store inform esi in the list of item that
litig must provid in their prediscoveri disclosur
pretrial confer
as amend in 2006 frcp 26f requir parti to attend a discoveri plan confer
call a pretrial confer to discuss certain issu such as the form in which the parti
want electron inform to be produc prior to the amend parti could discuss
electron discoveri issu wherea now thei must
after attend their discoveri plan confer the parti ar to develop a discoveri
report form 35 report which set forth a descript of how disclosur or discoveri of
electron inform should be handl
the court will enter a schedul order after receiv a form 35 report from the parti
among other thing the schedul order set forth the time limit for complet
discoveri the amend provid that feder court mai also includ provis for
disclosur or discoveri of electron store inform as an item in it schedul
order consequ failur to abid by a discoveri report or schedul order might result
in sanction and possibl crimin charg against the parti
the civil justic system law
2604 2011 fraud examin manual
oral deposit
deposit ar probabl the most popular and us form of discoveri a deposit is
sworn testimoni given by a parti or wit upon question by counsel for on of the
parti befor trial and outsid of court usual in a lawyer offic oppos counsel and a
stenograph who administ the oath and transcrib the testimoni also ar present
deposit testimoni mai be us to obtain evid about the parti own case or the
oppon or to preserv testimoni for trial in the feder system a wit outsid the
subpoena power of the court can be depos in the area he resid and the transcript read to
the juri at trial if the depos attornei wish to inspect or refer dure the proceed to
certain document in the witnesss possess these can be demand by a subpoena duce
tecum a legal order for the wit to produc the document for refer dure the
deposit
unless otherwis specifi statement made dure a deposit can be produc as
evid dure the trial accord to feder guidelin examin and crossexamin
of wit mai proce as permit at the trial the depon or counsel
can object to particular question as in a trial at a deposit the person must answer the
question even when counsel enter an offici object the evid is taken subject to
the object feder rule of civil procedur 30 thi mean the object is duli note
and if the deposit evid is present at trial the judg will be ask to rule on the
object befor that part of the deposit is read to the juri
interrogatori
interrogatori ar question that ar submit to an oppos parti in a suit thei ar
someth like a written deposit interrogatori cannot be given to anyon other than a
parti to a suit interrogatori ar submit to the wit in write if the receiv parti
think that a question is improp then he mai object to the question if no object is
given then the parti must answer the question in write all answer must be sworn to
under oath interrogatori ar less expens to perform than deposit some parti will
try to provid as littl inform as possibl but still give a truth answer howev
that tactic can backfir if the answer parti doe not provid the inform request
that parti cannot introduc evid on those issu at trial and can be sanction by the
court
a typic interrogatori in a fraud case might inquir
state your name address telephon number and titl of the person answer these
interrogatori
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2605
describ in detail your educ background and includ the name and address of
all institut that you have attend the date of attend and a descript of the
degre or certif that you have obtain
identifi all person have knowledg either directli or indirectli of the alleg
contain in defend origin answer
pleas list the name address and telephon number and the employ name address
and telephon number or each expert wit you expect to call as a wit at trial
describ in detail your duti at the compani
interrogatori ar cover under feder rule of civil procedur 33 in addit to allow
parti to serv interrogatori on other parti rule 33 allow a parti to produc busi
record in lieu of written respons but thi appli onli when the burden for acquir
such record is nearli equal on both side as amend rule 33 add esi to the type of
busi record that the respond parti mai specifi and produc in respons to an
interrogatori
a typic interrogatori in a fraud case regard esi might inquir
identifi and describ all email system present and previous in us by parti at
ani time within time period includ but not limit to the name of the email
server and the client softwar the version number of the softwar in us dure time
period and describ the date of us for each
identifi all past and present individu includ date respons for the ongo
oper expans mainten and upkeep of parti comput network
for all past and present data backup perform on all comput system in us dure
time period identifi the individu respons for make backup and the
individu who supervis thi process
request to produc document
a written request to produc document or other tangibl item demand that specif materi
be made avail for inspect the request must specifi the document or the type of
inform be sought eg eg all document identifi in your answer to
interrogatori rather than pleas turn over all document relat to thi case these
request mai be serv on oppos parti record from thirdparti wit or
institut mai be obtain by subpoena that often must be accompani by deposit
notic as well to take testimoni to authent the document
the civil justic system law
2606 2011 fraud examin manual
request for product ar cover under feder rule of civil procedur 34 in 2006 rule
34 wa amend to specif entitl ani parti to serv ani other parti with a request to
produc esi and to establish a procedur that give parti a mean for resolv ani form
of product issu
concern request to produc esi the amend rule provid that a request parti
shall set forth either by individu item or by categori the item to be inspect and
describ each with reason particular it further provid that the request shall specifi
a reason time place and manner of make the inspect and perform the relat
act in addit the request mai specifi the form or form in which electron store
inform is to be produc
written request for product of document regard esi might inquir
pleas produc ani and all document relat to parti backup tape andor
archiv media contain email and other electron data from time period
all email or comput system log
pleas provid exact copi of ani and all disk cd dvd and ani other storag
media us to store data relat to thi action from time period
request for admiss
a request for admiss is design to assist in stipul certain fact admiss help set
what is and is not at issu in a suit the request contain statement which ar present to
the oppos parti wit and outsid parti ar not subject to request for admiss
to the declar i daisi miller have discuss my compani oper with
individu emploi by our competit daisi repli either admit or deni she
mai also object to the question if she feel it is inappropri or impertin to the
proceed altern she can declin to answer sinc the issu is in disput she doe
not deni convers just the implic of the question or becaus she doe not have
enough inform to answer request for admiss often ar us near the end of the
discoveri process to narrow the focu of the disput ani admiss establish becom
part of the offici record and can be produc dure the trial
request for admiss also ar us to authent document for instanc
exhibit a is a true and correct copi of check no 3456
exhibit a wa sign by you
the signatur shown on exhibit a is your signatur
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2607
physic and mental examin
either side of a disput can request a physic or mental examin of a parti to the suit the
person condit must be in controversi and shown to be pertin to the proceed
the request is made on motion for good caus and the examin perform by
qualifi personnel it mai seem unthink that a defend would plead insan to a
fraud charg but mental and physic instabl can be part of a defend argument for
mitig circumst the physic or mental health of a defend also mai come into
plai if the defend file a counterclaim alleg mental anguish as the result of an improp
search wrong termin invas of privaci and so on
request for inspect of properti
parti mai request to inspect equip real estat or other properti which ha a bear
on the proceed request for inspect set forth as specif as possibl the item of
the request and the type of examin desir in fraud case thi request mai pertain to
record archiv offic machin or land that ha been involv in a crime for exampl in
the johnni mckenzi case which can be found in the appendix a mckenzi wa accus
of take monei out of a safe therefor a crucial issu in the case involv who had access
to the safe and whether the combin of the safe had been chang the defens file a
motion request that thei be allow to enter the premis of the west palm beach polic
depart to examin and conduct a test of the safe a copi of that motion is includ in
appendix a request for inspect of properti ar cover under feder rule of civil
procedur 34
electron discoveri
electron discoveri ediscoveri refer to the legal discoveri process that deal with
electron store inform esi esi is differ from paper inform becaus it
can be store in larger volum and in more locat it is also more volatil in addit
electron document usual contain metadata data about data which is rare found in
paper document
becaus of esi uniqu ediscoveri pose addit challeng to the legal process
preserv
the commenc of litig creat a discoveryrel oblig on the parti to
preserv relev inform whenev litig is reason anticip and although the
duti to preserv is not uniqu to esi electron inform is often difficult to preserv
the civil justic system law
2608 2011 fraud examin manual
becaus of it volatil natur also parti who fail to properli preserv evid spoliat
mai be subject to advers consequ thu it is import to consid the basic
characterist of the oblig to preserv inform and examin the relev
oblig especi those concern the preserv of esi
to avoid ani advers consequ compani should establish polici and procedur
govern the mainten storag and product of esi
document retent polici
document retent polici that instruct employe on which document to preserv or
destroi ar an import compon of ani risk manag program for thi reason
organ should adopt such polici and manag must effect monitor and
revis them thi is especi import given the grow amount locat and format
of esi in todai environ which creat addit risk and cost for compani that do
not have such polici for both physic and digit data
litig hold procedur
organ should also creat litig hold procedur which provid a process wherebi a
compani issu a litig hold commun that notifi employe to suspend the
destruct of potenti relev record when the duti to preserv relev inform
aris the duti to preserv relev data begin when a lawsuit is reason anticip
there ar howev certain attribut of esi that make execut a time litig hold
difficult includ 1 esi mai onli be avail for a temporari time period 2 busi
practic ar often design to free up storag space and 3 esi is particularli problemat
becaus of it sheer volum
time impos a litig hold is necessari to avoid sanction includ monetari fine
and sanction advers infer juri instruct sanction or dismiss of claim or
defens
safe harbor
frcp 37 allow court to order sanction for a parti failur to make disclosur or to
cooper in discoveri but as amend rule 37 contain a safe harbor provis
provid that court cannot impos sanction on a compani for fail to provid esi that
wa lost becaus of routin data manag practic nevertheless it is import to note
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2609
that ignor is no defens against how a parti electron inform is store
inadvert product of privileg esi
frcp 26 provid that if a parti ha inadvert produc esi that is later determin to
be privileg the receiv parti must destroi and refrain from us ani protect
inform until ani disput is resolv thi rule recogn that review larg volum
of esi for attorneycli privileg materi is gener more costli and time consum
than tradit document recoveri thi rule howev doe not provid guidanc for
determin whether or not produc the materi waiv the privileg
on septemb 19 2008 presid bush sign into law a bill ad evid rule 502 to
the feder rule of evid thi rule protect against the inadvert waiver of the
attorneycli privileg or the work product protect see the basic principl of
evid chapter below for further discuss of thi rule
esi from sourc that ar not reason access
frcp 26 also make a distinct between esi that is reason access and that which
is not the relev provis state that a parti need not provid discoveri of esi from
sourc that the parti identifi as not reason access becaus of undu burden or
cost
the rule howev doe not defin what is reason access accordingli disput will
continu to center on how access the inform is and what constitut undu
burden or cost thu at the outset of fore eeabl litig parti should understand the
scope and sourc of their electron inform that mai be relat to the case as well as
the inform locat and format thereaft it will be the court respons to
reconcil disagr between the parti as to what electron inform is and is not
reason access
the form of product
frcp 34 also provid procedur for resolv ani form of product issu specif
rule 34 requir that where a parti object to the form for produc the electron
inform or if no form is specifi in a request for inform the respond parti
must state the form or form it intend to us furthermor if a request doe not specifi a
form for produc the electron inform the respond parti must produc the
inform in a form or form in which it is ordinarili maintain or that ar reason
the civil justic system law
2610 2011 fraud examin manual
usabl given the specif of rule 34 parti should decid the format thei need prior to
request electron inform from the oppon
becom litig readi
the recent amend to the feder rule of civil procedur concern the discoveri of
esi ar expos compani to further liabil and cost dure litig becaus thei
requir organ to adapt how thei manag retain store and deliv esi dure legal
proceed the amend provid that in most circumst parti must voluntarili
turn over ie without await a discoveri request by the other parti a copi or a
descript by categori and locat of all esi to the other parti within 14 dai of the pre
trial confer therefor it is essenti that parti or organ be prepar for the
advent of electron discoveri prior to a case be file or in other word compani must
be litig readi to be litig readi parti or organ must know the scope of
their esi the locat of their esi the storag format of their esi the length of time esi is
store and whether their esi is readili access
pretrial motion in civil court
as note abov there mai be a seri of pretrial confer in which the parti to the suit sit
down with the judg these exchang ar design to narrow the disput to as few
contest point as possibl and to remov procedur obstacl that could delai a trial
judg also mai encourag parti to settl dure thi stage
onc on parti file a motion the other side can object and file an oppos motion there
gener will be a hear in person befor the judg on the motion sometim a judg
review the materi in each side motion paper and will issu a tent rule just befor the
hear to indic which wai the opinion is like to go thi give each side an idea of how
to prepar their argument for the hear at the hear each side argu it case to the
judg and answer question from the bench the judg mai announc a decis
immedi or take the matter under submiss make the final rule later
some common pretrial motion ar list below but pleas note that the actual name of
the motion vari among jurisdict
writ of attach
a writ of attach is a court order to seiz an asset befor judgment is render in some
case a parti mai attach or secur asset befor trial to prevent the defend from
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2611
dispos of them while the lawsuit is pend if the parti can show that the defend is
like to dispos of asset most court do not like to issu writ of attach and
attach is usual avail onli in certain type of suit ordinarili judg ar veri
reluct to depriv a defend of hi properti until a determin ha been made that he
is liabl to the plaintiff in addit if the plaintiff lose the suit the defend can sue for
damag in most case the parti request attach will be requir to post a bond in
the amount of the attach properti
sequestr
sequestr refer to the act of seiz properti that is the subject of a controversi and
place it in the custodi of the court thi is similar to attach the differ is that the
properti is physic deliv to the court for safekeep
motion for injunct relief
as note abov an injunct is a court order by which a parti is requir to perform or is
restrain from perform a specif act in a fraud case the defend is like to have
misappropri asset and there mai be a substanti risk that he mai try to hide or transfer
the illgotten gain if the monei or asset taken can be locat the plaintiff can ask for a
writ of attach to secur the asset howev there often ar case where the monei
mai not be locat yet in these case the plaintiff or the prosecutor can ask the judg to
issu an injunct
applic for a preliminari injunct
a preliminari injunct is a court order that the defend perform or not perform some
act while the suit is be contest if a lawsuit between the parti is pend a judg can
issu a preliminari injunct which freez everyth until a trial can be held the
injunct will prohibit the defend from transfer or move ani asset unless first
approv by the court a preliminari injunct is usual issu onli after the other parti
ha been given an opportun to respond
motion for a temporari restrain order
a temporari restrain order tro is an emerg temporari injunct order the
defend to perform or not perform some act like preliminari injunct tro ar
order to prevent irrepar injuri unlik preliminari injunct howev tro can be
enter without the defend be present and ar usual enter without notic to the
other parti it is onli good for up to 10 dai until the defend can appear befor the judg
the civil justic system law
2612 2011 fraud examin manual
motion to dismiss
thi motion ask a judg to throw out the lawsuit becaus the oppos parti argument is
legal unsound in other word the motion argu that even if the alleg ar taken as
true the other parti is not entitl to anyth
motion to make more definit and certain
thi motion ask for greater detail or specif in the complaint the specif of the
complaint such as which loss bartlebi be held liabl for will affect how the
defend choos to respond
motion in limin
thi motion is made befor trial and it request the court to rule that evid is
inadmiss prohibit oppos counsel from refer to or offer the evid dure
trial for exampl rockhard mai us someth damag from bartlebi crimin trial in
their complaint bartlebi object to the complaint becaus it unfairli prejudic the case
against him
motion to strike
thi motion ask that inflammatori prejudici or irrelev materi be stricken from the
record
motion for continu
a motion for continu ask the court to postpon a hear confer or an upcom
trial some court grant on or two routin other district requir justif for each
motion for continu
motion for summari judgment
a motion for summari judgment ask a judg to decid the case without a trial base on
the evid contain in the complaint and answer judg mai also consid affidavit or
declar ie sworn written statement contract or other materi in reach their
summari decis either side in a lawsuit can file for summari judgment the motion is
grant unless it can be shown that some of the fact as present ar in disput
counterclaim and crossclaim
in addit to the avail motion defend can file a counterclaim against the plaintiff in a
civil action a counterclaim also known as a countersuit doe just what it name impli it
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2613
level accus against the origin plaintiff who is now the defend of the
counterclaim the specif of thi claim mai be file as part of the defend answer or as
a separ document if a defend file a counterclaim it and the origin complaint will be
tri concurr with the final judgment stipul a decis on each side petit
addition if a case involv more than on defend a defend mai file a crossclaim
against on of it codefend a crossclaim is simpli an action between coparti ie
claim between two defend or two plaintiff the most common occas for
counterclaim in a fraud case is when an employ sue an exemploye for fraud
altern disput resolut
a current trend in civil litig is to allow or encourag parti to an action to resolv their
disput without the necess of a trial altern disput resolut is the term us to refer to
these process
altern disput resolut ha certain advantag over litig it help preserv
exist busi relat between the parti it provid more flexibl remedi and often
but not alwai it is less costli
altern disput resolut usual involv on of two type of method mediat or
arbitr
mediat
mediat is the process wherebi an imparti thirdperson assist the parti in reach a
resolut of the disput the mediat doe not decid who should win but instead work
with the parti to reach a mutual agreeabl settlement ani agreement will be enforc as
a contract
arbitr
arbitr is the process wherebi a disput is submit to an imparti thirdperson known
as an arbitr who then decid the outcom of the case ie which parti should win
the arbitr act as a judg or juri by decid the case on it merit arbitr can be
either bind or nonbind if the arbitr is bind then the decis of the
arbitr is final and the parti cannot later submit their disput to a judg or juri for
the civil justic system law
2614 2011 fraud examin manual
determin convers if the arbitr is nonbind the arbitr determin is
not bind upon the parti
todai mani contract contain arbitr claus provid that if a disput aris between
the parti to the contract both parti agre to submit their claim to bind arbitr
rather than file suit
trial of a civil case
trial procedur in civil action ar similar to crimin case although there ar sever
notabl differ in civil trial juri need not consist of 12 peopl mani civil case ar
heard by six juror also the parti to a civil action mai stipul that the verdict need not
be unanim the burden of proof for the civil plaintiff is lower than for the crimin
prosecutor in most case the civil plaintiff must prove hi case onli by the preponder of
the evid mean that there must onli be slightli more evid in favor than against
addition the fifth amend privileg against selfincrimin is more limit in
civil proceed a parti still mai refus to answer question or produc evid but if he
doe infer might be drawn and the refus mai be disclos to the juri the judg also
mai enter sanction against the parti refus to produc evid up to and includ the
entri of a judgment against such parti
furthermor variou privileg ar recogn in civil proceed such as the marit
privileg prevent on spous from be compel to testifi against anoth the attorneycli
privileg prohibit the disclosur of commun between an attornei and hi
client for the purpos of render legal advic and the work product doctrin protect an
attornei note and certain other materi the attornei prepar in anticip of litig
work undertaken by an account investig or fraud examin at the direct of an
attornei also mai be protect by the attorneycli privileg and the work product
doctrin see the chapter on evid for more inform
like crimin trial civil trial begin with the open statement start with the parti that
bear the burden of proof thu civil trial begin with the plaintiff counsel speak first
as in crimin trial the open is devot to introduc the parti state the natur of
the disput and outlin the evid the parti expect to produc
follow the open statement the parti present their case becaus the plaintiff bear
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2615
the burden of proof he offer evid first in mani civil trial the proof consist of the
wit and counsel read portion of deposit taken in discoveri from wit
outsid the subpoena power of the court thi tend to be particularli uninterest for the
juri and mai be veri prejudici for a parti forc to reli on a great deal of such testimoni
answer to written interrogatori by the oppos parti also mai be read to the juri which
if extens can be even more bore
civil parti also mai call expert wit to give their opinion on matter thought to be too
technic for the averag juror to understand fraud examin and account mai be us
as expert in commerci case to comput and testifi to damag as with expert testimoni
in crimin trial each side usual produc a qualifi expert who disagre categor
with everyth the expert for the other side sai becaus the juri usual learn through
crossexamin that each expert ha been paid for prepar and trial time and
becaus juror gener have a difficult time understand and evalu expert
testimoni such testimoni mai have littl effect on the outcom of the trial
the same rule of evid appli in civil and crimin trial with certain except such as
the applic of the fifth amend privileg against selfincrimin note abov
wit except expert must relat onli fact not opinion and irrelev and
prejudici evid is exclud as is most hearsai both parti mai crossexamin and
attempt to impeach the other side wit in essenti the same manner as at a crimin
trial
the defend mai make a motion for judgment as a matter of law also refer to as a motion for a
direct verdict at the close of the plaintiff case on the ground that even if the plaintiff
evid is believ the defend still is entitl to a judgment as a matter of law both
side mai make such a motion at the close of all the evid if such motion ar deni
both side argu to the juri with the plaintiff go first the plaintiff usual is afford an
opportun for final rebutt the juri is instruct on the law regard element of liabil
and damag and then retir for deliber within 10 dai of the verdict the lose
parti mai renew hi motion for judgment as a matter of law and move for a new trial in state
court practic the motion for judgment as a matter of law also mai be refer to as a motion
for judgment notwithstand the verdict or motion for judgment nov non obstant veredicto
both side mai appeal from an advers verdict either as to liabil or as damag as in the
crimin system the appel court is larg limit to review the legal decis of the
the civil justic system law
2616 2011 fraud examin manual
trial court rather than the factual determin of the juri the appeal court mai revers
and remand for a new trial on some or all of the issu mai order that a certain portion of
the award damag be remit or mai enter final judgment if legal ground ar clear in
favor of either parti
a plaintiff who obtain a monei judgment often must take addit step to collect it thi
might includ garnish the wage of the defend or levi against hi nonexempt asset
in mani instanc particularli in fraud litig a judgment might go uncollect becaus
the defend ha alreadi squander or secret the asset in the latter circumst a
plaintiff mai conduct postjudg discoveri includ a deposit of the defend in an
attempt to locat asset to satisfi a judgment
fidel bond claim
the fidel bond claim is an oftenoverlook method of recoveri for loss due to intern
fraud a fidel bond is a type of polici which is issu by mani larg insur compani
under which the insur entiti is cover against loss caus by the dishonest or
fraudul act of it employe dishonest or fraudul act typic ar defin as those
act commit with the intent to
caus the insur to sustain a loss
obtain a financi benefit for the employe or for ani third parti intend by the
employe other than hi proper compens
as with ani other insur agreement fidel polici have deduct a limit of liabil
often in the million of dollar and certain exclus to collect the insur must submit
a sworn proof of loss claim within specifi time limit togeth with support evid
of liabil and the amount of loss proof of loss is entir the respons of the insur
the carrier will not conduct nor assist in the investig nor will it reimburs investig
or legal cost incur in make a claim
most polici have express subrog provis provid that if the insur compani
pai a claim it acquir the right of the insur to sue the wrongdoer policyhold ar
prohibit from interf with these right in ani wai at the risk of jeopard coverag
such as releas the wrongdoer from liabil therefor no settlement agreement or
releas should be execut with a dishonest employe or ani confeder unless the
insur compani consent
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2701
basic principl of evid
definit of evid
black law dictionari defin evid as
anyth perceiv by the five sens and ani proof such as testimoni of wit record
document fact data or tangibl object legal present at trial to prove a content and
induc a belief in the mind of a juri
evid refer to an intric rule develop and refin over hundr of year that is
design to ensur that onli relev and prob evid is admit in court proceed
and that irrelev unreli and prejudici evid is exclud so that case can be fairli
and expediti decid
everi aspect of try a case from file the complaint through discoveri into the
present of wit and exhibit is affect by rule of evid thi bodi of law
cover not just what count as evid but how that evid is gather handl and
present
evid in feder court is govern by the feder rule of evid fre these rule
set out what can and cannot be introduc dure a disput in the late 1960 a us suprem
court panel began codifi centuri of common law into the fre what had previous
been a farflung set of preced buri in local jurisdict and lengthi appeal decis
wa gather into a singular bodi of inform congress pass the uniform code of
evid in 1974 as public law no 93595 state and local court often have some
special rule of evid but these rule ar themselv base on feder guidelin
the rule of evid ar complex and counsel should be contact if an import question
of evid aris thi part focus on the more import rule and those of greatest
interest to fraud examin
three basic form of evid
evid is anyth percept by the five sens which is invok in the process of
argu a case document spoken recollect data of variou sort and physic object
ar all potenti evid evid is simpli anyth that relat to the prove or
basic principl of evid law
2702 2011 fraud examin manual
disprov of a fact or consequ with the known univers avail for court inspect
legal author have narrow the field by set up categori to evalu evidentiari
signific
there ar three basic form as distinguish from type of evid testimoni real and
demonstr testimoni refer to the oral statement made by wit under oath in
gener there ar two type of testimoni wit lai wit and expert wit a lai
or fact wit is a nonexpert wit who must testifi from person knowledg about a
matter at issu an expert wit is a person who by reason of educ train skill or
experi is qualifi to render an opinion or otherwis testifi in area relev to resolut
of a legal disput
real evid describ physic object that plai a part in the issu be litig the term
includ both documentari evid such as cancel check invoic ledger and
letter as well as other type of physic evid therefor a typewrit or printer in a case
involv question document is clearli real evid as is a tape record sinc member
of the court can experi the sound firsthand
demonstr evid is a tangibl item that illustr some materi proposit eg a map a
chart or a summari it differ from real evid in that demonstr evid wa not
part of the underli event it wa creat specif for the trial it purpos is to provid a
visual aid for the juri nonetheless it is evid and can be consid by the juri in
reach a verdict
direct versu circumstanti evid
there ar two basic type of admiss evid direct evid and circumstanti evid
direct evid includ testimoni that tend to prove or disprov a fact in issu directli such
as eyewit testimoni or a confess circumstanti evid is evid that tend to prove
or disprov fact in issu indirectli by infer mani fraud case ar prove entir by
circumstanti evid or by a combin of circumstanti and direct evid but
seldom by direct evid alon the most difficult element to prove in mani fraud case
fraudul intent is usual prove circumstanti and necessarili so becaus direct proof
of the defend state of mind absent a confess or the testimoni of a coconspir is
imposs
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2703
in a circumstanti case the court mai instruct the juri that the prosecut must exclud all
infer from the fact other than it determin of guilt even if no such instruct is
given the certifi fraud examin should appli the same standard in prepar a
circumstanti case
admiss of evid
question involv the admiss of evid occur when on parti object to anoth
parti offer of evid if a judg sustain an object the evid is not admit if
howev the judg overrul the object the evid is admit and can be consid by
the fact finder
the admiss of evid depend on a wide varieti of factor and in larg part on the
discret of the trial judg
relev
although the admiss of evid depend on a number of factor the most import
factor is relev the gener rule of evid provid that all relev evid is
admiss rule 401 of the feder rule of evid defin relev evid as evid
have ani tendenc to make the exist of ani fact that is of consequ to
determin of the action more probabl or less probabl than it would be without the
evid in other word evid is relev if it tend to make some fact in issu more or
less like than it would be without the evid the fact in issu of cours vari accord
to the case but gener can be said to be those that tend to prove the essenti element of
the offens or claim as well as relat matter such as motiv opportun ident of the
parti and credibl
whether a particular piec of evid is relev or not depend on what the evid is
offer to prove an item of evid might be relev and admiss if offer to prove
on thing but not relev and inadmiss if offer to prove someth els for exampl
under rule 404b of the feder rule of evid evid of other crime wrong or act
commit by the defend would not be admiss if offer to prove that the defend is
gener a bad person and therefor is like to have commit the crime with which he is
charg howev evid would be admiss if offer to prove motiv intent ident
absenc of mistak or modu operandi if such factor ar at issu if evid of other
wrong or act is admit the judg will instruct the juri that thei mai consid the evid
basic principl of evid law
2704 2011 fraud examin manual
onli as it relat to the narrow issu for which it wa admit and mai not consid it for
ani other purpos
that evid is relev doe not howev automat mean that it will be admit
under rule 403 of the feder rule of evid relev evid still might be exclud if
it is unduli prejudici threaten to confus or mislead the juri threaten to caus
unnecessari delai or wast of time or is mere cumul relev evid also might be
exclud if it is subject to certain privileg as note below thu evid of drug addict
technic might be relev to prove motiv for embezzl or fraud but the judg still
might exclud the evid if he believ that it prob valu is outweigh by the danger
of prejudic to the defend evid of other crime and act as discuss abov that ar
otherwis relev also might be exclud for the same reason
special rule concern some type of circumstanti evid
special rule govern certain type of evid that have been found over the year to be so
mislead and prejudici that thei have been categor exclud such evid is alwai
exclud unless an except appli
charact evid
in civil and crimin trial there is strong polici against charact evid fre 404
charact evid sometim call propens evid is testimoni or exhibit that
purport to establish a trait of charact or propens to behav in a particular wai such as
care honesti violenc or cowardic there ar some good reason to leav charact
out of the discuss whenev possibl such as the subject natur of the descript
on person gruff is anoth viewer aggress
addition charact is not an absolut indic of behavior that is it is pretti common
to remark how out of charact somebodi action were in a given situat so there is
alwai a chanc someon wa act out of charact make the behavior propens if
there wa on useless in the legal exchang
final testimoni about charact ha a reckless potenti to be mistakenli found misl
or concoct it is alwai possibl to misjudg someon especi if we onli know the
person in limit circumst like work or a social club moreov it is exceedingli easi to
fabric incid about charact and for shrewd talker to manipul percept of
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2705
person in a fraud case it must be shown that the defend commit the act in
question there is too great a danger of prejud the juri if you allow testimoni about the
defend just be a bad person whether he is a bad person or not ought to have no
bear on whether or not he commit the act in question
in gener charact evid is not admiss in civil case charact evid is rare
admiss and the gener rule in crimin case provid that evid of a defend bad
charact is not admiss at trial for exampl the govern cannot offer evid of a
defend prior crime or other bad act to prove the defend bad charact
there ar howev some instanc where charact evid mai be admit in crimin
trial some of the except for us of charact evid in crimin case includ
the accus mai offer evid of hi good charact in which case the prosecut mai
introduc evid of the accus bad charact
charact evid mai be admiss to reflect on the credibl of a wit
under rule 404b of the feder rule of evid evid of other crime wrong or
act is not admiss to prove the charact of a person in other word such evid is not
admiss to prove that the defend is gener a bad person and therefor is like to
have commit the crime with which he is charg for exampl if a defend is charg
with steal monei from hi employ safe the prosecut would not be permit to
offer evid that the defend had previous stolen monei from anoth employ to
show the defend had a propens to steal
howev there ar some us of charact evid that mai be admiss becaus thei ar
offer for a purpos other than show charact some of the except for us of
charact evid in crimin case includ
to show the accus knowledg intent or motiv for the crime
to prove the exist of a larger plan of which the charg crime is a part
to show the accus prepar to commit the charg crime
to show the accus abil and mean of commit the crime possess of a
weapon tool or skill us in the commiss of the act
to show the accus opportun to commit the crime
threat or express of ill will by the accus
to link the accus to physic evid at the scene
the suspect conduct and comment dure arrest
basic principl of evid law
2706 2011 fraud examin manual
attempt to conceal ident
attempt to destroi evid
valid confess
opinion testimoni
dure trial most evid is introduc through the testimoni of wit evid on
which the juri can make factual determin must be introduc in the form of admiss
testimoni or documentari evid by law or fact ie nonexpert wit
the rule of evid howev limit the testimoni of lai wit lai wit ar onli
allow to testifi about what thei have actual experienc firsthand and their factual
observ fre 701 in gener wit provid a report on what thei know and must
keep their opinion and conclus to themselv
despit the gener rule there ar wai to get a nonexpert witnesss opinion into the record
a lai wit mai give opinion if the statement is ration base on their own
percept and if the opinion is help to a clear understand of their testimoni or the
determin of a fact
opinion ar admiss if thei pass a threepart test
the wit must have direct person knowledg of the fact to which the opinion
pertain
the opinion must be of the common everydai sort ie doe not involv special
knowledg or test
the opinion is not part of a legal judgment reserv for the juri or judg to decid
opinion from ordinari wit must be base on person experi and have some
bear on the fact as oppos to the judgment of the case thi distinct is further refin
in situat involv hearsai and person judgment discuss below
in contrast to lai wit expert wit ar exempt from the opinion rule becaus
expert ar hire to render a profession opinion thei possess educ train skill or
experi in draw conclus from certain type of data or inform that lai
wit do not possess expert testimoni howev mai be exclud if it embrac a legal
conclus therefor expert opinion address guilt or innoc will like be exclud in
crimin case
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2707
exhibit
exhibit ar the tangibl object present as evid therefor both real evid and
demonstr evid ar enter into the record as exhibit thi includ document such
as contract letter and receipt as well as photograph xrai basebal bat knive
fountain pen and comput file in short anyth that is not testimoni is an exhibit
testimoni is what peopl sai exhibit ar the prop
authent typic exhibit
at the most basic level evid must be establish as reliabl or authent thu evid
other than testimoni evid must be properli authent that is the parti offer the
evid must produc some evid to show it is in fact what the parti sai it is if a piec
of real evid cannot be authent the evid will not be admit even if it is plainli
relev
for proper authent the parti offer the evid must produc some evid eg
testimoni from a person with firsthand knowledg to show it is in fact what the parti sai
it is and that it ha remain in the same condit from the moment it wa seiz until it is
us in court
similar to the authent requir for tangibl evid there is a similar sort of
credibl test for wit if testimoni is to becom admiss evid the wit
must demonstr that the knowledg be commun is believ and gain by
person experi
below ar some of the issu you will encount in prove to the judg that a particular
exhibit is authent
demonstr evid
again demonstr evid refer to a tangibl item that illustr some materi proposit
it differ from real evid in that demonstr evid is not part of the underli
event it is creat specif for the trial it purpos is to provid a visual aid for the juri
an exhibit us for pure illustr purpos is a type of demonstr evid
demonstr evid includ chart graph and summari that help to simplifi
complic evid for the juri in complex fraud case such evid is extrem us
but it must be simpl and easi to understand
basic principl of evid law
2708 2011 fraud examin manual
demonstr evid is admiss if the court decid that it present a fair and balanc
summari or pictur of the evid and is not unduli prejudici and if offer for it truth
valu and not just to illustr a point demonstr evid must be authent to
show that the evid is in fact what it is claim to be
also demonstr evid must be made avail to the other parti and the court mai
order that the inform us to creat the exhibit be produc in court
diagram
a diagram is a schemat or technic draw that is us to help make someth easier to
understand a diagram on paper or some other tangibl displai can be admit as evid
with no more foundat than the assent of a wit is thi a fair represent of the
suit where you work it doe not have to be true to scale or particularli detail a diagram
can be prepar befor trial dure trial or prep outsid the court and finish dure
question if a parti object to the admiss of a diagram the offer parti mai need to
establish that it is reliabl diagram can be us in tandem with photo or other
represent evid or as assist in demonstr to the juri
write
in gener authent of a write consist of establish who author the document
depend on the document and situat thi is done in on of sever wai 1 the author
testifi and claim authorship 2 a wit testifi to see the author write the document
3 with handwritten letter a wit verifi the author penmanship 4 with type or
machinewritten document the wit verifi the author signatur 5 a wit testifi
that the content of the document point decis to the author these and mani other
document issu mai requir the particip of a question document expert
busi record and other document
busi record can encompass a broad rang of document from all sort of organ
includ corpor small busi nonprofit oper and commun group like
other evid a parti offer busi record must provid testimoni that the exhibit is
the busi record in question for proper authent the parti offer the evid
should be abl to establish the follow two thing
the content of the document is complet and unalt
the document origin from the name place of origin
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2709
certain document such as busi record ar selfauthent and mai be receiv into
evid without independ proof of authent under the feder rule of evid
busi record ar selfauthent if a custodian or other qualifi person certifi that
the record meet the follow requir
the record were prepar reason near the time of the event it describ
the record were made by or base on inform transmit from a person with
knowledg
the document wa prepar as a usual part of do busi ie it wa not prepar
specif for litig
busi record ar also vulner to hearsai object put differ offer the
content of busi record to establish the truth of their content can constitut hearsai
thu such materi can be bar as unreli outofcourt statement unless a trustworthi
foundat can be establish if howev there is certif that compli with the selfauthent
rule list abov the record will not onli be selfauthent but the
content of the record will be admiss to the prove the truth of the content as an
except to the rule against hearsai
govern document
the requir for govern document ar the same as for other busi record the
distinct between govern and busi record aros becaus of narrow interpret
of the law that separ nonprofit from forprofit enterpris todai most record
regardless of origin ar call busi record
phone record
to be admit into evid phone record must meet the busi record authent test
howev investig must also be awar of the feder telephon record and privaci
protect act of 2006 trppa which crimin the practic of obtain and attempt
to obtain confidenti phone record inform through pretext gain access through
the us of fals statement unless it is otherwis permit by law violat of the act ar
crimin and if convict a violat face up to 10 year in prison and up to 100000 in
fine
electron store inform
current there is still much controversi regard how to authent electron store
inform esi the us depart of justic comput crime and intellectu
basic principl of evid law
2710 2011 fraud examin manual
properti section ha develop a manual for electron search and seizur which judg have
us as a guid as to whether digit evid ha been properli seiz if digit evid
need to be seiz it is vital that examin engag the servic of a train comput forens
technician a properli train technician should know the procedur to follow to ensur that
the file can be authent
gener to be admiss esi evid must meet the same authent standard as
hard copi document ie to show that the item is what the propon claim howev
court have recogn that the authent of esi evid mai requir greater scrutini
becaus esi can easili be alter after creation thu to prove that a particular electron
document is authent those offer the evid must demonstr that the origin
document wa not modifi after it creation
rule 901 of the feder rule of evid provid a nonexclus explic list of
method by which evid can be authent and some of the method mai be us to
authent esi rule 901b1 allow authent through testimoni of a wit with
knowledg that a matter is what it is claim to be addition rule 901b3 allow for
authent by comparison to alreadi authent evid by an expert wit or the
trier of fact similarli rule 901b4 allow authent by circumstanti evid of
distinct characterist eg hash valu or metadata
furthermor under rule 902 some document ar selfauthent which mean that thei
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent for esi purpos
the three most relev categori of selfauthent document ar offici public
trade inscript and certifi copi of busi record
in addit differ form of esi evid mai requir differ authent approach
therefor it is help to examin a few common type
email
unlik tradit busi letter written on formal letterhead email ar more prone to
authent issu and mai be more difficult to properli authent for exampl the judg
in lorrain v markel 241 frd 534 d md 2007 refus to allow either parti to offer email
of an arbitr negoti as evid find that neither parti authent the email
by simpli attach them to their motion as exhibit
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2711
email authent issu usual aris becaus email system ar unreli and inher
unsecur make email suscept to alter moreov email can lack reliabl
becaus the ident of sender can be corrupt through unauthor access and us
even so there ar numer wai email can be authent includ
wit with person knowledg eg a wit testifi that he recogn a copi of an
email that he receiv or draft
comparison with authent exampl eg if on email ha been properli
authent a second email could by authent by compar it with the first
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg the presenc of a parti name
and email address or the presenc of metadata
trade inscript purport to have been affix in the cours of busi and
indic ownership control or origin eg an automat busi signatur at the end of
the email
certifi copi of busi record eg email is accompani by a written certif
by it custodian
text and instant messag
as the us of text and instant messag continu to grow parti ar offer thi esi as
evid in an increas number of case howev given the natur of thi type of
evid parti often encount foundat issu when authent text and instant
messag notwithstand the novel technolog involv these type of esi can be
admiss when the propon offer direct or circumstanti evid as to it authent
the most like authent chat room and text messag ar
wit with person knowledg eg a wit testifi that he recogn a copi
messag that he receiv or draft
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg the us of the defend name
in the text messag and the subject matter of the messag
comput record
court typic accept comput file and document as evid in fact court themselv
ar us more electron resourc becaus mani aspect of litig can now be conduct
electron
tradition to be admit as evid computer record need onli meet the usual
businessrecord authent which requir that the computer record be
basic principl of evid law
2712 2011 fraud examin manual
accompani by certif by a qualifi person state that 1 the record were prepar
reason near the time of the event thei describ 2 the record were prepar as a usual
part of do busi and 3 the organ wai of keep record is demonstr
reliabl
the requir support materi to authent comput record will includ inform
on the comput machin us ani softwar and the recordkeep process a busi
record electron or otherwis is legal as long as it kept in the normal cours of busi
when there ar clear routin for compil inform admit the record into court will
be routin
recent howev court have recogn that authent of computer record mai
requir greater scrutini becaus unlik other esi evid the primari authent issu
regard computer record is what ha or mai have happen to the record in the time
between when it wa enter in the file and the time of trial base upon thi view the most
like method of authent computer record ar
wit with person knowledg eg an authent wit attest to the process by
which the computer record ar creat acquir maintain and preserv
circumstanti evid of distinct characterist eg a person busi habit is
consist with the document
certifi copi of busi record eg computer record ar accompani by
custodian written certif
websit data
a grow number of peopl ar us social network site like linkedin facebook
myspac and twitter and as a result the legal us of inform obtain from social
media site ha increas mani user dont give much thought to what thei post onlin and
becaus most of the inform that get post onlin becom a perman record
somewher investig attornei and employ ar increasingli mine these site for
inform photo and video that can becom evid in civil and crimin litig
as with all evid the propon of social media evid must be prepar to establish
that the evid is authent the standard for authent evid from social media
site is no differ than for ani other type of evid that is there must be suffici
evid to support a find that the evid is what the propon claim
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2713
in some court authent can be establish by the testimoni of a wit like ani other
demonstr exhibit parti can authent a websit with the testimoni of a wit who
verifi that the exhibit at issu accur reflect what he observ after log on to the
site and review what wa there
altern the propon mai be abl authent a websit by provid testimoni from
the webmast or someon with person knowleg to show that the data wa post by the
person to whom the inform is attribut for exampl if websit data is attribut to
the websit owner the webmast can testifi that a particular file or content wa enter on a
site at a specif time thi is similar to authent write by show that the item wa
written by the person to whom it is attribut but becaus facebook myspac and twittertyp
evid typic come from third parti who sometim us pseudonym
attribut thi type of evid to a certain person can be challeng
final some websit data mai be selfauthent to review selfauthent evid
mai be receiv into evid without independ proof of authent the type of
websit evid that mai fall under thi categori includ govern materi that appear
on offici govern websit or businessrel materi that appear on an organ
websit
photograph
concern photograph it is necessari to establish their fidel to the object thei claim to
repres thi mean that the offer parti must prove that the pictur is unalt and
show what the propon claim it show gener it is enough to have a wit familiar
with the object or space in a photo to corrobor it eg ye that the hallwai run
between our two build the matter get more complic when a photo is
controversi thi can requir technic specif for proper foundat in the most
famou trial sinc sam sheppard oj simpson lawyer challeng a photo of the defend
wear bruno mali shoe as doctor both side introduc expert to discuss whether
the photo had been alter what sort of camera len and environment condit were
involv etc the same issu can aris with photo in ani trial
in some unusu situat a photo mai reveal inform that no wit can corrobor
there ha been at least on instanc where the background of a photo show a stab that
took place in a crowd no on not even the photograph saw the stab at the time in
unusu situat where a photo commun evid not substanti elsewher the
basic principl of evid law
2714 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat of the photograph will need more strength includ technic detail on the
camera the film who took the shot why and where etc
the except make photo seem more legal fraught than thei ar thei usual ar
admit with littl object photo do not even have to be contemporari with the crime or
grievanc to which thei pertain if a photograph is establish as accur in it portray it
can be shot after the origin act
gener point
either side can enter exhibit into the record given the proper foundat onc admit
the evid is avail for us by either side it doe not matter who enter the item into
evid either side can us it dure question
it also doe not matter when exhibit ar admit thei mai be introduc into evid
dure direct examin oppos counsel is allow to inspect the exhibit and then the
wit confirm the exhibit which ha been mark exhibit a or exhibit 1 some court
us letter for exhibit while some court us number usual the exhibit is identifi by
which side enter it eg plaintiff exhibit 1
when everyon agre exhibit can be directli enter into the record without foundat
review by stipul both parti sign the stipul form describ and acknowledg
the exhibit
the best evid rule
sometim testimoni mai be reject becaus of the best evid rule which prohibit a
parti from testifi about the content of a document without produc the document
itself thi rule howev onli appli when an origin or copi is be us to prove the
content of a write
also known as the origin write rule the best evid rule provid that when a wit
testifi about the content of a document at least a fair copi of the origin must be avail
for inspect if there is no origin a copi of the proven authent document will do but
the court must be assur that the copi ar reliabl and accur if the document is lost
no origin no copi the judg will have to be convinc there is good reason to forgo the
exhibit and admit the testimoni
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2715
fraud examin can us copi in prepar their case report but at trial the origin must
be produc if it is avail thu when public record ar involv in a fraud examin
examin should alwai obtain certifi copi
with regard to computer data the best evid rule doe not requir the parti offer
esi as evid to bring the origin custodian comput monitor and other equip to
displai the inform at trial rather rule 10013 provid that an origin write includ
ani printout or other output readabl by sight shown to reflect the data accur thu
hardcopi printout of document email and other esi qualifi as origin under the
feder rule of evid
object to exhibit
just becaus an exhibit is authent doe not mean it is automat admit if the
evid violat some other rule of evid such as the rule against hearsai prejudic or
relev the exhibit will like be bar
if an object is made the admiss of some exhibit requir separ hear for the
judg to consid the issu fraud trial can be bog down with lengthi challeng to the
sometim mountain stack of document offer as evid in decid on the
admiss of exhibit judg can decid to admit the materi just as it is admit it with
alter such as expurg part of a text or obscur certain imag or deni the
admiss altogeth
chain of custodi
if evid is subject to chang over time or is suscept to alter the offer parti
mai need to establish that the evid ha not been alter or chang from the time it wa
collect through it product in court thi is done by establish a chain of custodi the
chain of custodi is both a process and a document that memori 1 who ha had possess
of an object and 2 what thei have done with it it is simpli a mean of establish that
there ha not been a materi chang or alter to a piec of evid
chain of custodi issu ar paramount issu in ani case affect everi piec of physic
evid when parti present evid to a court thei must be readi to show that the item
thei ar offer is the same item that wa seiz when that evid is not distinct but
fungibl eg bag of cash bullet shell case or electron data the process or system
which authent the item is to maintain a chain of custodi
basic principl of evid law
2716 2011 fraud examin manual
in gener establish the chain of custodi consist of document each person who had
control or custodi of the evid how and when it wa receiv how it wa maintain or
store while in each person possess what chang if ani it underw in that person
custodi and how it left that person custodi the end result is a chain of testimoni that
account for the movement and locat of physic evid from the time it is obtain to
the time it is proffer at trial the goal is to show that access to the evid wa limit to
those who testifi in the chain of custodi and therebi demonstr that the evid ha not
been materi alter
gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur with a set of record or
outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa not properli seal can
dishevel a case but not wreck it outright court have found in some case that even though
there have been mistak in the chain of custodi the mistak affect the weight though
not the admiss of evid that is to sai the evid will still be allow into the
record but it is accompani by a forthright descript of ani improprieti that have
occur in the chain of custodi the juri and judg ar suppos to consid the
improprieti when thei deliber weigh the case for guilt or innoc
in fraud case the arrai of physic evid all the paper document audio and video
record and informationprocess equip such as comput demand some close
monitor in the chain of custodi thi is an area of the law which either side plaintiff or
defend can manipul to avoid talk about the evid itself rambl instead like a
filibust senat over who touch what and when and why that mean we will not see
or discuss the item in question
the follow ar some gener guidelin that will help examin demonstr the chain of
custodi thei will also help examin in authent obtain evid
if record ar receiv via mail or courierreceipt deliveri such as fedex or up
keep copi of the postmark envelop or the deliveri receipt
if a cover letter is includ make sure you keep it
if the cover letter or transmitt letter includ a list of the document check the packag
immedi to ensur all document ar there if someth is miss make a note in the
file and notifi the sender immedi
if you receiv document in person creat a memo state the date and time the
document were receiv who gave you the document where that individu obtain
the document and a complet list of the document receiv
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2717
if you obtain the document yourself from the origin sourc desk file cabinet etc
creat a memo describ the date time exact locat of where the document were
found and a complet list of the document obtain
keep the origin of these memo or deliveri receipt in the case file and keep a copi
with the document it will be much easier to identifi where the document came from if
you have the inform with the document
addition becaus digit evid can be easili alter or destroi a chain of custodi
must be maintain for all electron evid gather and analyz in an investig at
a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
hearsai
simpli put hearsai refer to a statement that repeat what some other person said while
outsid of court fre 801 defin hearsai as a statement other than on made at the trial
or hear offer in evid to prove the truth of the matter assert basic hearsai
involv the follow element
a statement anyth intend to be an assert statement can be oral written or
nonverb conduct such as nod a head
that is made outsid the court supervis statement made at trial or dure deposit ar
not hearsai becaus thei ar made dure court proceed but a statement made at
work or at a crime scene is outsid the court supervis and could be hearsai if the
other element ar also present
that is offer to prove the truth of the matter assert a parti is offer a statement to prove the
truth of the matter assert if the parti is try to prove that the assert made by the
declar the person who made the outofcourt statement is true
thi set apart virtual anyth said outsid the courtroom or outsid an offici
design function of the court such as a deposit
under the gener rule hearsai is not admiss in court but thi rule is subject to numer
except exclud hearsai on on level mean wit cannot sai he said she
basic principl of evid law
2718 2011 fraud examin manual
said each person testifi to hi own experi thi is design to protect the credibl
and condit of testimoni and to preserv each side right to crossexamin wit
each wit in the trial will be question about person firsthand encount unless their
statement satisfi on of the except discuss below wit will speak onli about
thing thei have experienc themselv if possibl evid should be present in the
courtroom so that the juri can determin the weight to give each piec of evid
the hearsai rule often creat admiss issu for electron store inform esi
becaus such evid is often made out of court and offer to prove the truth of the matter
assert
except to the hearsai rule
the gener rule against hearsai is full of except wai to get inform into the
record which account for the rule infami in courtroom drama and in real courtroom
the rule of evid exempt sever categori of statement that ar not to be consid
hearsai and there ar mani circumst in which evid although hearsai is admiss
the truth of the statement is not at issu
the hearsai rule onli appli if the statement is be offer to prove the truth of the matter
contain in the statement therefor if the statement is offer for some other purpos it
technic is not hearsai ani outofcourt statement can be admit if it 1 is relev to
some aspect of the proceed and 2 is not offer for the truth of it content such
statement ar most often us to show a person knowledg or state of mind at a particular
time for instanc a wit will be allow to testifi that she heard the defend sai i
cant stand thi compani thei ow me big time the statement cannot be us to prove
that the defend actual stole from the compani howev it can be admit to show the
defend state of mind that he wa disgruntl
admiss by an advers parti
gener the statement of an advers parti is not hearsai such statement ar call
admiss and can be veri power evid more specif an admiss is an outofcourt
statement or conduct by a parti to the lawsuit that tend to support the other side
posit or diminish the declar own posit thu anyth spoken or written by a
parti to a lawsuit can be enter into the record provid that the statement can be
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2719
corrobor and is relev each side can us it adversari outofcourt statement as
evid
for exampl dure your investig of the case prior to trial you interview the
defend dure the interview he tell you that he falsifi the invoic later he deni
make the statement if you take the stand and tell the juri that the defend told you he
falsifi invoic technic that statement is hearsai howev sinc it is an admiss it
will be admit under thi except to the rule
an admiss is not necessarili an outright confess a wit mai testifi that a bank
offic told her i have wai of get loan approv that no on els know about the
statement alon doe not prove loan fraud against the offic but it doe establish by hi
own admiss hi state intent to subvert the secur control of the institut
in case involv corpor larg group or govern agenc ani statement made by
a member of the organ is potenti an admiss the person who made the
statement ha to be directli author to speak for the organ or perform a job relat
to the issu under discuss for exampl an agent emploi by jefferson realtor who
sai youv been defraud here to an aggriev client ha made an admiss on behalf
of the compani a janitor at jefferson realtor howev cannot make the same admiss
becaus janitori duti ar not relat to the format of contract and chanc ar the
janitor is not author to make corpor declar sinc an agent make contract on
the compani behalf the statement is an admiss even if the agent is not the offici
spokesperson for jefferson legal affair
former testimoni under oath
testimoni given by the declar at anoth hear is admiss if the parti against whom
the testimoni is now offer had an opportun and motiv to examin the wit similar to
that in the present trial
busi and govern record
we commonli think of invoic receipt and offici document as the final legal word but
like statement made outsid of court busi and govern record ar hearsai thei ar
prepar outsid the courtroom a special except for these materi howev make
them admiss if thei ar provid with a legal foundat the admiss of such
record rest on two criteria
basic principl of evid law
2720 2011 fraud examin manual
have thei been prepar dure regularli conduct busi activ
ar thei verifi trustworthi
materi prepar specif for trial ar not admiss as busi record anyth that
cast doubt on the verac of these document can bar them in situat where the charg
involv alter document the materi ar admit to prove the charg of alter not
for their truthvalu so the hearsai rule doe not appli
computer record have had no troubl be accept as evid gener the hearsai
except for busi record appli ie thei ar admiss as long as the record have
been compil as a regular facet of do busi
howev it should be note that a minor of court follow a differ approach when
address hearsai within computer record which ha recent garner much acclaim
these court distinguish between computerstor record and computergener record
and hold that esi contain onli computergener record such as login record from
isp telephon record and atm receipt untouch by human hand do not contain
hearsai in such case there is no need to establish that a hearsai except appli
altern computerstor record ar creat or maintain by a human and therefor
ar deem hearsai thu thei must meet a hearsai except to be admit
statement against interest
a statement against interest is a special form of admiss in which a prior statement is at odd
with the declar current claim to be admiss under thi except the statement must
meet three requir
the declar must be unavail to testifi
the statement must have been against import interest of the declar when made
corrobor circumst must clearli establish the trustworthi of the statement
in prosecut a tax evas charg for exampl prosecutor mai present a financi
statement us by the defend to obtain a loan thi is a statement against interest becaus
the document declar a higher net worth than the defend now claim to have
absenc of an entri in busi record
evid that a matter is not includ in the memoranda or report kept in the regular cours
of busi mai be admiss to prove that a certain event did not occur if the matter wa
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2721
on about which a memorandum or report regularli wa made and preserv howev thi
doe not hold true if the sourc of inform or the circumst indic a lack of
trustworthi
record recollect
a memorandum or record mai be admiss if it concern a matter that the wit onc had
knowledg of but now ha forgotten if it wa made or adopt by the wit when the
matter wa fresh in memori and if it is shown to be accur such memoranda or record
also mai be shown to a wit who ha temporarili forgotten the event to refresh the
witnesss recollect and allow the testimoni to be more complet or accur
present sens impress
court assum statement that ar made dure or immedi after signific event or
condit and that describ or explain the event or condit ar reliabl so present sens
impress ar admiss for exampl a wit can report that he first suspect fraud at
secur plu by note that hi superior said oh my god thi cant be happen when
he wa inform that there would be an audit in a similar exampl mr whistler notic
jenni moor a cowork in john smith offic and overhear her sai oh here ar some
bid sheet in the trash can if the govern prosecut smith for bid rig which is
demonstr by the bid sheet mr whistler can testifi about moor statement as a present
sens impress becaus the word describ the scene befor her
excit utter
there is also an except for statement relat to a startl event or condit made while
the declar wa under the stress of it excit unlik statement of present sens
impress excit utter requir an occurr that is startl enough to produc
excit in the mr whistler scenario for exampl moor statement might qualifi as
an excit utter if she discov the bid sheet after month of search for
incrimin evid and told whistler while jump up and down in excit iv
found the evid iv been wait for a long time here the success conclus of the
search wa suffici excit
then exist mental emot or physic condit
statement of the declar thenexist state of mind emot or physic condit ar
also admiss as except to the hearsai rule specif the feder rule of evid
803 list state of mind emot sensat or physic condit pain and bodili health
basic principl of evid law
2722 2011 fraud examin manual
as accept subject matter along with extrem person thought process such as
intent plan motiv design mental feel
defens attornei at a fraud trial sometim us argument about what their client intend or
the confus and stress the person wa suffer for instanc the defend wa seen
shred document and he wa overheard to sai theyll never prove anyth now the
statement mai be admit to show the defend state of mind at the time he wa
shred the document it also show that the defend act with the intent to destroi
the document hearsai statement that help establish thi intent ar admiss as
except
statement for purpos of medic diagnosi or treatment
anyth first commun dure a medic examin is admiss as a hearsai
except thi includ medic histori symptom pain and the gener charact of the
medic condit these statement do not even have to have been made by the patient
thei can involv someon parent or spous accompani the patient
print matter learn treatis and refresh write
written materi that add to the court knowledg of an issu ar except from the hearsai
rule thi except often bear on the testimoni of expert wit who often us
publish materi in their work
print materi that support technic or profession assert such as commod market
report stock market quot mortal tabl cost of live index etc ar admiss if
thei ar gener us and reli upon by the public or by person in particular
occup the feder rule of evid specif mention market report and
commerci public
the feder rule of evid also creat a hearsai except for learn treatis provid
that an authorit work is admiss to either support or attack the opinion of an expert
wit and that the work ar establish as reliabl author howev some court limit
the rule in these jurisdict special treatis period or pamphlet can be
referenc onli dure crossexamin in a world of prolifer and sometim
contradictori sourc of inform just what count as a learn treatis and what is a
fring group manifesto is not immedi clear
write us to refresh a witnesss memori is admiss under special circumst basic
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2723
court mai permit testifi wit to refresh or reviv their memori by refer to a
write or anyth els if the wit will thereaft be abl to testifi without depend on
the term of the write for exampl whistler who is serv as a wit at a fraud trial
want to see some note he wrote two year ago to make sure he got the number right in hi
testimoni he is allow to consult the note and continu with hi testimoni there is a
lawyerli aspect to thi ruleth text of the note is admiss too but onli if the oppos
attornei request the admiss
other except
miscellan except to the hearsai rule includ thing like dy declar and ancient
document for those instanc not specifi in ani rule there remain the judg discret
anyth the judg deem trustworthi for the purpos of it present is admiss thi is
the cornerston of the rule hearsai is exclud in the first place becaus it supposedli lack
trustworthi howev other kind of hearsai that do not fall within ani specif hearsai
except mai be admiss if thei meet the same standard of trustworthi as requir
for the list except
exclud illeg seiz evid
in gener evid obtain improperli is taint and unfit for trial the fourth
amend set out thi cornerston exclusionari rule bar anyth obtain by
author without proper author from the owner or possessor or through a courtord
search warrant gener thi rule appli onli in crimin case but it also appli
to govern employ therefor a public employ cannot us illeg seiz evid
to disciplin an employe there is no fourth amend prohibit against a privat
employ us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe howev but if a privat
employ doe us illeg seiz evid to disciplin an employe the employ might be
expos itself to litig for invas of privaci trespass or other common law caus of
action even though the evid mai still be admit in court
impeach
the abov discuss concern the manner in which evid is introduc at trial usual
dure direct examin there is of cours anoth side to testimoni crossexamin
under the rule of evid and the sixth amend which guarante a defend the
right to confront wit the advers parti is entitl to offer evid to impeach the
basic principl of evid law
2724 2011 fraud examin manual
testimoni or credibl of a wit impeach is the practic of bring out matter that
attack a witnesss credibl
there ar numer wai an attornei might impeach a wit but the most common wai
includ effort to show that the wit
is influenc by bia or selfinterest
ha an impair abil to observ
made prior inconsist statement
ha been convict of a feloni
ha a reput for untruth
impeach by bia show that the wit ha reason or at least opportun to skew the
evid against on of the parti in the litig question on crossexamin will
cover ani pecuniari interest the wit ha in the case ani connect the wit might
have to ani matter or litig and ani other inform that will make the wit appear to
have some interest in favor on parti over anoth
anoth wai to impeach wit is to show that their abil to observ wa impair matter of
observ includ the abil to see hear smell or feel some item in question
noth overturn a witnesss statement like inconsist oppos lawyer will alwai
confront ani wit on crossexamin with ani appar inconsist between the
trial testimoni and statement testimoni or inform given by the wit on other
occas
a witnesss credibl mai be challeng though not automat impeach by show that
the person ha been convict of a feloni crime the govern rule rule 609 of the feder rule of
evid offer a few basic instruct first convict for act involv dishonesti
such as larceni theft or fraud ar especi harm to a witnesss testimoni second ani
wit mai be impeach with ani prior feloni convict third evid of ani prior
convict is presum inadmiss if the convict is more than 10 year old
final ani wit mai be impeach by proof of reput for untruth
certifi fraud examin should keep in mind that the abov method of impeach mai
be us not onli on the defend and defens wit but also on wit for the
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2725
prosecut or defens inquiri should be made befor trial to determin if a prosecut or
defens wit is subject to impeach and if so appropri step should be taken
privileg
introduct
there ar certain evidentiari privileg that protect certain type of evid from be
discov or produc invok a privileg for a piec of testimoni or other evid in a
legal encount keep the materi outsid trial proceed if a privileg appli the court
and it petition ar deni access to the privileg inform and judg and juri must
disregard ani evid thei do actual hear if it is deem privileg afterward
the most import privileg ar discuss below
attorneycli privileg
the attorneycli privileg preclud disclosur of commun between an attornei
and client but onli if the follow condit ar met
the client retain the attornei
to provid legal advic
and thereaft commun with the attornei on a confidenti basi and
the privileg ha not been waiv
the attorneycli privileg appli to individu as well as corpor or other busi
entiti in the context of an investig of a compani commun gener will be
protect under the attorneycli privileg if the follow element ar present
the commun were made by corpor employe to counsel
the commun were made at the direct of corpor superior in order for the
compani to obtain legal advic from counsel
the employe were awar that the commun were be made in order for the
compani to obtain legal advic
the inform need wa not avail from upper manag
the commun concern matter within the scope of the employe corpor
duti
basic principl of evid law
2726 2011 fraud examin manual
the commun were confidenti when made and were kept confidenti by the
compani
a gener counsel particip in an investig conduct by manag doe not
automat creat an attorneycli privileg the kei element is that the attornei whether
inhous counsel or outsid counsel is conduct the investig for the purpos of
provid legal advic to the compani the privileg gener extend to inform
gather by investig if the investig is act at the direct of the attornei
the attorneycli privileg prevent disclosur of the communicationsth letter memo
or content of telephon callsb etween the attornei and client not of the underli fact
or documentari evid in the case a client mai not refus to produc document or other
relev evid mere becaus such evid wa previous given to the attornei
similarli the attorneycli privileg doe not prevent disclosur of commun that
relat to busi rather than legal advic corpor counsel is often consult to give advic
on matter relat to busi conduct rather than legal issu such commun would
be discover
final the attorneycli privileg mai not be assert if the commun involv the
attempt or actual commiss of a present crime or fraud the attornei doe not have to be
a particip in the fraud for the waiver to appli
waiver
special care should be taken to ensur that the attorneycli privileg is not waiv
inadvert by give document or commun inform to anyon outsid the
investig team includ member of law enforc if inform gather dure an
investig is share with law enforc then the privileg mai be waiv not onli as to
the inform given but also to ani other inform relat to the same subject matter
for exampl if an investig submit a copi of hi report to the prosecutor who initi
crimin proceed base on the find in the report the crimin defend mai be abl
to requir the investig to provid all the document he us in write the report in such
an instanc the investig mai be consid to have waiv the privileg likewis if law
enforc request the result of an investig or inform gather dure an
investig the attornei should be consult befor turn over the inform some
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2727
court have held that the privileg is not waiv if a compani is subpoena to produc the
inform
inadvert waiver
moreov some court have held that inadvert disclosur of a singl privileg document
includ digit document waiv the privileg as to all document concern the same
subject matter for thi reason special care must also be taken to avoid inadvert disclosur
from the us of electron commun includ email cell phone fax text
messag instant messag etc it is clear that the attorneycli privileg extend to
electron commun and it is also clear that a matter voluntarili commun to a
thirdparti who is not an agent of your counsel is not confidenti and therefor not
privileg thu when a parti choos to us a form of electron commun which is
vulner to intercept and inadvert disclosur you run the risk that your messag
might be intercept by or disclos to an unintend thirdparti
to illustr how easili inadvert disclosur of electron commun mai occur
consid a few wai that an email mai unwittingli end up in the hand of an unintend
thirdparti email mai be forward to addit unintend employe indic a lack
of confidenti subject matter thei mai be distribut to a larg number of person
suggest a lack of confidenti or the sender could mistakenli hit the wrong kei on the
keyboard and send the email to the wrong recipi therefor fraud examin must be
concern about the risk of inadvert disclosur of electron commun and should
take cautionari measur to preserv the attorneycli privileg
unfortun fear over the consequ of subjectmatt waiver ha led to dramat
litig cost increas in todai digit environ where review ten hundr and
even thousand of gigabyt of inform for privileg is time consum and expens
feder rule of evid 502
in an effort to protect against inadvert waiver of the attorneycli privileg or the work
product protect presid bush sign into law s 2450 a bill ad evid rule 502
to the feder rule of evid the legisl resolv conflict between court throughout
the countri on whether an inadvert product of privileg materi result in waiver
simpli state under rule 502 an inadvert disclosur of a privileg commun can
no longer waiv protect for all document concern the same subject matter
basic principl of evid law
2728 2011 fraud examin manual
among other thing rule 502 provid the follow protect
if disclosur is made then the privileg is waiv to ani other undisclos inform
onli if 1 the waiver is intent 2 the other inform relat to the same subject
matter and 3 fair requir further disclosur rule 502a
if disclosur is inadvert it doe not result in waiver when the privileg holder took
reason step to prevent disclosur and promptli took reason step to rectifi the
error rule 502b
if the disclosur wa made in a state court proceed the disclosur doe not waiv
protect in a feder proceed if on of two condit is met 1 the disclosur
would not have been a waiver under rule 502 or 2 the disclosur is not a waiver under
state law rule 502c
the mcnulti memorandum and the doj guidelin
on decemb 12 2006 the depart of justic doj issu guidelin in the form of
the mcnulti memorandum for feder investig and prosecut of busi
organ the mcnulti memorandum which address the practic of feder
prosecutor investig and charg busi organ misconduct revis the doj
prior guidanc outlin in the much malign thompson memorandum which provid that
feder prosecutor could seek waiver of the attorneycli privileg and attornei work
product protect as an element of a compani cooper specif the mcnulti
memorandum provid specif criteria that prosecutor were requir to consid and
procedur thei were requir to follow befor seek waiver of privileg or work product
protect
on august 28 2008 the depart of justic doj issu guidelin which revis the
mcnulti memorandum on how feder prosecutor investig charg and prosecut
corpor crime unlik the mcnulti memorandum the guidelin ar a part of the us
attornei manual which provid intern doj guidanc but doe not creat ani enforc
law
in an effort to stop congression action such that propos by s 445 the guidelin bar
prosecutor from judg corpor cooper for lenienc on whether an entiti is will
to waiv the attorneycli privileg or work product protect the guidelin also state
that prosecutor can no longer seek disclosur of inform that is either privileg or
protect work product in addit the guidelin provid that when evalu a
corpor cooper prosecutor mai no longer consid whether a compani is
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2729
advanc legal fee for it employe whether a corpor ha sanction or retain
culpabl employe or whether a corpor ha enter into joint defens agreement
even though most observ agre that the guidelin ar a signific improv over the
mcnulti memorandum mani contend that comprehens legisl is still need to make
the doj reform perman and prevent a relaps in depart polici as well as to bar
similar waiver polici adopt by other feder agenc such as the secur exchang
commiss and the intern revenu servic for thi reason the doj guidelin mai
stop interest parti from support the enact of legisl that would further
protect corpor and their employe from governmentcoerc waiver
select waiver
under the select waiver doctrin a corpor seek to cooper with a govern
investig pursuant to a confidenti agreement can disclos materi protect by the
attorneycli privileg to the govern without waiv those protect as to
nongovernment parti such as privat plaintiff but it should be note that most feder
circuit court have reject the select waiver doctrin in addit rule 502 of the feder
rule of evid doe not explicitli acknowledg select waiver but it doe not explicitli
elimin select waiver as a viabl doctrin
the attornei work product doctrin
under rule 26b3 of the feder rule of civil procedur and under compar state
rule document and tangibl thing that ar prepar in anticip of litig ar
protect by the attornei work product doctrin or privileg the privileg is condit in part
the oppos parti mai obtain access to otherwis privileg investig document and
thing through pretrial discoveri if it can show substanti need for the protect inform
and that the inform cannot be obtain from anoth sourc howev the attornei
mental impress opinion and strategi concern the litig ar absolut privileg
and cannot be discov even with a show of substanti need the privileg extend to not
onli inform and document prepar by a parti or the parti attornei but also by the
consult and examin hire by the attornei for instanc commun with the
attornei and ani work or analysi done by an expert with whom the attornei ha consult is
privileg as work product although that privileg will be waiv if the expert is call to
testifi as an expert wit at trial
work product protect appli onli to document and thing prepar in anticip of
basic principl of evid law
2730 2011 fraud examin manual
litig or for trial thu document and tangibl thing prepar in the cours of an inhous
or other prelitig investig even if at the direct of an attornei mai not be
privileg if thei were not prepar in anticip of litig just becaus there is a possibl
of futur litig doe not mean that the investig is in anticip thereof litig
must be actual plan and the work for which protect is sought must have been
undertaken for the specif purpos of prepar for that litig but if the work to be
protect wa done in anticip of litig then it doe not matter in most jurisdict that
no lawsuit ha been file yet
the privileg protect document and thing prepar in anticip of litig from
compel disclosur nevertheless it doe not render the fact themselv confidenti
privileg or nondiscover thu while report interview note and transcript might
not be discover under the privileg the fact learn mai have to be provid in respons
to properli phrase discoveri request similarli the privileg doe not prevent discoveri of
the ident of wit and the exist of interview note tape or transcript the extent
to which interview note transcript and other factual report prepar in anticip of
litig ar actual protect from discoveri by a parti oppon mai vari between
jurisdict and mai depend on the fact and circumst of a given case
waiver of work product protect
like the attorneycli privileg work product protect can be waiv moreov the
feder rule of evid 502 expressli appli to disclosur of a commun or
inform cover by work product protect therefor the examin should abid by
the same rule govern disclosur of materi protect by the attorneycli privileg
work product protect and outsid auditor
in late 2004 a feder district judg in new york under the work product doctrin protect
the result of an intern investig of a larg compani given to an outsid auditor merril
lynch co inc v allegheni energi inc 2004 us dist lexi 21543 howev court
continu to disagre as to whether such disclosur waiv work product protect under the
feder rule of evid
befor disclos work product to an outsid auditor a compani should determin whether
the outsid auditor is an adversari some court consid auditor to be the watchdog of
compani and therefor inher adversari to their corpor client certainli the role of
outsid auditor is to independ ensur the accuraci of a compani financi find
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2731
inaccuraci and detect fraud howev the court in merril lynch distinguish thi kind of
adversari from a litig adversari a compani auditor is not necessarili a litig
adversari which is requir to invalid the work product privileg rather a busi
and it auditor can and should be align insofar as thei both seek to prevent detect and
root out corpor fraud
the court also emphas that a blanket waiver of privileg in thi kind of situat would
like discourag ethic disclosur and conduct by compani thu the trend in litig
seem to review the fact on a casebycas basi to determin whether an auditor and
compani share common interest and therefor ar nonadversari
the follow principl should aid compani in determin whether thei should provid
work product to outsid auditor 1 ensur a common interest between the compani and
the outsid auditor 2 onli disclos inform necessari to help the auditor assess
suffici of the compani control and the accuraci of the compani auditaccount
procedur and 3 when disclos informati on alwai includ a confidenti agreement
acknowledg that the document were prepar by counsel and therefor privileg as well
as a coven that the outsid auditor is to maintain the strictest confid of the
document
selfevalu privileg
the selfevalu privileg also refer to as the selfcrit privileg mai provid some
protect for the investig work product thi privileg is base on the need to
encourag voluntari intern review and complianc program it appli if an organ
can demonstr that it is attempt to polic itself in an area of public interest and that
disclosur of the work product would prejudic such effort the privileg is a rel new
concept and is not recogn in all jurisdict it is much weaker than the attorneycli
and attornei work product privileg
marit privileg
addition the marit privileg protect commun between husband and wive
there ar two form of the marit or spousal privileg 1 the confidenti commun
privileg enabl either spous to prevent the other from testifi regard a
commun dure marriag between the two that wa intend to be in confid and
2 the advers testimoni privileg protect spous from be compel to testifi against each
other while thei ar marri usual the confidenti commun privileg continu
basic principl of evid law
2732 2011 fraud examin manual
after the termin of the marriag the advers testimoni privileg doe not
there is no privileg that permit a person not to testifi against other famili member
although as a matter of polici mani law enforc agenc will not compel testimoni
from immedi famili member
law enforc privileg to withhold the ident of an inform
law enforc agenc mai legitim withhold the ident of an inform unless
disclosur is necessari to ensur that the defend receiv a fair trial in such circumst
the prosecut ha to decid whether to forego prosecut or disclos the ident of the
inform in the privat sector there is no equival privileg certifi fraud examin or
other who ar investig on behalf of a privat client mai be compel by court order to
disclos the ident of an inform or ani other wit thi possibl should be disclos
to potenti wit who mai request confidenti see the investig section of the
fraud examin manual for more inform
accountantcli privileg
a few state have a weak accountantcli privileg that allow an account to resist
product of a client work paper or document no such privileg is recogn in feder
court and the state privileg mai be overcom by a show of need or by the servic of a
subpoena
there is howev a feder author tax practition privileg under section 7525 of
the intern revenu code thi privileg is a evidentiari privileg that provid limit
protect in feder tax law it appli onli in situat where a cpa is provid tax advic
in noncrimin proceed befor the ir or befor a feder court
nevertheless as discuss abov in feder proceed commun between a client
and a thirdparti such as an account mai be protect under the attorneycli privileg
or the attornei work product doctrin
the attorneycli privileg extend to account if the attornei hire the account to
assist in render legal advic addition the privileg extend to an account
document which were made at the attornei request us to render legal advic thi
privileg wa clarifi in us v cote which conclud that there is no protect for
account servic if no legal advic wa sought in cote the client engag the account
law basic principl of evid
2011 fraud examin manual 2733
befor retain the lawyer the client and account had a longstand profession
relationship and the attornei did not control or supervis the account effort or work
product
in addit the attornei work product protect extend to inform and document
prepar by the consult and examin hire by the attornei includ account
howev ani protect will be waiv if the account is call to testifi as an expert
wit at trial
in case where account serv as expert wit the work product doctrin mai appli
protect under the work product doctrin gener depend on whether the account
serv as a testifi expert or a nontestifi consult expert noth creat by the
testifi expert is privileg from discoveri convers the rule of discoveri gener
protect commun between a nontestifi expert the attornei and the parti from
disclosur to adversari howev the protect against disclosur of commun with
nontestifi expert can be lost and thi commonli occur when the nontestifi expert
commun ar releas to other particularli to testifi expert thi topic is
discuss in further detail below
there ar a number of other privileg that ar less like to be assert in fraud action
includ the priestpenit and physicianpati privileg
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2801
testifi as an expert wit
introduct
certifi fraud examin account and auditor often ar call upon to provid
testimoni in crimin and civil prosecut where their servic can be us to support
investig of matter such as financi fraud embezzl misappl of fund
arson for profit bankruptci fraud improp account practic and tax evas fraud
examin mai also be us as defens wit or to support the defend counsel on
matter that involv account or audit issu
expert can serv on of two role in the trial process testifi expert or consult expert
testifi expert wit give opinion testimoni when special knowledg is need to help
the juri understand evid or determin a fact in issu convers consult expert typic
do not testifi at trial instead thei ar hire to provid technic assist to the attornei in
prepar the case gener both testifi and consult expert plai an ongo part with
the litig process
although expert serv on of two role thei can perform variou function throughout the
litig process lawyer often count on testifi expert to help crystal the judg or
juri understand of the case in hi book effect expert wit author jack v matson
list the four main function of all expert testimoni and offer advic on fulfil each
assign duti
establish the fact you must first develop a strategi to collect and examin the
document in the case the discoveri process which is a mechan for full
disclosur of all knowledg pertin to the case usual yield a vast amount of paper
which the expert then must sift through to make a preliminari classif of relev
interpret the fact tie togeth caus and effect relationship with the data and the fact for
the technic basi of your case do not be fool by correl that seemingli link caus
and effect but hold no theoret justif
comment on the oppos expert fact and opinion develop a good understand of the
oppos expert by review their educ background and experi read their
public probe for weak that your side might exploit oftentim trial becom
a battl of the expert prepar for the battl with as much intellig as you can muster
take apart the opposit expert report which repres the other side best case
piec by piec your attornei need to know the most intim detail about the fact and
opinion contain in that report
testifi as an expert wit law
2802 2011 fraud examin manual
defin the profession standard in the particular area of your oppon expertis on of the most
critic import wai an expert is us in trial is to defin the standard of care
exercis by fellow profession in the field standard of care ha been tradition
defin on the basi of judgment normal exercis by profession in good stand
addition the profession must be inform or awar of current practic and
promulg obsolet practic ar now consid by the court to be neglig
practic thu profession must exercis reason inform judgment in carri out
their duti you as the expert will be call upon to defin the profession standard and
to measur that against the standard of care exercis by the profession on the other
side
if call by the prosecut examin might testifi to their find and if call by the
defens thei might testifi regard opinion express by the prosecut expert to
creat doubt in the juri mind about the credibl or weight to be given to that expert
altern an examin might be call upon to give an opinion differ from that reach
by an equal credibl expert on the other side thi might be due to differ interpret
of the fact of the case in some instanc given equal plausibl altern the case might
be decid on whichev side ha the most credibl expert wit
addition effect expert wit frequent share certain characterist credibl is
on such featur to becom a credibl expert wit on must be a member in good
stand of the profess and usual be recogn as an author in that profess or
some special aspect of practic within it
similarli an expert wit in the area of account must have a thorough knowledg not
onli of gener accept account principl but also of current promulg the
expert expertis often might involv special knowledg of a specif industri in thi case
the expert should be awar of recent develop and ani import issu within that area
the expert also must be analyt and be abl to work with incomplet data the expert
howev might not alwai be abl to recogn when data is incomplet as a result the
expert might make assumpt that will then be open for interpret or attack if all data
have not been made avail then the oppos counsel might be abl to offer altern
scenario that ar more plausibl under the circumst thu discredit the expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2803
pretrial prepar
pretrial prepar remain kei to becom a success expert wit and success often
depend on full inquiri and thorough investig follow the initi complaint and
answer the discoveri process usual begin with on side give the other a set of written
question call interrogatori an expert assist mai begin by compos the question
or by provid the repli depend on your side of engag both side then submit
request to the other for product of record pertin to the case a financi expert is
often expect to educ a lawyer on the type of document typic avail most
everyth from a singl deposit slip to continu atm videotap to volumin
account ledger is subject to discoveri
mani time financi crime expert on the prosecutor side must scale a mountain of
document or scroll through a heap of comput file to find the core fact that show crimin
intent or behavior the defens mai buri the other side in paper or electron document to
hide or trivial vital document becaus an effici search save time and monei
success expert develop an earli strategi and tick off a detail checklist to achiev their
goal within a specif time frame
when testifi as an expert it often is us to have a list of all other wit includ
those for the other side thi is import so that the expert is not surpris by the exist
of other expert or report on can then determin if it is necessari to be present for the
testimoni of those wit and can obtain the necessari court approv if anoth expert
will be present then it becom incumb upon the expert wit to examin the altern
report and to assess whether or not reason point ar brought up by the other side that
might affect the credibl of the expert report
conflict of interest
when retain expert must quickli determin if ani conflict of interest exist or even
appear to exist in a particular case becaus a conflict might preclud particip a conflict
of interest exist when an expert abil to object evalu and present an issu for a
client will be impair by ani current prior or futur relationship with parti to the litig
there ar sever action an expert can take to determin if ani conflict of interest exist
befor engag ask for the name of all parti involv review the name with your
associ as well request full disclosur of ani connect howev remot prior or
testifi as an expert wit law
2804 2011 fraud examin manual
ongo relationship mai suggest to other that the expert could not provid undivid
loyalti to the caus and your client
penalti for consult or act as an expert in a conflict of interest includ expert
disqualif attornei disqualif and inadmiss of expert testimoni
prepar a report
care consider should be given to the prepar of an expert report which
document your find and opinion for both side it put your reput on the line a
wellwritten report that lai out a strong case might even prompt an earli settlement
howev it also let the opposit see the strength and weak of your case and better
prepar them for your deposit and trial testimoni
keep the follow six tip in mind when prepar an expert report
be brief
avoid ambigu or inexact languag
avoid gener be specif
add chart or graph where appropri
refer your work
meticul check the report for accuraci and neat
an import problem in the prepar of report and account summari aris from
the deleg of task to subordin if the person give evid ha not had direct
knowledg or ha not examin the specif document or prepar the summari the expert
might be trap under the hearsai rule if task ar deleg it is import that the review
process entail comparison of all origin work document
it also is import to know the effect of other assumpt on the conclus or opinion
reach in the report it often is possibl to trap an expert into give altern opinion base
upon assumpt that had not been consid gener work paper and schedul
support the report should not show contradictori conclus as thei mai be produc in
court thi is not to advoc that work paper should be delet or amend subsequ
to prepar rather it is a caution that these paper should be prepar with the precept
that thei could ultim be submit to the court thu the work paper should be
appropri prepar
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2805
onc thei accept a case mani expert immedi start assembl a narr version of the
event thi detail summari of the fact of the case serv as the raw materi for render
an offici opinion it is import that the text be written with care and profession as
the discuss below outlin the text mai and probabl will have to be produc dure
discoveri addition a wellwritten narr help the attornei in prepar and execut
the case at trial
what to includ in an expert wit report
the requir for an expert report differ depend on whether a case is pend in
feder or state court feder rule of civil procedur 26a2 which appli to civil case in
feder court requir expert wit to prepar report and provid them to the oppos
parti although thi requir mai be waiv if direct by the court or agre to by the
principl parti involv the rule appli to expert who have been retain specif for a
given case and it includ employe of a parti if part of the employe duti involv give
expert testimoni a written report often call a rule 26 report must be produc for each
expert wit
convers some state court do not requir written expert report but mai requir anoth
form of mandatori disclosur unfortun the requir of all fifti state ar beyond
the scope of thi manual therefor expert should check with counsel prior to issu their
written report to make sure that the report will compli with ani applic standard or
requir under state law
consult with counsel
gener expert should coordin with counsel to ensur that their report compli with all
applic legal standard failur to compli could result in a disposit of a claim by
summari judgment or an order preclud an expert from testifi
gener includ onli what is necessari
if a written report is request includ onli what is necessari avoid gratuit and
unimport comment at a minimum an expert wit report should do the follow
identifi the reason for the report and provid the matter to be explor by the report
provid the expert witnesss observ and opinion includ the basi rational data
or other inform us to reach the opinion
list ani exhibit us as a summari of or in support of the provid opinion includ
all chart or graph
testifi as an expert wit law
2806 2011 fraud examin manual
state ani conclus the wit mai have reach base on the observ and
inform
provid all sourc includ individu articl sourc document and book that the
expert consult
cite specif test that support the expert conclus and list the standard or test
method us by the expert
rule 26 report and disclosur requir under the feder rule of civil procedur
as note abov expert report in all civil action in feder court must compli with rule 26 of
the feder rule of civil procedur rule 26 state that testifi expert must prepar a
written report and make certain disclosur about their opinion and support ground
specif the expert report which must be prepar and sign by the expert wit must
includ the follow
a complet statement of all expert opinion to be express and the basi and reason for
such opinion
the data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion
ani exhibit to be us as support for or as a summari of the opinion
the qualif of the expert wit
all public author by the expert in the preced 10 year
a list of all other case in which the expert ha testifi as an expert at trial or at
deposit within the preced four year
the expert compens for hi review and testimoni
the feder rule of civil procedur also impos time limit concern rule 26 report the
rule requir that the ident and report of the expert must be disclos at least 90 dai befor
trial but the disclosur of an expert whose testimoni is intend sole to contradict or rebut
anoth witnesss testimoni must be disclos within 30 dai after the other wit
disclosur addition an expert must supplement the written report or deposit
testimoni at least 30 dai befor trial if he becom awar that previou disclosur might
have been materi incomplet or incorrect
if a court find that an expert report fail to satisfi the rule 26 requir it mai strike the
expert design and prohibit the expert from testifi a sampl format for an expert
report is includ at the end of thi chapter
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2807
note that under the feder rule of civil procedur the expert wit must turn over
anyth he us in form hi opinion thu if an expert us privileg or confidenti
document those document must be given to the oppos parti
moreov draft report ar also discover therefor expert should never destroi draft
note record or ani other form of document us to form the expert opinion ani
action to do so mai result in perman loss of the expert credibl in fact the best
practic to prevent discoveri of draft report is not to creat draft report in the first place
these mandatori disclosur requir remain controversi attornei and judg cannot
agre on whether the requir add unnecessari expens or whether thei promot
uniform and fair at least on of those goal uniform ha not been realiz rule 26
provid that the disclosur requir ar mandatori unless a particular district court
provid otherwis by order or local rule sever district court have elect not to adopt rule
26 and have written their own local rule in it place accordingli instead of provid a
uniform system of disclos inform the amend have led to a system of differ
rule for differ district
disclosur requir under the feder rule of crimin procedur
lawyer and expert wit must also mind the rule regard expert disclosur in crimin
case which ar differ from those requir in crimin case in crimin case pretrial
expert disclosur is onli trigger if the defend request it from the govern when thi
happen the govern must produc a written summari of ani testimoni that it intend to
us dure it caseinchief at trial the summari must describ the witnesss opinion the
base and reason for those opinion and the witnesss qualif if the govern
compli and request reciproc disclosur the defend must also provid a summari of
ani expert testimoni he intend to us at trial
expert wit discoveri
concern expert wit discoveri is the process by which the oppos side find out an
expert opinion and underli rational caution is the byword for expert wit at
everi step of the legal process
in gener everyth that a expert wit creat or us is discover accord to frcp
26 which appli to civil case in feder court everyth the expert receiv review reli
produc and sai about the case after be hire is subject to discoveri by oppos
testifi as an expert wit law
2808 2011 fraud examin manual
counsel that mean everyth narr version of the case comment to the press or law
enforc hypothet reconstruct draft report and even note can be demand
and us by the oppos parti a shrewd attornei can us an expert notebook which
contain dry run at an opinion and other pure delib inform to call the
witnesss testimoni into question the onli except as discuss below is when the expert
is hire by the attornei pure on a consult basi
becaus all data or other inform consid by the wit in form the opinion is
admiss in feder court expert should never destroi draft note record or ani other
form of document us to form the expert opinion feder rule of civil procedur
rule 26a
in legales an expert wit ha no privileg the principl of privileg exist to protect certain
core societ relationship attorneycli husbandwif but the expert witnesss relationship
with client is not among those protect if the expert opinion will be present in court
everyth relat to the expert opinion is discover
in fact anyth an expert carri into a deposit sworn testimoni given by a parti or
wit upon question by counsel for on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court
is subject to discoveri attornei have been known to request a search of someon attach
case to get at import materi thi sharp edg of discoveri is why expert insist on be
depos awai from their own workplac if thei did not their entir file would be subject to
discoveri
the consult expert except
although everyth a expert wit receiv review reli produc and sai is gener
discover there is an except of cours the rule of discoveri gener protect
commun between a consult expert the attornei and the parti from disclosur to
adversari
specif the work of a consult expert is gener not discover becaus it typic
fall under the protect of the work product doctrin to review the work product doctrin
prevent compel disclosur of document and tangibl thing prepar in anticip of
litig and becaus it protect extend to inform prepar by or for a parti or the
parti repres includ consult the work of a consult expert is gener not
discover but otherwis protect materi mai becom discover through waiver and
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2809
the gener test for waiver is whether the materi at issu have been disclos in a manner
inconsist with keep it from an adversari
the distinct between the protect afford to consult and testifi expert is
someth like thi when act as wit expert ar bring offici inform to
the court and thu must disclos ani contact with the case when expert act as consult
or associ for attornei or law enforc thei ar onli assist the attornei and do
not have to disclos their involv in the case
there is of cours on trap for the unwari protect of work product perform by a
consult expert mai be lost when a testifi expert review the work of a consult expert
the rule is that if an expert will testifi at trial everyth he doe regard the case must be
turn over to the other side if an expert work onli as a consult to the attornei then hi
work product is not discover but if a testifi expert review the work of a consult
expert then the work of the consult expert will be discover just rememb thi if you
ar hire to testifi at trial anyth you us to form your opinion will be subject to review by
the oppos parti thi includ note from other expert document receiv from the
plaintiff or defend and ani document or note from the attornei be sure to consult with
the attornei befor you review anyth if a document wa given to you by someon other
than the attornei ask befor you read it otherwis you mai inadvert destroi the
confidenti or privileg of the materi
keep good file
the best wai to protect the confidenti of inform is to keep good file dan poynter
report that expert routin reduc their file to us report onli onc thei have been
offici engag as a wit for trial no on is recommend that file be sanit
poynter add just updat the differ mai be subject to abus but it is simpl ani
materi that serv as the basi for an expert opinion must be in the file note document
or test that serv as background or that repres unfruit line of investig do not have
to be includ and probabl should not be the attornei try the case doesnt want an
expert have to answer about dead end or exploratori jaunt a shrewd crossexamin can
turn a hastili scribbl hypothet into just enough reason doubt to avert a convict
so in the best case scenario an expert present to the court an opinion and it basi noth
more noth less
7 poynter dan the expert wit handbook santa barbara para publish 1997 p 82
testifi as an expert wit law
2810 2011 fraud examin manual
propos chang to expert wit rule relat to expert wit discoveri
recent the judici confer of the unit state advisori committe on feder rule
of civil procedur propos signific amend to rule 26 if adopt the amend
would significantli chang the discover of the data or inform consid by a
testifi expert thi section examin the propos
although almost everyth a testifi expert sai or write is subject to discoveri by
oppos counsel under current law the revis would prohibit the discoveri of draft expert
report and limit discoveri of attorneyexpert commun more specif the
amend would among other thing make the follow three chang
commun between counsel and retain testifi expert would gener be
protect from disclosur or discoveri thi amend would offer work product
protect similar to those alreadi avail to consult expert
draft report and disclosur requir by rule 26a2 of ani testifi expert would no
longer be discover
rule 26 report produc by a testifi expert would onli need to includ the fact or
data consid by the expert current rule 26a2 read data or other inform
consid which court have interpret to includ everyth commun by
counsel to the expert thu the amend emphas that expert should onli includ
factual inform in their report
these amend ar expect to be adopt and becom effect on dec 1 2010 as
amend
qualifi to testifi as an expert wit
just what constitut expert statu gener the term expert wit refer to someon
whose educ and profession credenti establish their knowledg of a particular set of
practic as with introduc exhibit in trial counsel must lai a foundat for the expert
testimoni thi mean show that by formal educ advanc studi or experi the
wit is suffici knowledg on the subject at hand that is a wit must be
qualifi to testifi as an expert the foundat mai be establish dure the pretrial stage
or dure direct examin
unfortun it is becom increasingli difficult to testifi in feder court as an expert and
to understand the standard and rule to qualifi as an expert
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2811
rule 702 of the feder rule of evid govern the admiss of expert testimoni in
feder court rule 702 provid that a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi in the form of an opinion or otherwis to
scientif technic or other special knowledg if such testimoni will assist the trier of
fact to understand the evid or to determin the fact in issu
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut 509 us 579 1993 the suprem court state that
judg should act as gatekeep and keep out scientif testimoni that is not base on the
method of scienc in a relat case titl kumho tire co v carmichael 526 us 137 1999
the suprem court state that the judg gatekeep function appli not just in case
deal with scientif evid but in ani case involv testimoni base on technic and
other special knowledgetaken togeth these case mean that expert testimoni given
by certifi fraud examin account or other expert must be judg against the
standard set forth by the suprem court in the daubert case
in respons to these case rule 702 of the feder rule of evid wa modifi to
specif includ the standard set forth by the suprem court in daubert and kumho tire
rule 702 now read
if scientif technic or other special knowledg will assist the trier of fact to understand the
evid or to determin a fact in issu a wit qualifi as an expert by knowledg skill
experi train or educ mai testifi thereto in the form of an opinion or otherwis if 1
the testimoni is base upon suffici fact or data 2 the testimoni is the product of reliabl
principl and method and 3 the wit ha ap pli the principl and method reliabl to the
fact of the case
simpli put rule 702 provid that the judg must make three determin befor allow
an expert to testifi befor the juri
is the person qualifi as an expert wit
will the expertis of the wit assist the juri in understand the evid or
determin a fact at issu in other word is the testimoni relev to the fact of the
case
is the testimoni reliabl
qualif
befor admit expert testimoni the judg must determin that the expert is a qualifi
testifi as an expert wit law
2812 2011 fraud examin manual
practition thi element address whether the individu is qualifi to assist the trier of
fact for a wit to qualifi as an expert counsel must establish that the wit is suffici
knowledg on the subject at hand by show formal educ skill or experi the
determin of whether a wit is qualifi as an expert or whether expert testimoni is
need is left to the discret of the trial judg
the process of evalu whether an expert is qualifi mainli center on the candid
formal educ and work experi whether that includ 30 year in law enforc or
10 year in a larg account firm but there is no particular educ requir for
expert testimoni a wit with no formal educ mai be qualifi base on train or
experi some other factor that mai be consid includ the candid
award and honor
licens or certif
technic train
publish book and journal articl
posit in profession associ societi and organ
in addit to be qualifi as an expert the expert qualif must be relev to the
particular issu in the case at hand but the import thing to rememb is that a person
can be qualifi as an expert base on either special train or experi a person doe not
have to be a cfe to testifi as an expert on fraud detect techniqu if that person ha
suffici practic experi in those techniqu the cfe design is import becaus
it serv as a recognit of the special skill that those hold the design have
demonstr to becom a cfe
although design ar import it is most help to have prior experi as an expert
with litig or crimin matter thi is primarili becaus of what is learn dure the
experi of testifi further it often is help to have been accept as an expert in other
case therebi eas current accept a danger exist howev of appear to be a
profession wit
the counsel introduc the wit often will read the expert qualif or ask specif
question to establish the witnesss credenti smart defens lawyer ar not like to
challeng the credenti of expert assum thei meet at least minimum standard of
profession compet to do so mai give these expert an opportun to fulli highlight
their profession credenti and perhap make a greater impress on the juri or judg thu
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2813
ad more weight to their testimoni although the expert qualif ar not often
contest it doe happen beyond be accept by both parti the expert wit most
importantli must be accept by the court
testimoni
after determin that a wit is a qualifi expert the trial judg must determin that the
testimoni offer by the expert is relev to the fact of the case and reliabl these two
question focu on what opinion the expert will actual testifi to in court
relev testimoni will assist the juri in understand the evid or determin a fact at
issu to be relev the propos testimoni must be suffici ti to the fact of the case
that it will aid the juri in resolv a factual disput specif the court must determin
whether the expert opinion ha ani tenden cy to make the exist of ani fact more
probabl than it would be without the evid testimoni is not relev if the juri can make
it own determin without expert testimoni
to be reliabl the testimoni must be base on suffici fact and data and it must be the
product of reliabl methodolog that ha been reliabl appli to the fact of the case thi
assur that an expert opinion ar not mere specul
in daubert v merrel dow pharmaceut inc the suprem court set forth the follow nonexclus
list of factor to assess reliabl
whether the expert theori or techniqu can be or ha been test
whether the expert theori or techniqu ha been subject to peer review and
public
whether the expert theori or techniqu enjoi gener accept within the relev
scientif commun
whether there ar standard govern the method us by the expert
whether the expert techniqu ha a high error rate
accordingli cfe should be sure to fulli cover the rational for their assumpt and
determin whether the assumpt ar support by the fact present dure discoveri in
fact court often find that assumpt not support by evid render expert opinion
insuffici thu caus the judg to exclud the expert testimoni for exampl in target
market publish inc v advo inc a breach of contract case aris from a joint ventur to
produc advertis public a wellqualifi account and busi apprais conclud
testifi as an expert wit law
2814 2011 fraud examin manual
that had the defend perform it contractu oblig the joint ventur would have
earn 14 million in profit to reach thi conclus the expert assum the joint ventur
would have successfulli enter 49 market zone at the time of the breach but the joint
ventur had onli enter into two market zone and wa unprofit in both the
appel court affirm the exclus of the expert opinion as to the valu of a contract
becaus the methodolog underli the opinion wa base upon subject belief and
specul includ unsupport assumpt
when prepar an expert report or testimoni examin should keep in mind the daubert
factor set forth abov examin should document their conclus how thei reach
those conclus what evid thei base the conclus on and what profession
techniqu or knowledg thei us it would also be a good idea to keep a list of profession
book or journal that advoc or sanction whatev principl were us in draw the
conclus
daubert challeng
a daubert challeng is a motion rais either befor or dure trial to exclud an expert
wit from present evid thi motion is us to exclud the testimoni of an expert
who lack suffici expertis or us question method
basi of expert testimoni
rule 703 of the feder rule of evid govern the sourc on which expert mai base
their testimoni it provid that expert mai reli on fact or data made known to the expert at
or befor the hear
the fact or data in the particular case upon which an expert base an opinion or infer mai
be those perceiv by or made known to the expert at or befor the hear if of a type reason
reli upon by expert in the particular field in form opinion or infer upon the subject the
fact or data need not be admiss in evid in order for the opinion or infer to be
admit
therefor under rule 703 an expert mai base an opinion on
firsthand observ
fact data or opinion present at trial
fact data or opinion convei outsid of court
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2815
in addit under rule 703 expert can reli on inadmiss hearsai or other inadmiss
evid as long as it is the type reason reli upon by expert in the particular field a
determin that is left to the discret of the trial judg thi rule allow an expert to
emploi data usual us by expert in the field though the data itself mai not be admiss
an exampl might be a tabl of interest rate taken from a depart of commerc
public similarli an account serv as an expert wit mai reli on privat sourc
in form an opinion if such sourc normal ar reli upon by account
the major of state howev follow the common law rule which permit a more limit
basi for expert testimoni most state requir the expert to predic testimoni on firsthand
percept or in the altern inform admit in evid at the hear at which
he is call to testifi
prepar to testifi
the major of case file will not go to trial thei will be resolv through either a
settlement agreement or a plea bargain therefor most expert experi in testifi
come through have their deposit taken
deposit of expert wit
a deposit is sworn testimoni given by a parti or wit upon question by counsel for
on of the parti befor trial and outsid of court a deposit serv as a power
discoveri devic that mai be us to compel anyon associ with the case to give oral
testimoni under oath although you cannot declin to testifi an expert mai be allow to
specifi a conveni time and place
sometim the parti request the deposit pai the oppos expert fee which consist
of the time spent give the deposit at hi standard hourli rate or in halfdai or fulldai
increment plu travel time thi usual occur in feder court most state court requir
each side to pai the expens of the expert thei hire an expert charg hi client for the
time spent prepar for deposit and for testifi
in addit to the requir court report the proceed mai be record by a camera or a
voic record a judg is not present dure thi questionandansw session for skill
investig deposit provid a golden opportun to hear the other side case aloud
the opposit mai set ulterior goal as well includ
testifi as an expert wit law
2816 2011 fraud examin manual
to learn new inform or confirm exist fact
to apprais the expert abil as a wit
to lock the expert into a hardtodefend posit
to creat a written record for futur impeach
befor testifi at a deposit or at trial the expert should ensur that requir graphic
displai ar readi and avail that all import discuss with the lawyer have been held
and that the expert ha a complet understand of the report and other relev issu the
expert should ensur that he ha agreement with counsel as to the sequenc of evid and
the strategi for present it it often is us to have a dry run at the direct testimoni with
all the question pose by the counsel to the expert to avoid surpris dure trial
at pretestimoni meet it is appropri to discuss the qualif of the wit again
to ensur that thei ar current to discuss the strength and weak of the case and to
discuss and agre on what part of the expert report if ani ar to be enter as exhibit
appear
the appear of the expert wit often lend itself to an assess of the credibl of
that wit it is recommend that the wit wear conserv busi attir be wellgroom
and neatli dress
it is also import that the wit maintain a profession demeanor in the wit box the
wit should maintain a pois alert appear stand firmli and be readi to take the oath
the wit should not smile gratuit at the judg juri or the lawyer also it is
import that the wit keep control of hi hand to avoid fidget and wit should
maintain ey contact with the question as much as possibl he should not stare off into
space at the floor or at the ceil
as the judg will be take note the wit should speak slowli to ensur that the judg
doe not fall behind the answer should be direct to the question the witnesss voic
should be strong clear and audibl thu befor answer each question the wit should
paus befor answer and carefulli consid the answer he should also respond in a slow
and deliber manner
do and dont
there ar other consider in make an expert a credibl wit some tip ar
exud an alert and confid attitud
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2817
maintain profession pride and integr throughout
tell the truth be honest and avoid bia
us simpl rather than complex term and refrain from us profession jargon
explain complex concept in a layperson term
be friendli and polit to all parti present
be alert
correct ani misstat as soon as thei ar detect
listen carefulli and answer the specif questionsdo not go off on tangent or volunt
more than the question requir
do not verbal fenc with the attornei
do not try to be humor or hip
be calm and deliber in respond to questionsthink befor you speak
plan your testimoni in advanc and know your materi thoroughli
us graph chart and other visual aid if thei help to clarifi a point
do not read from note if you can avoid it the opposit lawyer will probabl demand to
see such note and the wit will then look like he rehears hi testimoni
prepar your materi complet if you have document to introduc have them
organ so that you can quickli retriev them when ask to do so
do not hem and haw or stammer recov your composur when a tough or complex
question is pose
ask for a question to be repeat or clarifi if not fulli comprehend
if an answer is not known sai so do not guess
do not invent and do not inflat
in crossexamin do not respond too quickli becaus counsel might wish to object to
the question
do not be evas
sever other thing should also be avoid these rang from drink five cup of coffe
immedi prior to testimoni or chew bubbl gum while give evid to small
physic manner that might affect your appear these physic manner which
might be as simpl as rub on hand togeth continu look down at on hand
fidget on the stand or jingl coin in a pocket could becom irrit to the judg and
juri
similar to trial proceed the opposit commonli drill an expert about hi credenti hi
methodolog and hi conclus pertain to the case unlik in a trial the expert quit
testifi as an expert wit law
2818 2011 fraud examin manual
often answer ters give onli a straight ye or no for inquiri that requir more you
should respond directli and precis and refrain from volunt ani inform it is not
your duti to educ the other side at deposit you mai ask for a recess or a break if
need
pour over the written transcript of your deposit afterward to ensur accuraci
immedi correct ani omiss or error whether made by you or the stenograph
notifi your lawyer if your opinion ha chang sinc deposit if you ar present at the
deposit of the oppos expert you mai be ask to summar your impress
afterward and note ani grai area that call for further line of inquiri
direct examin
direct examin ar conduct by the attornei who retain the expert becaus expert
ar hire for their opinion thei ar not subject to the usual restrict about statement of
judgment expert also have other leewai not given to ordinari wit thei mai reli on
document or exchang that would otherwis be inadmiss as hearsai thi allow them to
us articl academ paper profession text and consult in render their opinion
of the case these materi ar admiss as long as thei were us by the expert in
develop hi opinion
present expert testimoni
expert wit present their find in variou wai such as narr question
hypothet special materi and special exhibit expert ar commonli ask to
answer narr question which ar all but forbidden to lai wit narr question ar
broad openend question that allow expert to present their opinion in their own word
with minim prompt from the lawyer fraud case with their diverg path of activ
and intrigu can requir complex summar in order for the fact to make ani sens the
averag group of juror ha never consid how someon could manipul store
inventori to drive up the compani stock price and then make million on the phoni surg
the expert wit in case like thi often will begin testimoni by recount the narr
background of a case the test and experi that were perform dure the investig
and a summari of the find base on hi profession expertis
expert wit also ar allow to demonstr their find by us hypothet fiction
situat analog to the act in question which clarifi and highlight particular aspect of
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2819
the disput but to be effect hypothet must be construct exquisit appeal court
have been adam that the fact of the case be tri have to be reflect directli in the
hypothet situat there must be no exagger or obscur in the present
moreov expert sometim us special ma terial in reach and commun their
opinion profession public and sourc of inform that normal ar us in the
cours of busi mai be produc as part of the trial feder rule requir onli that the
sourc be gener us and reli on by peopl in that field
final expert mai us special exhibit to demonstr fact about the case or some aspect of
their opinion these exhibit mai includ chart diagram annot document or photo
if the exhibit is offer to prove a fact it must satisfi the rule applic to ani other piec of
evid in the case in demonstr a profession opinion the role of the exhibit must be
clear and it applic to the present case justifi if necessari
direct testimoni consider
the purpos of direct examin is to enabl counsel for the side you repres to draw out
the evid to prove the case most like thi will onli be a reiter of what previous
ha been discuss with your counsel outsid the courtroom it is still veri import
howev to refresh your memori beforehand by refer to anyth you mai have read
written or given in evid on the case
direct examin is the most organ aspect of the trial it is the stage in which the
expert credibl must be establish with the judg or juri accord to the concept of the
primari memori peopl rememb best what thei hear first and last thi often is a us
idea to emploi in give or structur evid anoth noteworthi point is that the juror
often have limit attent span in a long trial thu it is often us to us a
grabgiveconclud method of present evid
to a wit the interpret of question and the abil to listen ar crucial skill even
though the wit might alreadi have gone through a mock direct examin it is critic
that each question be carefulli evalu again the wit should reflect upon the question
ask and not anticip them thei might have been chang anywai sinc the time of
rehears
the answer to all question should be clear and concis and where complex term ar us
testifi as an expert wit law
2820 2011 fraud examin manual
thei should be clarifi similarli explain complex concept in a layperson term and avoid
profession jargon becaus the fact finder might not be familiar with esoter or technic
terminolog
us of note should be limit as much as possibl to maintain ey contact
schedul if ani should be describ accur and succinctli in easili understood term
schedul ar by their natur concis document and should be describ in that manner
if opinion ar given thei should be state with convict
certain standard for certifi fraud examin ar found in the code of profession ethic
pleas see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
specif certifi fraud examin ar prohibit from express opinion as to the guilt
or innoc of ani person or parti thi is not to sai that the expert wit cannot testifi to
the badg hallmark or characterist of fraud found in the case it also doe not mean that
the certifi fraud examin cannot testifi that base on the evid he believ the
accus might have commit the offens howev the ultim guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti is the sole respons of the judg and juri the certifi fraud examin
typic will not be permit to testifi to the ultim fact question
crossexamin
crossexamin is truli the highlight of the adversari court system it is gear to allow
counsel either to clarifi or to make point at the witnesss expens it gener is the most
difficult part of the trial process for ani wit anyth can turn up that might refut or
embarrass the wit the witnesss credibl is constantli call into question
the goal of the oppos counsel dure crossexamin ar threefold the first goal is to
diminish the import of the expert testimoni just present the second goal is to have
the expert testifi in support of the oppos posit by provid a seri of assumpt
the third goal is to attack the opinion itself or to show the inadequaci in the expert
opinion therebi discredit the opinion the report and the wit
the oppos counsel can attack or question anyth that ha been said or enter into court
thi includ note work paper affidavit willsai report and preliminari trial or
law testifi as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2821
discoveri transcript often crossexamin creat an atmospher of confront and
contradict
the wit must not take attack or attempt to discredit person there ar mani wai to
discredit an expert wit throughout the process it is import for the wit to maintain
pride and profession integr an adag to rememb is that even mud can be worn well
oppos counsel want to reduc or limit the impact of the witnesss evid it is natur
to feel a certain amount of apprehens and thi might do a great deal to keep the wit
alert the juri often watch the judg and thu the expert often can take a clue as to the
tempo and reaction of the juri and the judg to the evid be present slight chang
in style and present could be made accordingli
the oppos counsel usual ha a plan of crossexamin in mind and an expert wit
should be abl to anticip thi direct to prevent fall into a trap a danger to thi of
cours is that the wit will spend as much time plan ahead as answer the question
and might not be give appropri attent to the immedi question further in
attempt to anticip a question the wit might misunderstand what is actual ask
gener it is a rule of thumb that a wit should not volunt or freeli give inform
dure the answer it often might be extrem difficult to avoid get trap in variou
assumpt what if scenario and gener present by counsel dure crossexamin
if thi occur or if ask a long or imprecis question retrench by ask for a
question to be rephras in smaller compon
it is critic never to underestim the expertis of the oppos counsel often oppos
counsel will be underplai it understand of the issu to lull the expert into a sens of
secur thi can lead the expert into a difficult situat oppos counsel golden rule is to
crossexamin onli if it would benefit the case in ask question of the wit oppos
counsel gener either will ask short question in plain word or will ask lead question
usual counsel know the answer to the question
the oppos counsel gener will evalu answer and then take a specif approach that
further the argument gener the wit will not be allow to explain or elabor on
the question as that would allow the wit to alter the thrust of a carefulli orchestr
testifi as an expert wit law
2822 2011 fraud examin manual
crossexamin oppos counsel will continu question or evalu how the last
question and answer could be us against the wit
furthermor oppos counsel often will prepar by research the expert for exampl it is
like that counsel will read all earlier testimoni and public of the wit oppos
counsel also might speak to other lawyer as to the witnesss capabl in court if the lawyer
have had experi with the wit if weak ar discov the question probabl
will be direct to that area
oppos counsel also might attempt to take psycholog control of a wit by
us physic presenc to intimid
make nonstop ey contact
challeng space of the wit
ask question at a fast pace to confus the wit
not allow the expert to explain or deviat from the exact question
physic domin often is us by oppos counsel oppos counsel will quickli
discov the respons pattern of the expert and might take an aggress stanc to lead the
expert to the point where he is unsur
counsel mai emploi the follow strateg method to discredit a wit or to diminish the
import of a witnesss testimoni these method could be us alon or in conjunct
with on anoth and ar not an allencompass list a good counsel in crossexamin
will quickli discov the witnesss weak area and emploi ani possibl techniqu to achiev
it goal
myopic vision
myopic vision entail get the expert to admit to a great amount of time be spent in the
investig of a matter then select an area to highlight about which the expert is unsur
or ha not done much work thi area might not be central to the issu in the case but it
must be relev to the conclus reach then the oppos counsel will make a larg
issu of it and prove that the expert vision is myopic in that the work wa limit in extent
or scope and as such substandard at the same time the matter of fee could be drawn in to
show that larg sum were expend to have thi obvious incomplet work done
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2823
safeti
thi approach involv lull the expert into a feel of fals secur by not attack him
after the expert feel secur the oppos counsel might find a small hole in the expert
testimoni that can be enlarg quickli thi approach often is character by be friendli
and conciliatori by which the juri is made sympathet to the caus of the oppos counsel
oppos counsel also might attempt to achiev a certain amount of associ with the
wit that will make the wit want to help the oppos counsel to bring out
inform do so mai result in the wit give inform that otherwis would not
have been given with thi addit inform it might be possibl to find a chink or hole
in the evid and open it further
contradict
oppos counsel might us lead question to forc the wit into a hard or
contradictori posit altern counsel can establish the credibl in court of a
potenti contradict document or quot from other articl written by expert in the field
if these document or articl ar in contradict to the expert then an admiss can be
obtain from the expert as to that contradict if a contradict exit the expert might be
drawn into an argument as to who is the most appropri or experienc person instanc
also occur in which a wit ha contradict himself or hi own articl written sever year
prior mere becaus of hi lack of memori or confus due to the attack
new inform
oppos counsel mai introduc new inform of which the expert might not be awar
thi normal is done to introduc confus in the witnesss mind in the hope that the
wit might contradict himself or develop a seri of altern scenario given the new
inform to show that the exist report and opinion ar no longer of valu
support oppos side theori
thi approach recogn an expert qualif and evid the same inform us
by the expert is then interpret by oppos counsel in a differ fashion to support an
altern theori by get the expert to agre to the altern interpret of the fact and
the altern theori the oppos counsel in effect ha made the expert a wit for the
other side thi techniqu is us to obtain concess from the wit that would damag
hi conclus and ultim hi credibl
testifi as an expert wit law
2824 2011 fraud examin manual
bia
thi method draw the expert counsel and the expert togeth to show possibl collus as
to the evid be present and henc to demonstr bia thi can be shown if the
oppos counsel can determin that the expert counsel had instruct the wit as to
what to sai or by limit the expert scope and thu hi conclus thi approach also can
focu on the question of whether or not the expert wa told by hi client what to do and look
for with thi approach oppos counsel might attempt to show that the expert overlook
import document in an effort to assist hi client
confront
thi method involv the us of a confront of will to put the wit into a situat in
which he might lose emot control and show anger onc a wit ha explod
credibl normal disappear
sound board
thi method us the wit as a sound board to reacquaint the juri with the favor
aspect to oppos counsel of the case thi techniqu often us the is it not true and
would you agre with me approach constant agreement is us to browbeat the expert
in the ey of the judg and juri agreement with variou question rais by the oppos
counsel also might be assum to be a gener concurr with the posit of the oppos
counsel
fee
thi method attack the wit on the basi of take an inordin amount of time for the
result given the attack might indic a lack of complet work and be correl to the fee
charg thi method often is relat to bia and myopic vision it might be suggest
that the wit and hi opinion ar in fact bias thi techniqu often build to a
conclus in which the oppos counsel arriv at the idea that the work wa superfici and
unprofession yet a great deal of monei wa receiv by the expert for thi and other area
of servic to the client the infer is that the testimoni wa purchas or that the expert
wa paid to overlook fact contradictori to the conclus reach
term of engag
thi techniqu normal is emploi by obtain the origin engag letter and
examin the term of engag oppos counsel can then show that the expert
intend to look onli at variou item in support of hi client and gloss over altern
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2825
theori gener to the detriment of the opposit as such the wit could be portrai
as partial
discredit the wit
discredit the wit is base on prove that the expert is unworthi to be a credibl
wit instructor to the court thi often can be accomplish by show that the expert is
current or ha previous been grossli bias prejud or corrupt been convict of
crimin activ been shown to engag in immor activ made inconsist statement
acquir a reput for a lack of verac or exagger hi qualif discredit also
could consist of look at the qualiti of the expert educ background to reveal ani
other unusu activ that might bia the wit or exclud him from the court as an expert
person attack
anoth crossexamin tactic often us by attornei is to kill the messeng these
attack ar of a more person natur and gener includ some of the follow
the wit is unqualifi
the wit displai unprofession behavior dure the examin such as ask
person or sexual question dure interview
the wit had a conflict of interest
the wit wa harass phone call at home threaten voic mail etc
failur to follow the standard of the profess
addition the attornei mai attempt to discredit expert by try to show that thei fail to
follow the standard best practic or profession conduct rule set forth by their profess
such as the acf for fraud examin or other profession bodi such as the aicpa the
iia or state bar associ
for cfe it is extrem import to be familiar with the tool and techniqu set forth in
the fraud examin manual there have been case where enterpris defens attornei have
obtain copi of the manual and quizz the fraud examin about whether or not the
method set forth in the manual were follow likewis attornei will often question cfe
about the acf code of profession ethic particularli regard the prohibit against
state an opinion of guilt or innoc which is discuss below
it is import to understand that the fraud examin manual doe not set forth standard
the manual provid the cfe with inform suggest and method for conduct a
testifi as an expert wit law
2826 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud examin a cfe is alwai requir to follow the code of profession ethic but
he is not requir to follow what is set forth in the fraud examin manual
howev if a fraud examin deviat from the normal investig method set forth in the
manual he should have an explan as to why it wa appropri and explain that the
manual is onli provid as guidanc
express an opinion on guilt
as previous discuss testifi expert wit give opinion testimoni which is base
upon their special knowledg and experi about case issu but expert mai onli give
opinion testimoni in area that will aid the juror in reach their verdict addition
expert mai give opinion testimoni on ultim issu ie the basic conclus upon which
the outcom of a case depend but thei cannot offer legal conclus or educ the juri on
the principl of law
moreov articl five of the acf code of profession ethic prohibit opinion regard
the guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
a fraud examin in conduct examin will obtain evid or other document to
establish a reason basi for ani opinion render no opinion shall be express regard the
guilt or innoc of ani person or parti
thi rule is a rule of prudenc for exampl it is prudent for a certifi fraud examin to
refrain from usurp the role of juri in a courtroom no good attornei would ask a certifi
fraud examin for such a conclus and no alert judg would allow such testimoni
the fraud examin job is to present the evid in hi report such evid might
constitut a convinc case point to the guilt or innoc of a person howev a clear
line should be drawn between a report that essenti sai here is the evid and on
that step over the line and sai he is the guilti innoc person nevertheless there is a
fine line between recommend action forward the evid to a law enforc
agenc or file a complaint or lawsuit and give an opinion on guilt or innoc certifi
fraud examin might make such recommend becaus thei think the evid is
strong enough to support a case thei might even have a conclus about whether the
suspect commit a crime the rule doe not prohibit the certifi fraud examin under
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2827
the proper circumst from accus the person under investig howev the
ultim decis of whether a person is guilti or innoc is for a juri to determin the
cfe is free to report the fact and the conclus that can be drawn from those fact but the
decis as to whether or not a person is guilti of a crime is a decis for the judg or juri
wit immun for expert
gener feder and state court grant fact wit immun for their testimoni at trial
there ar three commonli cite public polici rational for grant thi immun first the
immun rule prevent selfcensorship of the wit second without immun wit
mai be inclin to distort their testimoni in fear of a retaliatori suit third the crossexamin
process ensur truth and reliabl testimoni
furthermor court have extend wit immun to includ advers expert wit and
courtappoint expert wit thi immun gener appli to trial testimoni
deposit testimoni and report prepar court grant immun to advers and courtappoint
expert for numer reason includ the longstand common law wit
immun doctrin the prevent of wit selfcensorship and the belief that the judici
system adequ ensur truth and reliabl testimoni howev even though immun is
the gener rule for advers and courtappoint expert court have deni immun and
permit neglig claim where testifi expert breach their profession duti to act
within the standard of care
despit the wit immun discuss abov recent case indic that expert wit mai
be liabl to their retain parti for their pretrial work or testimoni rule that expert
wit should not be immun from liabil from their own client in fact a grow
number of state have allow parti to sue their own expert for neglig testimoni
includ california connecticut louisiana massachusett missouri new jersei and
pennsylvania
the underli base for deni immun to friendli expert ar gener found on the
follow rational 1 the common law grou nd for immun ar narrow 2 potenti
liabil encourag total and honest testimoni 3 expert should be held to the standard of
their profess 4 the role of the paid advisor and advoc warrant allow claim and 5
the judici system doe not adequ ensur truth and reliabl testimoni from friendli
expert
testifi as an expert wit law
2828 2011 fraud examin manual
expert wit should be awar that the wit immun defens for expert is erod
and as a result suit alleg that expert wit commit fraud or neglig ar
increas moreov the presenc of expert wit in the legal system will not decreas in
the near futur therefor it is import that expert wit understand the liabil and
protect place upon them
summari
in hi book succeed as an expert wit harold a feder suggest keep the follow in
mind while you ar work on a particular case
keep an open mind
do not approach a case with predetermin conclus as to causat culpabl fault
or damag
rememb that attornei and client come to you with fact that might be slant either
accident or purposefulli
carefulli follow your own wellestablish investig step develop form procedur
and process that will ensur that you do not overlook evid
on of the best thing you can do is to stai current about new develop in your field it
take a concert effort to stai on top of chang and advanc in ani industri as well as the
latest forens investig method to be a success expert wit in ani area of
account for instanc you must have a thorough knowledg of not onli gener accept
account principl but also current promulg for case involv credit card fraud
you must have a basic understand of your nation electron bank system while activ
practic in your field of expertis in other word experi remain your singl most
valuabl sourc of knowledg other sourc abound
action which maintain and improv your current credenti and make you a better expert
wit includ
pursu continu educ and train opportun
read trade journal and public
join and particip in profession societi and associ
teach lectur and hold seminar
attend special seminar and workshop
write for trade journal and public
take advanc comput cours
law testifyin g as an expert wit
2011 fraud examin manual 2829
you can practic your oral deliveri skill and henc improv your credibl by activ
pursu public speak engag and opportun
similarli to feel more comfort on the legal stage you mai wish to visit your local
courtroom to observ anoth financi expert give testimoni in similar case cabl
televis especi local govern show and the courttv channel also offer a chanc
to see other expert in action in a varieti of situat
2011 fraud examin manual 3101
