2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/Basic Concepts of the Law/Constitutional Law


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Constitutional Law 
The U.S. Constitution and its accompanying amendments are the foundation of our legal 
system. The Constitution defines and limits the powers of the various branches of the 
government and guarantees basic rights to all citizens — rights such as equal protection under 
the law, due process, and the right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. 
 
The Constitution is the supreme law of the land. The legislature may not properly pass, the 
executive branch enforce, nor the judiciary uphold, any law or action that violates its 
provisions. 
 
Constitutional rights that are of particular importance to Certified Fraud Examiners include 
those found in the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Amendments. The Fourth Amendment 
guarantees the right of all citizens to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. This 
means that the government may not seize any records in a criminal case unless reasonable 
grounds exist — “probable cause” — to believe that the records would constitute evidence of a 
crime, and that a suspect may not be arrested unless there is probable cause to believe that he 
committed an offense. The Fifth Amendment guarantees subjects of a criminal investigation 
the right to refuse to answer questions or to provide certain personal information that might 
be incriminating. The Sixth Amendment affords subjects in a criminal investigation the right 
to counsel, the right to confront (cross-examine) the witnesses against them, and the right to 
a speedy trial.  
 



:


constitut law
the us constitut and it accompani amend ar the foundat of our legal
system the constitut defin and limit the power of the variou branch of the
govern and guarante basic right to all citizen right such as equal protect under
the law due process and the right to be free from unreason search and seizur
the constitut is the suprem law of the land the legislatur mai not properli pass the
execut branch enforc nor the judiciari uphold ani law or action that violat it
provis
constitut right that ar of particular import to certifi fraud examin includ
those found in the fourth fifth and sixth amend the fourth amend
guarante the right of all citizen to be free from unreason search and seizur thi
mean that the govern mai not seiz ani record in a crimin case unless reason
ground exist probabl caus to believ that the record would constitut evid of a
crime and that a suspect mai not be arrest unless there is probabl caus to believ that he
commit an offens the fifth amend guarante subject of a crimin investig
the right to refus to answer question or to provid certain person inform that might
be incrimin the sixth amend afford subject in a crimin investig the right
to counsel the right to confront crossexamin the wit against them and the right to
a speedi trial
