2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/The Court System/Federal Courts


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


Federal Courts 
The federal system uses a three-tier model. 
• U.S. District Courts conduct trials on criminal charges and civil complaints under federal 
law. 
• Courts of Appeal, including the Court of Military Appeals, reviews trial court decisions. 
• The U.S. Supreme Court  reviews lower court decisions. It is sometimes called the court of 
last resort. 
 
Each federal district has a chief prosecutor, a political appointee, known as the United States 
Attorney, and a staff of prosecutors, known as Assistant United States Attorneys. Almost all cases 
are prosecuted by assistants. Criminal cases at the state and local level are prosecuted by the 
District Attorney’s office or the Attorney General’s office. 
 
The federal system also includes specialized courts. These are:  
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.106  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Bankruptcy Court — handles matters involving the U.S. Bankruptcy Code.  
• Tax Court — deals with tax law violations.  
• Court of Federal Claims — jurisdiction over complaints filed against the federal government 
and its agencies.  
• Court of Veterans Appeals — hears veterans’ benefits cases. 
• Court of International Trade — covers business cases of international jurisdiction. 

*Although federal administration agencies are not part of the federal judiciary, they are included here because
appeals from their decisions go to the federal courts.
**Appeals from the highest state court also may be heard by the U.S. Supreme Court.
  
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.107 




:


feder court
the feder system us a threetier model
us district court conduct trial on crimin charg and civil complaint under feder
law
court of appeal includ the court of militari appeal review trial court decis
the us suprem court review lower court decis it is sometim call the court of
last resort
each feder district ha a chief prosecutor a polit appointe known as the unit state
attornei and a staff of prosecutor known as assist unit state attornei almost all case
ar prosecut by assist crimin case at the state and local level ar prosecut by the
district attornei offic or the attornei gener offic
the feder system also includ special court these ar
overview of the unit state legal system law
2106 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci court handl matter involv the us bankruptci code
tax court deal with tax law violat
court of feder claim jurisdict over complaint file against the feder govern
and it agenc
court of veteran appeal hear veteran benefit case
court of intern trade cover busi case of intern jurisdict
although feder administr agenc ar not part of the feder judiciari thei ar includ here becaus
appeal from their decis go to the feder court
appeal from the highest state court also mai be heard by the us suprem court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2107
