2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/OVERVIEW OF THE UNITED STATES LEGAL SYSTEM/The Court System/Federal Courts/A TYPICAL STATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM


:


Law


:


Overview of the Legal System


:


A TYPICAL STATE JUDICIAL SYSTEM 
 
 HIGHEST–LEVEL APPELLATE COURT  
 (A state’s highest court; 
 usually called the State Supreme 
 Court; sometimes called the Court of 
 Appeals of the Supreme Judicial 
 Court) 
 Typically, 5 to 9 judges 
 
 
 
 
 INTERMEDIATE APPELLATE OR 
 REVIEWING COURTS  
 (Found in 41 of the 50 states) 
 Generally, 3 Judges per Panel 
 
 
 
 
 TRIAL COURTS 
 General Jurisdiction
  (Called, for example, Circuit Courts 
 or Superior Courts) 
 LAW                     EQUITY 
 
 
 
 LOWER TRIAL COURTS   (Usually presided over by judges, 
 although some states have justices of 
 the peace or magistrates) 
 Nonjury—Limited Jurisdiction   
 
 (In some states, 
 handled by several 
 types of courts; in 
 others, by the 
 same trial court) 
 Traffic 
 Courts
  
 Housing 
 (Rent) 
 
 Small 
 Claims 
 Courts 
 
 Probate 
 (Orphan’s) 
 Courts 
 
 County or 
 Municipal 
 Courts 
 
 Juvenile 
 Courts 
 
 Domestic 
 Relations 
 Courts 
 Criminal 
 Courts 
 (Maximum amounts vary, 
 depending on the state, from 
 $200 to about $5,000) 
 (Serious criminal cases tend 
 to be handled by the general 
 jurisdiction trial courts) 
Law  Overview of the United States Legal System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.109 
In general, the judge and jury serve important roles during a trial. In the trial setting, the jury 
finds the facts, and the judge applies the law, rules on evidence, and generally moderates the 
proceeding to ensure a fair trial. If, however, a jury is waived by the defendant and 
government, the judge decides both the facts and the law.  
 
Evidence in a criminal or civil case is presented based on burdens of proof. In general terms, 
the burden of proof is the responsibility of a party to prove each element necessary to 
establish the existence of a cause of action. In a criminal case, the prosecution must prove its 
case beyond a reasonable doubt; in a civil case, the burden of proof usually is a 
preponderance of the evidence — a lower standard. 
 
After the trial court enters its decision, a party may file an appeal with a higher court. Appeals 
involve questions of law or questions involving both law and fact. Most questions of law are 
decided by precedent, that is, prior court decisions of equal or higher authority that have 
considered similar cases. Obviously, however, disputes exist over what precedent should 
prevail, with both sides attempting to persuade the court to interpret existing law in a manner 
favorable to its client. 
 
The right to appeal differs in criminal and civil cases. Because of the Fifth Amendment’s 
double jeopardy provisions, which prohibits defendants from being tried twice for the same 
crime, only a convicted defendant in a criminal case can appeal a verdict. The government 
cannot appeal an acquittal on the merits. If a statute authorizes the prosecution to appeal, 
such an appeal is constitutional only if the appellate court can decide the appeal without 
subjecting the defendant to a second trial. The prosecution may appeal adverse pre-trial 
rulings on the admissibility of evidence and certain other matters that can terminate a 
prosecution temporarily (but do not result in a decision on the merits in favor of the 
defendant). Either party in a civil case may appeal a judgment. 
 
An appellate court will not reverse a conviction unless it finds error that affected the 
“substantial rights” of a party; “harmless error,” which supposedly does not affect the jury’s 
decision, is tolerated. Defendants are entitled to a fair trial—not a perfect one. If the appellate 
court reverses a conviction, it will usually order a new trial, but it may also direct dismissal of 
the case. 
 
Appeals from decisions of the U.S. District Courts are heard in the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the “Circuit,” which covers a particular geographic area. The United States is divided into 11 
Overview of the United States Legal System Law 
2.110  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
judicial circuits, plus the District of Columbia. The U.S. Supreme Court is the highest 
appellate court in the federal system and may hear certain appeals from state courts, 
particularly on constitutional grounds. 
 
In the federal system, an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court is accomplished by applying for a 
Writ of Certiorari. Relatively few appeals — “writs” — are granted. The Supreme Court usually 
hears only those cases that present an important question of constitutional law, or may be 
used to resolve a “split” or disagreement on a point of law among the circuits, or that have 
considerable significance to the judicial system beyond the interest of the litigants. If the 
Supreme Court “denies Cert.,” the lower court decision stands and the appeal process ends 
unless the defendant can find some collateral ground, such as alleged constitutional errors in 
state court proceedings, to attack the judgment. As death penalty challenges illustrate, appeals 
on such points, often brought by people in custody under “Habeas Corpus” proceedings, can 
sometimes consume a decade or more. 
 
The various state and federal courts operate in separate spheres, confined by their own 
jurisdictional limitations. State courts are “inferior” to federal courts only in the sense that 
they are subject to Constitutional and “federal question” limitations. Without these factors, a 
federal court will not interfere in state court proceedings. A single act might violate both state 
and federal law, and actions may be brought in separate courts for both violations without 
violating the double jeopardy protection. However, one jurisdiction will usually abstain if the 
other has already prosecuted. 
 
 



:


a typic state judici system
highestlevel appel court
a state highest court
usual call the state suprem
court sometim call the court of
appeal of the suprem judici
court
typic 5 to 9 judg
intermedi appel or
review court
found in 41 of the 50 state
gener 3 judg per panel
trial court
gener jurisdict
call for exampl circuit court
or superior court
law equiti
lower trial court usual presid over by judg
although some state have justic of
the peac or magistr
nonjurylimit jurisdict
in some state
handl by sever
type of court in
other by the
same trial court
traffic
court
hous
rent
small
claim
court
probat
orphan
court
counti or
municip
court
juvenil
court
domest
relat
court
crimin
court
maximum amount vari
depend on the state from
200 to about 5000
seriou crimin case tend
to be handl by the gener
jurisdict trial court
law overview of the unit state legal system
2011 fraud examin manual 2109
in gener the judg and juri serv import role dure a trial in the trial set the juri
find the fact and the judg appli the law rule on evid and gener moder the
proceed to ensur a fair trial if howev a juri is waiv by the defend and
govern the judg decid both the fact and the law
evid in a crimin or civil case is present base on burden of proof in gener term
the burden of proof is the respons of a parti to prove each element necessari to
establish the exist of a caus of action in a crimin case the prosecut must prove it
case beyond a reason doubt in a civil case the burden of proof usual is a
preponder of the evid a lower standard
after the trial court enter it decis a parti mai file an appeal with a higher court appeal
involv question of law or question involv both law and fact most question of law ar
decid by preced that is prior court decis of equal or higher author that have
consid similar case obvious howev disput exist over what preced should
prevail with both side attempt to persuad the court to interpret exist law in a manner
favor to it client
the right to appeal differ in crimin and civil case becaus of the fifth amend
doubl jeopardi provis which prohibit defend from be tri twice for the same
crime onli a convict defend in a crimin case can appeal a verdict the govern
cannot appeal an acquitt on the merit if a statut author the prosecut to appeal
such an appeal is constitut onli if the appel court can decid the appeal without
subject the defend to a second trial the prosecut mai appeal advers pretrial
rule on the admiss of evid and certain other matter that can termin a
prosecut temporarili but do not result in a decis on the merit in favor of the
defend either parti in a civil case mai appeal a judgment
an appel court will not revers a convict unless it find error that affect the
substanti right of a parti harmless error which supposedli doe not affect the juri
decis is toler defend ar entitl to a fair trialnot a perfect on if the appel
court revers a convict it will usual order a new trial but it mai also direct dismiss of
the case
appeal from decis of the us district court ar heard in the us court of appeal for
the circuit which cover a particular geograph area the unit state is divid into 11
overview of the unit state legal system law
2110 2011 fraud examin manual
judici circuit plu the district of columbia the us suprem court is the highest
appel court in the feder system and mai hear certain appeal from state court
particularli on constitut ground
in the feder system an appeal to the us suprem court is accomplish by appli for a
writ of certiorari rel few appeal writ ar grant the suprem court usual
hear onli those case that present an import question of constitut law or mai be
us to resolv a split or disagr on a point of law among the circuit or that have
consider signific to the judici system beyond the interest of the litig if the
suprem court deni cert the lower court decis stand and the appeal process end
unless the defend can find some collater ground such as alleg constitut error in
state court proceed to attack the judgment as death penalti challeng illustr appeal
on such point often brought by peopl in custodi under habea corpu proceed can
sometim consum a decad or more
the variou state and feder court oper in separ sphere confin by their own
jurisdict limit state court ar inferior to feder court onli in the sens that
thei ar subject to constitut and feder question limit without these factor a
feder court will not interfer in state court proceed a singl act might violat both state
and feder law and action mai be brought in separ court for both violat without
violat the doubl jeopardi protect howev on jurisdict will usual abstain if the
other ha alreadi prosecut
