2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT 
 
There are many things that organizations can and should do to minimize the risk that fraud 
can occur and go undetected. A fraud risk assessment can be a powerful proactive tool in the 
fight against fraud for any business.  
 
Regulators, professional standard-setters, and law enforcement authorities continue to 
emphasize the crucial role that fraud risk assessment plays in developing and maintaining 
effective fraud risk management programs and controls. 
 
 
What Is Fraud Risk? 
Cressey’s fraud triangle teaches us that there are three interrelated elements that enable 
someone to commit fraud: the motive  that drives a person to want to commit the fraud, the 
opportunity  that enables him to commit the fraud, and the ability to rationalize  the fraudulent 
behavior. The vulnerability that an organization has to those capable of overcoming all three 
elements of the fraud triangle is fraud risk. Fraud risk can come from sources both internal 
and external to the organization.  
 
Why Should an Organization Be Concerned About Fraud Risk?  
Every organization is vulnerable to fraud; there is no organization that has immunity to that 
risk. The key to reducing that vulnerability is to be consciously aware and realistic about 
what the organization’s weaknesses are. Only  then can management ensure that it can 
establish mechanisms that effectively prevent or detect fraudulent activities. 
 
Organizational stakeholders expect their stewards to be thoughtful and prudent about 
protecting the business. However, even when tales of fraudsters are getting a lot of public 
attention, many organizations still have difficulty facing the realities of how susceptible they 
really are to fraud.  
 
There are many factors that influence how at risk an organization is to fraud. Some of the 
bigger factors are:  
• The business it is in 
• The environment in which it operates 
• The effectiveness of the internal controls within the business processes 
• The ethics and values of the company and the people within it 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.802   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Business It Is In  
The types of risks an organization faces are directly connected to the nature of the business 
in which it is engaged. For example, the inherent fraud risks faced by hospitals and medical 
practices are vastly different from those faced by banks and financial institutions.  
 
The Environment in Which It Operates  
The environment in which the organization operates has a direct impact on its vulnerability 
to fraud. Brick-and-mortar businesses have a very different risk profile than Internet 
businesses. Likewise, businesses in urban areas ha ve different risk profiles than businesses in 
rural areas. The environment in which the business operates can play a big role in 
influencing its vulnerability to fraud. 
 
The Effectiveness of Internal Controls Within the Business Processes  
A good system of internal controls, with the right balance of preventive and detective 
controls, can greatly reduce an organization’s vulnerability to fraud. Preventive controls  are those 
manual or automated processes that stop something bad from happening before it occurs. 
Detective controls  can also be manual or automated, but are designed to identify something bad 
that has already occurred. No system of internal controls can fully eliminate the risk of fraud, 
but well-designed and effective internal controls can deter the average fraudster by reducing 
the opportunity to commit the fraud. 
 
The Ethics and Values of the Company and the People Within It  
It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to have a company made up of individuals whose 
ethics and values are fully aligned with those of the organization. The gap in that alignment 
can significantly increase an organization’s fraud risk.  
 
While many organizations have codes of conduct, those codes are not always very clear in 
drawing the definitive line between acceptable and unacceptable behavior. That lack of 
clarity leaves a lot of wiggle room for fraudsters to rationalize their actions. For example, in 
most organizations, it is generally understood that manipulating financial records is 
unacceptable behavior that will result in termination. However, it is not always apparent 
whether taking a pen or pencil home that belongs to the company is unacceptable behavior, 
or what the consequence, if any, would be.  
 
An organization that is clear and consistent about its ethics, values, and expectations for its 
people will reduce the potential fraudster’s ability to rationalize his actions. Likewise, an 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.803 
organization that demonstrates consistency and predictability in how it handles and holds 
accountable unacceptable behaviors can significantly reduce the risk of fraud.  
 
 
What Is a Fraud Risk Assessment?  
Fraud risk assessment  is a process aimed at proactively identifying and addressing an 
organization’s vulnerabilities to internal and external fraud. As every organization is 
different, the fraud risk assessment process is often more an art than a science. What gets 
evaluated and how it gets assessed should be tailored to the organization — there is no one-size-fits-all 
approach. Additionally, organizational fraud risks continually change. It is 
therefore important to think about a fraud risk assessment as an ongoing, continuous 
process, rather than just an activity.  
 
A fraud risk assessment starts with an identification and prioritization of fraud risks that 
exist in the business. The process evolves as the results of that identification and 
prioritization begin to drive education, communication, organizational alignment, and action 
around effectively managing fraud risk and identifying new fraud risks as they emerge.  
 
What Is the Objective of a Fraud Risk Assessment?  
In the simplest terms, the objective of a fraud risk assessment is to help an organization 
identify what makes it most vulnerable to fraud. Through a fraud risk assessment, the 
organization is able to identify where fraud is most likely to occur, enabling proactive 
measures to be considered and implemented to reduce the chance that it could happen. 
 
Why Should Organizations Conduct Fraud Risk Assessments?  
Every organization should conduct a fraud risk assessment and build procedures to keep the 
assessment process current and relevant. Not only is this practice good corporate 
governance, but it makes good business sense.  
 
Improve Communication and Awareness About Fraud  
Conducting a fraud risk assessment can be a great vehicle for an organization to open up 
communication and raise awareness about fraud. When employees are engaged in an open 
discussion about fraud, the conversations themselves can play a role in reducing fraud 
vulnerability. Employees are reminded that the organization does care about preventing 
fraud and are empowered to come forward if they suspect fraud is occurring in the 
organization. Open communication and awareness about fraud can also deter a potential 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.804   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
fraudster by reducing his ability to rationalize bad behavior and increasing his perception 
that someone might catch on to his actions and report him. 
 
Identify What Activities Are the Most Vulnerable to Fraud  
Management must know where the company is most vulnerable to fraud in order to prevent 
it from happening. For most companies, the normal course of business generally involves 
many different activities. However, not all of the activities that the company engages in are 
equal in terms of increasing the business’s exposure to fraud. The fraud risk assessment 
helps guide the organization to focus on the activities that really put the company at greatest 
risk.  
 
Know Who Puts the Organization at the Greatest Risk  
The actions of certain individuals can significantly increase the company’s vulnerability to 
fraud. The risk can be driven from the way in which someone makes decisions, behaves, or 
treats others within and outside the organization. The fraud risk assessment can help home 
in on those people and their activities that may increase the company’s overall fraud risk. 
 
Develop Plans to Mitigate Fraud Risk  
If management knows where the greatest fraud risks are, it can put plans in place to reduce 
or mitigate those risks. The fraud risk assessment provides a vehicle that can be used to gain 
alignment among various stakeholders and drive action to decrease fraud risk.  
 
Develop Techniques to Determine If Fraud Has Occurred in High-Risk Areas  
Assessing an area as having high fraud risk does not conclusively mean that fraud is 
occurring there. However, the fraud risk assessment is useful in identifying areas to 
proactively investigate to determine whether fraud has in fact occurred. In addition, putting 
activity in high-risk areas under increased scrutiny can deter potential fraudsters by 
increasing their perception of detection.  
 
What Makes a Good Fraud Risk Assessment?  
A good fraud risk assessment is one that fits within the culture of the organization, is 
sponsored and supported by the right people, encourages everyone to be open in their 
participation, and is generally embraced throughout the business as an important and 
valuable process. Conversely, a fraud risk assessment that is conducted without these 
conditions will have inferior results.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.805 
The Right Sponsor  
Having the right sponsor for a fraud risk assessment is extremely important in ensuring its 
success and effectiveness. The sponsor must be senior enough in the organization and 
command the respect of the employees to elicit full cooperation in the process. The sponsor 
has to be someone who is committed to learning the truth about where the company’s fraud 
vulnerabilities really are. He can’t be someone who is prone to rationalization or denial; he 
must be a truth seeker. In the ideal situation, the sponsor would be an independent board 
director or audit committee member. However, a good CEO or other internal senior leader 
can be equally as effective. 
 
An organization’s culture plays a big part in influencing fraud vulnerability and risk. If the 
company’s culture is shaped by a strong and domineering leader, it would be difficult to have 
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assessment and get candid, honest participation from the 
people in the business. Think about how effective a fraud risk assessment of Tyco 
International would have been with Dennis Kozlowski as its sponsor. Similarly, a fraud risk 
assessment of Enron would have been impossible with Kenneth Lay or Jeffrey Skilling as  
its sponsor.  
 
The right sponsor is someone who is open and willing to hear the good, the bad, and the 
ugly. For example, let’s say that the fraud risk assessment reveals that one of the greatest 
fraud risks facing the organization is bribery/corruption based on the cozy nature of one of 
the key business leaders with the company’s busi ness partners. For the assessment to be fully 
effective, the sponsor needs to be independent and open in his evaluation of the situation 
and, most importantly, appropriate in his response to the situation.  
 
Independence/Objectivity of the People Leading and Conducting the Work  
A good fraud risk assessment can be effectively conducted either by people inside the 
organization or with external resources. However, the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment need to be independent and objective throughout the assessment 
process. Additionally, they must also be perceived as independent and objective by others.  
 
The people leading and conducting the work should be thoughtful and mindful about any 
personal biases they may have regarding the organization and the people within it, taking 
steps to reduce or eliminate all biases that may affect the fraud risk assessment process. For 
example, if an employee on the fraud risk assessment team had a very bad past experience 
with someone in the accounts payable department, he might allow that experience to affect 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
his evaluation of the fraud risks related to that area of the business. To compensate for this 
bias, someone else should perform the fraud risk assessment work related to the accounts 
payable department’s activities.  
 
Cultural neutrality is an important aspect of independence and objectivity when leading or 
conducting a fraud risk assessment. Some organizations have very strong corporate cultures 
that can play a big role in influencing the way the people inside of the organization think 
about fraud risk. If people within the organization are leading and conducting the fraud risk 
assessment, they must be able to step outside of the corporate culture to assess and evaluate 
the presence and significance of fraud risks in the business.  
 
A Good Working Knowledge of the Business  
The individuals leading and conducting the fraud risk assessment need to have a good 
working knowledge of the business. Every organization is unique; even companies that 
appear similar have characteristics that make them — and their fraud risks—different from 
their competitors. Some of those differences can be obvious, while others are more subtle.  
 
To ensure a good working knowledge of the business, the fraud risk assessor must know, at 
a more than superficial level, what the business does and how it operates. He must also have 
an understanding about what makes the organization both similar to and different from 
other companies in related lines of business. 
 
Obtaining information about broad industry fraud risks from external sources can be 
extremely helpful. Such sources include industry news; criminal, civil, and regulatory 
complaints and settlements; and professional organizations, such as the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Association of 
Certified Fraud Examiners.  
 
Access to People at All Levels of the Organization  
It is often said that perception is reality. In other words, how an individual perceives a 
situation is his reality of the situation. In an organization, it is important to ensure that the 
perceptions of people at all levels get a voice in the fraud risk assessment process.  
 
Leaders of a business or function often have very different perspectives from their 
subordinates about how something is perceived or executed. However, this does not always 
mean that one perspective is right and the other is wrong. What it does mean is that 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.807 
expectations and perceptions within the organization are not aligned, which could increase 
fraud risk.  
 
Engendered Trust  
If the organization and its employees do not trust the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment, they will not be open and honest about the realities of the business, its 
culture, and its vulnerability to fraud. Trust is not something that can be granted by 
authority; it must be earned by words and a ctions. As the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment engage with business, they should deliberately and carefully plan the 
initial contact with an effort to develop a rapport and gain trust.  
 
The Ability to Think the Unthinkable  
Most honest people are not naturally inclined to  think like a fraudster. In fact, many large-scale 
frauds that have occurred would have been deemed unthinkable by people closest to 
the events. A good fraud risk assessment has to allow for the people leading and conducting 
the assessment to be expansive in their consideration and evaluation of fraud risk. Thoughts 
of “it can’t happen here” should not be allowed  to moderate the evaluation of fraud risk.  
 
A Plan to Keep It Alive and Relevant  
The fraud risk assessment should not be treated as a onetime exercise that is executed, 
reported on, and then put on a shelf to collect dust. The organization should strive to keep 
the process alive and relevant through ongoing dialogue, active management of action plans, 
and development of procedures to ensure the assessment is maintained on a current basis. 
 
Considerations for Developing an Effective Fraud Risk Assessment 
A fraud risk assessment is only effective if the organization embraces it and uses the results 
to monitor, change, or influence the factors that put the company at risk for fraud.  
 
Packaging It Right  
People do not easily relate to or embrace things that they don’t understand. Every 
organization has its own vocabulary and preferred methods of communication (i.e., the 
language of the business). The notification and execution of the fraud risk assessment, 
including the reporting of the results, will only be effective if completed in the language of 
the business. For example: 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.808   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• In a creative organization where decisions are made based on qualitative assessments and 
instinct and where the majority of communication is visual, a quantitative approach to 
assessing fraud risk driven by numbers and calculations would most likely be rejected. 
• In an organization where the business is built and run on quantitative decision-making 
models, a qualitative approach with no quantitative components would most likely 
 be rejected. 
 
Therefore, the assessor must remain mindful of the language used throughout the fraud risk 
assessment. Specifically, he should stay away from technical language that will not resonate 
with people in the business. For example, many people in the business might not easily relate 
to or understand the term cash larceny. If cash larceny is one of the organization’s greatest 
fraud risks, it might be more effective to explain the concept in layman’s terms and describe 
the risk as theft of cash  instead.  
 
One Size Does Not Fit All  
Do not try to fit a round peg into a square hole; what works in one organization most likely 
will not easily work in another. Recognizing the nuances and differences of each business 
and tailoring the approach and execution to the specific organization can help make the 
fraud risk assessment successful. While a generic framework or toolset can be a valuable 
starting point for the development of the fraud risk assessment, it must be adapted to fit the 
business model, culture, and language of the organization.  
 
Keeping It Simple  
The more complicated the fraud risk assessment is, the harder it will be to execute it and 
drive action. Whether the assessor uses a generic assessment framework or develops one 
specifically for the organization, he should focus the effort and time on evaluating the areas 
that are most likely to have fraud risk.  
  
 
Preparing the Company for a Fraud Risk Assessment  
Preparing the company for the fraud risk assessment is a critical element to ensuring its 
success. The culture of the organization should play a large role in influencing the approach 
taken to prepare the company for the fraud risk assessment. The goals of the preparation 
should be to:  
• Assemble the right team to lead and conduct the fraud risk assessment. 
• Determine the best techniques to use in conducting the fraud risk assessment. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.809 
• Obtain the sponsor’s agreement on the work to be performed. 
• Educate the organization and openly promote the process. 
 
Assemble the Right Team to Lead and Conduct the Fraud Risk Assessment  
Before conducting the fraud risk assessment, the organization should build a fraud  
risk assessment team consisting of individuals with diverse knowledge, skills, and 
perspectives that will lead and conduct the fraud risk assessment. The size of the team will 
depend on the size of the organization and the methods used to conduct the assessment. 
The team should have individuals who are credible and who have experience in gathering 
and eliciting information.  
 
The team members might include internal and external resources, such as: 
• Accounting and finance personnel who are familiar with the financial reporting 
processes and internal controls 
• Non-financial business unit and operations personnel who have knowledge of day-to-day 
operations, customer and vendor interactions, and issues within the industry 
• Risk management personnel who can ensure that the fraud risk assessment process 
integrates with the organization’s enterprise risk management program 
• The general counsel or other members of the legal department 
• Members of any ethics or compliance functions within the organization 
• Internal auditors 
• External consultants with fraud and risk expertise 
• Any business leader with direct accountability for the effectiveness of the organization’s 
fraud risk management efforts 
 
Determine the Best Techniques to Use to Conduct the Fraud Risk Assessment  
There are many ways to go about conducting the fraud risk assessment. Picking a method or 
combination of methods that is culturally right for the organization will help to ensure its 
success. The assessment team should also consider the best ways to gather candid, truthful 
information from people throughout all levels of the organization, starting by understanding 
what techniques are commonly and effectively used throughout the organization.  
 
Some examples of methods that can be used to conduct the fraud risk assessment are: 
• Interviews 
• Focus groups 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.810   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Surveys 
• Anonymous feedback mechanisms  
 
Interviews  
Interviews can be an effective way to conduct a candid one-on-one conversation. The 
usefulness of interviews as a technique will depend on how willing people in the organization 
are to be open and honest in a direct dialogue with the interviewer. The assessor must 
consider whether interviews are commonly and effectively used in the organization to gather 
and elicit information. He should also speak with individuals that have previously conducted 
interviews with employees to glean lessons learned. For each potential interviewee, the 
assessor should gauge how likely and willing he would be to be open and honest—some 
people may be good interview candidates, while others may need to be engaged through a 
different approach.  
 
Focus Groups  
Focus groups enable the assessor to observe the interactions of employees as they discuss a 
question or issue. Some topics may lend themselves to being discussed in an open forum in 
which people feel comfortable among their colleagues. Additionally, when discussing tough 
or thorny issues in a group, an anonymous, real-time voting tool can be an effective way of 
opening up a dialogue among the participants.  
 
The success of a focus group will be highly dependent on the skill of the facilitator. If focus 
groups are used as part of the fraud risk assessment, they should be led by an experienced 
facilitator whom the group will relate to and trust. Getting a group to open up and talk 
honestly can be very difficult. An experienced facilitator will be able to read the group and 
use techniques, such as group icebreakers, to make the session a success. 
 
Surveys  
Surveys can be anonymous or directly attributable to individuals. Sometimes people will 
share more openly when they feel protected behind a computer or paper questionnaire. In 
an organization where the culture is not one where people open up and freely talk, an 
anonymous survey can be a great way to get feedback. However, employees can be skeptical 
about the true anonymity of a survey, especially in organizations that use surveys to solicit 
feedback anonymously but send follow-up e-mails to individual delinquent respondents. If 
the assessor determines that an anonymous survey is an appropriate technique to use in the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.811 
fraud risk assessment, he should clearly and explicitly explain to employees how anonymity 
will be maintained.  
 
Anonymous Feedback Mechanisms  
In some organizations, anonymous suggestion boxes or similar mechanisms are used to 
encourage and solicit frequent employee feedback. In these companies, information 
pertaining to the fraud risk assessment can be requested in the same way. Additionally, use 
of an anonymous feedback mechanism can also be effective in an environment where people 
are less likely to be open and honest through other methods and techniques.  
 
One approach to effectively using the anonymous feedback technique involves establishing a 
question of the day that is prominently displayed above a collection box. An example 
question is: “If you thought fraud was occurring in the company, would you come forward? 
Why or why not?” 
 
Another approach involves using a table lineup of five to ten opaque boxes, each with a 
statement posted above it. Employees are provided with poker chips in two different colors 
and told that one color indicates “I agree” and one indicates “I disagree.” Employees are 
then encouraged to respond to each statement by putting a corresponding chip in each box 
to indicate their response. 
 
Obtain the Sponsor’s Agreement on the Work to Be Performed 
Before the fraud risk assessment procedures begin, the sponsor and the fraud risk 
assessment team need to agree on: 
• The scope of work that will be performed 
• The methods that will be used to conduct the work (e.g., surveys, interviews, focus 
groups, anonymous feedback mechanisms) 
• The individuals who will participate in the chosen methods 
• The content of the chosen methods  
• The form of output for the assessment 
 
Educate the Organization and Openly Promote the Process  
The fraud risk assessment process should be visible and communicated throughout the 
business. Employees will be more inclined to participate in the process if they understand 
why it is being done and what the expected outcomes will be.  
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.812   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sponsors should be strongly encouraged to openly promote the process. The more 
personalized the communication from the sponsor, the more effective it will be in 
encouraging employees to participate in the process. Whether it is a video, a town hall 
meeting, or a companywide e-mail, the communication should be aimed at eliminating any 
reluctance employees have about participating in the fraud risk assessment process.  
 
 
Executing the Fraud Risk Assessment  
The execution of the fraud risk assessment can be approached in many ways. The approach 
should be tailored to the organization, but should be structured and rational to ensure its 
success.  
 
Choosing a Framework  
When conducting a fraud risk assessment, it is helpful to use a framework for performing, 
evaluating, and reporting on the results of the work. Fraud risk can be analyzed and reported 
both qualitatively and quantitatively using a consistent framework.  
 
The following sample fraud risk assessment frameworks illustrate how the elements of fraud 
risk assessment are applied under different approaches.  
 
Sample Fraud Risk Assessment Framework #1 1  
Using this framework, the fraud risk assessment team incorporates the following steps into 
the fraud risk assessment strategy: 
1. Identify potential inherent fraud risks. 
2. Assess the likelihood of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
3. Assess the significance to the organization of the fraud risks. 
4. Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
5. Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
6. Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
7. Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or nonexistent 
controls. 
 
                                                 
1 This framework is based on information contained in Managing the Business Risk of Fraud: A Practical Guide, 
sponsored by the Institute of Internal Auditors, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and 
the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.813 
The framework begins with a list of identified fraud risks, which are assessed for relative 
likelihood and significance of occurrence. Next, the risks are mapped to people and 
departments impacted, and to relevant controls. Subsequently, the relevant controls are 
evaluated for design effectiveness and are tested to validate their operating effectiveness. 
Lastly, residual risks are identified, and a fraud risk response is developed to address them. 
The table below provides a visual representation of the steps involved in this framework, 
and can be filled in as the fraud risk assessment is performed. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment Framework 2  
Identified 
Fraud Risks and Schemes 
Likelihood Significance People 
and/or 
Departments 
Existing 
Anti-fraud 
Controls 
Controls 
Effectiveness 
Assessment 
Residual 
Risks 
Fraud Risk 
Response 
Financial Reporting:       
       
       
       
Misappropriation o f  
Assets: 
      
       
       
       
Corruption:       
       
       
       
Other Risks:       
       
       
       
 
Identify Potential Inherent Fraud Risks  
The fraud risk assessment team should brainstorm to identify the fraud risks that could apply 
to the organization. Brainstorming should include discussions regarding the following areas: 
 
                                                 
2 Managing the Business Risk of Fraud: A Practical Guide, sponsored by the Institute of Internal Auditors, the 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners, pg. 21.  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.814   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
INCENTIVES, PRESSURES, AND OPPORTUNITIES TO COMMIT FRAUD  
When assessing incentives, pressures, and opportunities to commit fraud, the fraud risk 
assessment team should evaluate: 
• Incentive programs and how they may affect employees’ behavior when conducting 
business or applying professional judgment 
• Pressures on individuals to achieve performance or other targets and how such pressures 
may influence employees’ behavior 
• Opportunities to commit fraud that arise from weak internal controls, such as a lack of 
segregation of duties 
 
RISK OF MANAGEMENT’S OVERRIDE OF CONTROLS  
When considering the potential for management’s override of controls, the fraud risk 
assessment team should keep in mind that: 
• Management personnel within the organization generally know the controls and standard 
operating procedures that are in place to prevent fraud. 
• Individuals who are intent on committing fraud may use their knowledge of the 
organization’s controls to do it in a manner that will conceal their actions. 
 
POPULATION OF FRAUD RISKS  
The fraud risk identification process requires an understanding of the universe of fraud risks 
and the subset of risks that apply to a particular organization. It includes gathering 
information about the business itself, including its business processes, industry, and 
operating environment, as well as all associated potential fraud risks. Such information can 
be obtained from external sources—such as in dustry news outlets; criminal, civil, and 
regulatory complaints and settlements; and professional organizations and associations—and 
from internal sources by interviewing and brainstorming with personnel, reviewing 
complaints on the whistleblower hotline, and performing analytical procedures. 
 
Fraud risks can be classified into three major areas: fraudulent financial reporting, asset 
misappropriation, and corruption. Potential fraud risks to consider in each category are 
discussed below. 
 
FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING  
Potential fraudulent financial reporting risks include: 
• Inappropriately reported revenues, expenses, or both 
• Inappropriately reflected balance sheet amounts, including reserves 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.815 
• Inappropriately improved or masked disclosures 
• Concealed misappropriation of assets 
• Concealed unauthorized receipts, expenditures, or both 
• Concealed unauthorized acquisition, disposition, or use of assets 
 
ASSET MISAPPROPRIATIONS  
Potential asset misappropriation risks include misappropriation of: 
• Tangible assets 
• Intangible assets 
• Proprietary business opportunities 
 
CORRUPTION  
Potential corruption risks include: 
• Payment of bribes or gratuities to companies, private individuals, or public officials 
• Receipt of bribes, kickbacks, or gratuities 
• Aiding and abetting of fraud by outside parties, such as customers or vendors 
 
Certain other types of risks that can affect or be affected by each of the major areas of fraud 
risks include regulatory and legal misconduct, reputation risk, and risk to information 
technology (IT). 
 
REGULATORY AND LEGAL MISCONDUCT  
Regulatory and legal misconduct includes a wide range of risks, such as conflicts of interest, 
insider trading, theft of competitor trade secrets, anti-competitive practices, environmental 
violations, and trade and customs regulations in areas of import and export. Depending on 
the particular organization and the nature of its business, some or all of these risks may be 
applicable and should be considered in the fraud risk assessment process. 
 
REPUTATION RISK  
The fraud risk assessment team should ensure that consideration of reputation risk is part of 
the organization’s risk assessment process because fraudulent acts can damage an 
organization’s reputation with customers, suppliers, capital markets, and others. For 
example, fraud leading to a financial restatement can damage an organization’s reputation in 
capital markets, which can increase the organization’s cost of borrowing and depress its 
market capitalization. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.816   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
RISK TO INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
Information technology (IT) is a critical component of fraud risk assessment. Organizations 
rely on IT to conduct business, communicate, and process financial information. A poorly 
designed or inadequately controlled IT environment can expose an organization to threats to 
data integrity, threats from hackers to system security, and theft of financial and sensitive 
business information. Whether in the form of hacking, economic espionage, Web 
defacement, sabotage of data, viruses, or unauthorized access to data, IT fraud risks can 
result in significant financial and information losses. 
 
Assess the Likelihood of Occurrence of the Identified Fraud Risks  
Assessing the likelihood and significance of each potential fraud risk is a subjective process 
that allows the organization to manage its fraud risks and apply preventive and detective 
controls rationally. The fraud risk assessment team should first consider fraud risks to the 
organization on an inherent basis, or without consideration of known controls. By 
approaching the assessment in this manner, the team will be better able to consider all 
relevant fraud risks and then evaluate and design controls to address the risks. 
 
The likelihood of occurrence of each fraud risk can be classified as remote, reasonably possible, 
or probable. The fraud risk assessment team should consider the following factors in assessing 
the likelihood of occurrence of each fraud risk: 
• Past instances of the particular fraud occurring at the organization 
• Prevalence of the fraud risk in the organization’s industry 
• Internal controls environment of the organization 
• Resources available to address fraud 
• Support of fraud prevention efforts by management 
• Ethical standards of the organization 
• Number of individual transactions involved 
• Complexity of the fraud risk 
• Number of people involved in reviewing or approving a relevant process 
• Unexplained losses 
• Complaints by customers or vendors 
• Information from fraud surveys such as ACFE’s Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud 
and Abuse  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.817 
Assess the Significance to the Organization of the Fraud Risks  
The fraud risk assessment team should consider qualitative and quantitative factors when 
assessing the fraud risks to the organization. For example, a particular fraud risk that might 
only pose an immaterial direct financial risk to the organization, but that could greatly impact 
its reputation, would be deemed a more significant risk to the organization. 
 
The significance of each potential fraud can be classified as immaterial, significant, or material. 
In assessing the significance of each fraud risk, the fraud risk assessment team should 
consider the following factors: 
• Financial statement and monetary significance 
• Financial condition of the organization 
• Value of the threatened assets 
• Criticality of the threatened assets to the organization 
• Revenue generated by the threatened assets 
• Significance to the organization’s operations, brand value, and reputation 
• Criminal, civil, and regulatory liabilities 
 
Evaluate Which People and Departments Are Most Likely to Commit Fraud and Identify the Methods They Are Likely to Use  
In identifying potential fraud risks, the risk assessment team will have evaluated the 
incentives and pressures on individuals and departments to commit fraud. The team should 
use the information gained in that process to identify the individuals and departments most 
likely to commit fraud and the methods they are likely to use. This knowledge will assist the 
organization in tailoring its fraud risk response, including establishing appropriate 
segregation of duties, proper review and approval chains of authority, and proactive fraud 
auditing procedures. 
 
Identify and Map Existing Preventive and Detective Controls to the Relevant Fraud Risks  
After identifying and assessing fraud risks for likelihood of occurrence and for significance, 
the fraud risk assessment team should identify and map existing preventive and detective 
controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
 
PREVENTIVE CONTROLS  
Preventive controls, which are intended to prevent fraud before it occurs, include: 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.818   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Bringing awareness to personnel throughout the organization of the fraud risk 
management program in place 
• Performing background checks on employees (where permitted by law) 
• Hiring competent personnel and providing them with anti-fraud training 
• Conducting exit interviews 
• Implementing policies and procedures 
• Segregating duties 
• Ensuring proper alignment between an individual’s authority and his level  
of responsibility 
• Reviewing third-party and related-party transactions 
 
DETECTIVE CONTROLS  
Detective controls, which are intended to detect fraud if it does occur, include: 
• Establishing and marketing the presence of a confidential reporting system, such as a 
whistleblower hotline 
• Implementing proactive fraud detection process controls, such as reconciliations, 
independent reviews, physical inspections/counts, analysis, and audits 
• Implementing proactive fraud detection procedures, such as data analysis, continuous 
auditing techniques, and other technology tools 
• Performing surprise audits 
 
Evaluate Whether the Identified Controls Are Operating Effectively and Efficiently  
The fraud risk assessment team must ensure that there are adequate controls in place, that 
the controls are mitigating fraud risk as intended, and that the benefit of the controls exceeds 
the cost. Such an assessment requires: 
• Review of the accounting policies and procedures in place 
• Consideration of the risk of management’s override of controls 
• Interviews with management and employees 
• Observation of control activities 
• Sample testing of controls compliance 
• Review of previous audit reports 
• Review of previous reports on fraud incidents, shrinkage, and unexplained shortages 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.819 
Identify and Evaluate Residual Fraud Risks Resulting from Ineffective or Nonexistent Controls  
Consideration of the internal control structure may reveal certain residual fraud risks, 
including management’s override of established controls that has not been adequately 
mitigated due to: 
• Lack of appropriate prevention and detection controls 
• Noncompliance with established prevention and control measures 
 
These residual fraud risks should be evaluated by the fraud risk assessment team in the 
development of the fraud risk response for likelihood and significance of occurrence. 
 
Sample Fraud Risk Assessment Framework #2 — Fraud Risk Index  
The following is a suggested framework that has two components: the Fraud Risk Index, 
which looks at indicators of areas that put the organization at risk for fraud, and the 
Leadership Risk Profile, which examines the way business leaders operate to help determine 
if they behave or conduct business in a way that can increase the company’s risk of fraud. 
 
Fraud Risk Index  
The Fraud Risk Index is the overall assessment of fraud risk for the organization based on 
three components: 
• The Environmental Risk Index 
• The Culture Quotient 
• The Prevent/Detect Index 
 
THE ENVIRONMENTAL RISK INDEX  
The Environmental Risk Index is an assessment of macro-level fraud risk indicators that can 
affect the organization’s vulnerability to fraud. These include factors such as pressures on 
the business, the organization’s system of internal controls, the tone at the top, and the 
overall quality of the mechanisms that the company has in place to prevent and detect fraud.  
  
THE CULTURE QUOTIENT  
The Culture Quotient is an assessment of how the organization and its people behave or are 
perceived to behave. The Culture Quotient includes: 
• Tolerance Index — an assessment of the organi zation’s tolerance for bad behavior. An 
organization that has a high tolerance for bad behavior can significantly increase the 
company’s vulnerability to fraud risk. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Entitlement Index — an assessment that helps determine whether people in the company 
display or promote a sense of entitlement. An organization that sustains a strong sense 
of entitlement from its employees or leaders can have a higher risk of fraud.  
• Notification Index — an assessment of how likely it is that employees will come forward 
when they suspect something is wrong. An organization where there is a low probability 
that employees will come forward is at significantly greater risk of fraud than an 
organization where it is likely that employees will come forward.  
 
Both the Environmental Risk Index and Culture Quotient are elements of the Fraud Risk 
Index that are aimed at identifying and evaluating macro-level indicators of fraud risk that 
the company may be exposed to. The content and approach for performing these parts of 
the assessment should be tailored for the organization under review. 
 
THE PREVENT/DETECT INDEX  
The Prevent/Detect Index assesses the quality of the specific mechanisms that the 
organization has in place to prevent or detect potential fraud, particularly those fraud 
schemes for which the company is at the greatest risk. This component of the assessment 
can be used to identify the company’s greatest fraud risks by pinpointing areas and methods 
that provide opportunities for potential fraudsters to get something—of either real or 
perceived value—out of the business. 
 
To calculate the Prevent/Detect Index, a standard, comprehensive population of fraud 
schemes, such as the ACFE Occupational Fraud Classification System, is used to evaluate 
each scheme that applies to the business and determine which schemes are the high-risk 
schemes that the organization should focus on. For those fraud schemes that apply to the 
company, an evaluation of each scheme should be performed to identify:  
• The likelihood that the scheme could be perpetrated 
• The significance of the fraud risk to the company  
• Whether there are preventive or detective internal controls in place to moderate the risk 
to a sufficient level  
 
Leadership Risk Profile  
The Leadership Risk Profile is developed to provide a macro-level organizational view of 
which business leaders, if any, increase the organization’s vulnerability to fraud through their:  
• Leadership style 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.821 
• Operating behaviors 
• Decision-making practices 
 
The fraud risk assessment team should develop or obtain an organizational chart that shows 
the organizational structure of the business and identifies its leaders. The team should then 
develop a profile of each of the leaders and evaluate the fraud risk associated with their 
leadership styles, operating behaviors (including how they interact with their team and 
partners across the business), and decision-making practices.  
 
As part of this evaluation, the team should consider any information that indicates unique 
pressures on or incentives for each leader that could increase the organization’s fraud risk. 
Such pressures and incentives can include, but are not limited to: 
• A significant amount of personal net worth invested in the company 
• A large portion of compensation tied to activities that the leader can manipulate (e.g., 
sales volumes or other business performance measures)  
• A pending divorce 
• Recent organizational changes that have either greatly expanded or reduced/eliminated 
the leader’s span of control 
• Living larger than life 
• Dependence on drugs or alcohol 
• Gambling problems 
 
Note that a comprehensive approach to conducting a fraud risk assessment using this 
framework would include the assessment of both the Fraud Risk Index and the Leadership 
Risk Profile. However, due to the sensitive nature of the Leadership Risk Profile, the 
sponsor may decide to focus the assessment on only the Fraud Risk Index.  
 
 
Responding to Residual Fraud Risks 
Regardless of the framework used to conduct the fraud risk assessment, management will 
need to address the identified risks. Larry Cook, CFE, who is the principal author of the 
ACFE Fraud Risk Assessment Tool, suggests that management can use one or a 
combination of the following approaches to respond to the organization’s residual  
fraud risks: 
• Avoid the risk 
• Transfer the risk 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.822   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Mitigate the risk 
• Assume the risk 
 
Avoid the Risk  
Management may decide to avoid the risk by eliminating an asset or exiting an activity if the 
control measures required to protect the organization against an identified threat are too 
expensive. This approach requires the fraud risk assessment team to complete a cost-benefit 
analysis of the value of the asset or activity to the organization compared to the cost of 
implementing measures to protect the asset or activity. 
 
Transfer the Risk  
Management may transfer some or all of the risk by purchasing fidelity insurance or a bond. 
The cost to the organization is the premium paid for the insurance or bond. The covered 
risk of loss is then transferred to the insurance company, less any deductible payment 
included in the contract. 
 
Mitigate the Risk  
Management can help mitigate the risk by implementing appropriate countermeasures, such 
as prevention and detection controls. The fraud risk assessment team should evaluate each 
countermeasure to determine if it is cost effective and reasonable given the probability of 
occurrence and impact of loss. 
 
Assume the Risk  
Management may choose to assume the risk if it determines that the probability of 
occurrence and impact of loss are low. Management may decide that it is more cost effective 
to assume the risk than it is to eliminate the asset or exit the activity, buy insurance to 
transfer the risk, or implement countermeasures to mitigate the risk. 
 
Combination Approach  
Management may also elect a combination of the above approaches. For example, if the 
probability of occurrence and impact of loss are high, management may decide to transfer 
part of the risk through the purchase of insurance, as well as implement preventive and 
detective controls to mitigate the risk. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.823 
Reporting the Results of the Fraud Risk Assessment  
The success of the fraud risk assessment process hinges on how effectively the results are 
reported and what the organization then does with those results. A poorly communicated 
report can undermine the entire process and bring all momentum established to a screeching 
halt. The report should be delivered in a style most suited to the language of the business. If 
management prefers short, punchy PowerPoint presentations, the fraud risk assessment 
team should not give them a 50-page Word document.  
 
Considerations When Reporting the Assessment Results 
To maximize the effectiveness of the process, the team should consider the following points 
when developing the report of the results.  
 
Report Objective — Not Subjective — Results  
A lot of instinct and judgment goes into performing the fraud risk assessment. When 
reporting the results of the assessment, the team must stick to the facts and keep all opinions 
and biases out of the report. A report that is peppered with the assessment team’s subjective 
perspective will dilute and potentially undermine the results of the work.  
 
Keep It Simple  
The assessment results should be reported in a way that is easy to understand and that 
resonates with management. The reader of the report should be able to quickly look at and 
comprehend the results. A simple one-page visual can sometimes make the most impact.  
 
Focus On What Really Matters  
Less is often more when it comes to reporting the results of the fraud risk assessment. The 
team should take care not to turn the report into a laundry list of things that management 
will have to sort through and prioritize. Instead, the report should be presented in a way that 
focuses on what really matters, clearly highlighting those things that are most important and 
that will make the most impact on the organization’s fraud risk management efforts.  
 
Identify Actions That Are Clear and Measurable to Drive Results  
The report should include some key recommendations for action that are clear, measurable, 
and will drive results. The actions should be presented in a way that makes it apparent what 
exactly needs to be done. The report should not include recommendations that are vague or 
that wouldn’t reduce the risk of fraud. Additionally, the actions reflected in the report should 
have already been vetted with and agreed to by the recommended action owners.  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sample Report Formats 
Below are two examples of simple formats that can be used or adapted to report on the 
results of a fraud risk assessment based on the Fraud Risk Index framework discussed earlier 
in this chapter. 
 
Graphic Report Format  
The first sample report format, shown below, would work well in an organization that uses 
dashboards or tends to be visually oriented. The gauges can be substituted with any type of 
visual representation that the organization uses in the normal course of business. This report 
should be accompanied by a one- or two-page action plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary Report Format  
The following report format is a simple one-page executive-summary-type report. It gives 
the reader a snapshot view of the results of the work, along with insight into what is driving 
the results and what actions can be taken to reduce the fraud risk. Using a simple format like 
this forces the assessment team to focus on what really matters and what will make the  
most impact. 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting the Leadership Risk Assessment Results  
The results of the Leadership Risk Profile should  be treated with great sensitivity. The fraud 
risk assessment team should discuss with the sponsor what the best method would be for 
conveying the results of that work. If a formal report is requested, a color-coded 
organization chart can be used as quick visual to convey the fraud risk associated with each 
leadership area across the business. 
 
 
Making an Impact with the Fraud Risk Assessment  
To make the most of the fraud risk assessment process, management should use the  
results to: 
• Begin a dialogue across the company. 
• Look for fraud in high-risk areas. 
• Hold action owners accountable for progress. 
• Keep the assessment process alive and relevant.  
 
Begin a Dialogue Across the Company  
The results of the initial fraud risk assessment can be used to begin a dialogue across the 
company that promotes awareness, education, and action planning aimed at reducing the risk 
of fraud. Engaging in an active dialogue can be an effective way to further establish 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
boundaries of acceptable and unacceptable behavior. Open communication about fraud risks 
can also increase the chances that employees will come forward if they believe they have 
witnessed potential fraud.  
 
Look for Fraud in High-Risk Areas 
An internal audit or investigative team within the organization can use the results of the 
fraud risk assessment in identifying high-risk processes or activities and unusual transactions 
that may indicate fraud. This practice can also provide some reassurance if the subsequent 
search for fraud reveals that, despite the assessed risk, fraud does not appear to be occurring 
at that point in time. Management should remember, however, that just because there is no 
evidence that fraud is occurring in the present, the risk that it could occur is not eliminated.  
 
Hold Action Owners Accountable for Progress 
It is often said that what gets measured gets done. To effectively reduce identified fraud risk, 
management must hold action owners accountable for making progress and driving impact. 
The organization should track and measure progress against agreed-upon action plans. 
Publicly celebrating the successes of action owners that make good progress can be as or 
more effective in driving the right behaviors as providing consequences for the action 
owners that fail to deliver results.  
 
Keep It Alive and Relevant  
Since there are so many factors that can affect an organization’s vulnerability to fraud risk, 
management must ensure that the fraud risk assessment stays current and relevant. Someone 
should be designated within the organization to own the fraud risk assessment process. That 
person or team should build processes to ensure that all changes in the business model, 
company operating environment, and personnel are considered relative to their impact on 
the company’s risk of fraud.  
 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment and the Audit Process  
The fraud risk assessment should play a significant role in informing and influencing the 
audit process. In addition to being used in the annual audit planning process, the fraud risk 
assessment should drive thinking and awareness in the development of audit programs for 
areas that have been identified as having a moderate to high risk of fraud. Although auditors 
should always be on guard for things that might be indicators of fraud risk, the results of the 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.827 
fraud risk assessment can help them design audit procedures in a way that enables them to 
look for fraud in known areas of high risk.  
 
In the course of their work, auditors should validate that the organization is appropriately 
managing the moderate to high fraud risks identified in the fraud risk assessment by:  
• Identifying and mapping the existing preventive and detective controls that pertain to 
the moderate to high fraud risks identified in the fraud risk assessment 
• Designing and performing tests to evaluate whether the identified controls are operating 
effectively and efficiently 
• Identifying within the moderate to high fraud risk areas whether there is a moderate to 
high risk of management override of internal controls 
• Developing and delivering reports that incorporate the results of their validation and 
testing of the fraud risk controls 
 
The following template can be used by auditors to evaluate how effectively the moderate to 
high fraud risks are being managed by the business:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.828   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool 
 
Introduction  
The ACFE’s Fraud Risk Assessment Tool can be  used by fraud examiners to identify their 
clients’ or employers’ vulnerabilities to fraud. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool consists of 15 modules, each containing a series of 
questions designed to help organizations zoom in on areas of risk. The fraud professional 
and the client or employer should begin the risk assessment process by working together to 
answer the questions in each module. It is important that the client or employer select 
people within the organization who have extensive knowledge of company operations, such 
as managers and internal auditors, to work with the fraud professional. Upon completion of 
all of the questions, the fraud professional should review the results of the assessment with 
the client or employer in order to: 
• Identify the potential inherent fraud risks. 
• Assess the likelihood and significance of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
• Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
• Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
• Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
• Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or  
nonexistent controls. 
• Respond to residual fraud risks. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool may reveal certain residual fraud risks that have not been 
adequately mitigated due to lack of, or non-compliance with, appropriate preventive and 
detective controls. The fraud professional should work with the client to develop mitigation 
strategies for any residual risks with an unacceptably high likelihood or significance of 
occurrence. Responses should be evaluated in terms of their costs versus benefits and in 
light of the organization’s level of risk tolerance. 
 
Be aware, however, that this assessment only provides a snapshot of a particular point in 
time. The dynamic nature of organizations requires routine monitoring and updating of their 
financial risk assessment processes in order for them to remain effective. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.829 
MODULE # 1 — Employee Assessment  
The employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a fraudulent 
event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls.  
• Internal control environment.  
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud. 
 
1. Are employees provided formal written job descriptions? 
In addition to clarifying what employees are responsible for, job descriptions signify what 
employees are not responsible for. Employees who perform duties outside of their job 
descriptions represent a significant red flag. 
 
2. Are employees provided with an organizational chart that shows lines of responsibility? 
Organizational charts provide employees with a snapshot of an organization’s division of 
work, levels of management, and reporting relationships. 
 
3. Does the company have written accounting policies and procedures?  
Accounting policies and procedures, including those related to fraud, should be documented, 
implemented, and communicated to employees. 
 
4. Is there a formal policy covering approval authority for financial transactions, such  as purchasing or travel?  
In order to safeguard assets and financial reporting, companies should develop and 
implement policies for determining how financial transactions are initiated, authorized, 
recorded, and reviewed. 
 
5. Does the company have an ethics statement?  
The company should implement a formal ethics statement that (1) defines conduct that is 
unethical, (2) states that unethical acts will be punished, and (3) provides information on 
reporting unethical conduct. 
 
6. Does senior management exhibit and encourage ethical behavior?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Does the company have written fraud policies and procedures?  
The company should document and implement fraud policies and procedures that describe 
(1) fraudulent conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in fraudulent conduct, and (3) how to 
report fraudulent conduct. 
 
8. Is a senior member of management responsible for compliance with fraud policies?  
The responsibility for compliance with fraud and ethics policies should be assigned to a 
senior member of management. 
 
9. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
10. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to report suspected violations of the ethics and anti-
 fraud programs? 
Organizations should provide employees, vendors,  and customers with a confidential system 
for reporting suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
11. Are fraud incidents promptly  and thoroughly investigated? 
Promptly and thoroughly investigating all reported incidents of fraud can minimize losses. 
 
12. Does the company maintain a record of fraud incidents? 
A formal record of all reported incidents of fraud, including documentation of investigative 
activities and final disposition of each incident, should be maintained. 
 
13. Does  the company conduct pre-employment background checks?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
14. Does the company have a loss prevention function?  
Responsible personnel should be trained to perform loss prevention functions. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.831 
15. Does the company have an internal audit function?  
Internal audits that focus on high-risk areas for fraud can identify new vulnerabilities, 
measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud prevention is a high 
priority for the company. 
 
16. Are the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and recording or reporting of transactions 
segregated? 
The company should segregate the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and 
recording or reporting of transactions. 
 
17. Is compliance with internal controls audited periodically?  
Periodic audits of compliance with internal controls send the message to employees that the 
company is proactive in its anti-fraud efforts. 
 
18. Do employees feel they are tr eated and compensated fairly? 
Management should establish appropriate lines  of communication with employees (such as 
surveys, exit interviews, and open-door policies) to assess their attitudes toward the 
organization. 
 
19. Do any employees have large personal debts or credit problems?  
Employees with large personal debts or credit problems are a red flag of potential fraud and 
should be monitored by management. 
 
20. Do any employees appear to be spending  far more than they are earning? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars and extravagant vacations. 
 
21. Do any employees gamble excessively?  
Employees who gamble excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company and should 
be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made available to help 
employees with gambling addictions. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
22. Do any employees use alcohol or drugs excessively? 
Employees who use alcohol or drugs excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company 
and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made 
available to help employees with alcohol or drug addictions. 
 
23. Do any employees resent their superiors? 
Employees who resent their superiors should be monitored by management, as they pose a 
potential fraud risk to the company. 
 
24. Do any employees have a close association with vendors or competitors? 
Employees with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
25. Do any employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company? 
Employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Outside interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should  
be prohibited. 
 
26. Is the company experiencing high employee turnover? 
High employee turnover, especially in areas particularly vulnerable to fraud, is a warning sign 
of fraud that should be investigated. 
 
27. Are employees required to take annual vacations?  
Requiring employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an ongoing 
fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running such a 
scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
28. Is the company dominated by a small group of individuals? 
If control is centered in the hands of a few key employees, those individuals should be under 
heightened security for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
29. Does the company have unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations?  
Unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations can place undue pressure on 
employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.833 
30. Does management fail to give employees positi ve feedback and recognition for job performance?  
Providing positive feedback and recognition to employees helps to reduce the likelihood of 
internal fraud and theft through boosting morale. Employees with positive feelings about an 
organization are less likely to commit fraud against the organization. 
 
31. Are employees afraid to deliver bad news to supervisors or management? 
Management should promote a culture in which employees aren’t afraid to deliver bad news. 
After all, the sooner management receives the bad news, the sooner it can respond. 
 
32. Is there a lack of communication between employees and management? 
Management can improve communication with em ployees by creating an atmosphere that 
encourages open communication. Employees should feel safe in sharing any thoughts, 
comments, complaints, or suggestions. 
 
33. Is there a lack of clear organizational responsibilities in the company? 
A lack of clear organizational responsibilities can lead to confusion and frustration for 
employees. Organizational charts and job descriptions can be used to clarify organizational 
responsibilities. 
 
34. Does management not seem to care about  or reward appropriate employee behavior? 
Management that does not seem to care a bout or reward appropriate employee behavior  
can contribute to low employee morale and increased risk of fraud against the company  
by employees. 
 
MODULE # 2 — Management/Key Employee Assessment  
The management/key employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability 
of a fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls 
• Internal control environment 
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud 
 
1. Is the board of directors composed of mainly officers of the company or related individuals? 
The board of directors should include independent board members that are not associated 
with or employed by the company. In theory, independent directors are not subject to the 
same pressures as management and, therefore, are more likely to act in the best interest of 
shareholders. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is there an independent audit committee?  
Independent audit committee members with financial and accounting expertise can be 
instrumental in preventing and detecting financial fraud. 
 
3. Has there been high turnover of managers  and members of the board of directors? 
Management should investigate the reasons for high turnover and implement measures to 
reduce it. 
 
4. Have an unusually high number of key employees left the company recently?  
Management should investigate the reasons for their departure and implement measures to 
reduce turnover. 
 
5. Is the company involved in any litigation?  
Management should determine the reason for the litigation, monitor the filings, and take 
corrective action where necessary. 
 
6. Does the company have offshore activities or bank accounts?  
Management should determine the reason for the offshore activities and accounts, ascertain 
compliance with U.S. laws, and monitor activity closely. 
 
7. Do any of the senior managers have off shore bank accounts or business interests?  
The organization should require senior managers to file annual financial disclosure reports 
and explain the purpose of any offshore bank accounts or business interests. 
 
8. Are any key employees experiencing financial pressur es such as debts, gambling, medical bills, or divorce?  
Key employees who are experiencing financial pressures represent a potential fraud risk to 
the company and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can 
be made available to help employees with alcohol, drug, and other problems. 
 
9. Do any key employees appear to be living beyond their means? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars, extravagant vacations, or expensive clothing. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.835 
10. Do any key employees have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record? 
Key employees who have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record represent a potential 
fraud risk to the company and should be monitored by management. 
 
11. Do any key employees have a criminal conviction? 
Key employees with known criminal convictions should be subjected to increased review by 
management for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
12. Do one or two key employees appear to dominate the company?  
If control is centered in the hands of one or two key employees, then those individuals 
should be under heightened scrutiny for compliance with internal controls and other policies 
and procedures. 
 
13. Do any key employees have friends or relatives reporting directly to them?  
Organizations should prohibit key employees from  having friends or relatives report directly 
to them. 
 
14. Do any of the key employees appear to have a close association with a vendor?  
Key employees who have a close association with a vendor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
15. Do any key employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company?   
Key employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should be 
prohibited. 
 
16. Do any key employees own a portion of any company that does business with this company?  
Organizations should require key employees to disclose any potential conflicts of interest 
and should closely monitor any such conflicts of interest. 
 
17. Has any key employee failed to take vacation?  
Requiring key employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an 
ongoing fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running 
such a scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Do any key employees have a significant amount  of their net worth invested in the company?  
Management should subject key employees with  a significant amount of their net worth 
invested in the company to increased review for compliance with internal controls, especially 
those controls related to financial reporting. 
 
19. Does the company have unusually high debts? 
Management should determine the reason for debt levels and monitor internal controls for 
financial reporting. 
 
20. Is key employee compensation prim arily based on comp any performance? 
Organizations should monitor employees whose compensation is based primarily on 
company performance for compliance with internal controls, especially controls related to 
financial reporting. 
 
21. Is there an incentive to use inappropriate means to minimize earnings for tax reasons? 
Companies should remove any incentive to use inappropriate means to manipulate  
financial information. 
 
22. Is there excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price? 
Excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price can result in management 
manipulating financial results in order to meet expectations. 
 
23. Has the company recently experienced large operating or investment losses? 
Large operating or investment losses ca n place undue pressure on management to 
manipulate results in order to cover up the losses. 
 
24. Does the organization have sufficient working capital? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
25. Does the organization have sufficient credit?  
A lack of sufficient credit can place undue pressure on management to manipulate financial 
results in order to obtain credit. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.837 
26. Is the organization under pressu re to report favorable earnings?  
Excessive pressure to report favorable earnings can result in management committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet expectations. 
 
27. Does the company depend heavily on only a limited number of products or customers?  
Dependence on only a limited number of products or customers places a company at greater 
risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
28. Has the company experienced diff iculty in collecting receivables? 
Cash flow problems, which are a warning sign of possible fraud, can arise when a company 
experiences difficulty in collecting receivables. 
 
29. Has the company recently expanded rapidly into new business or product lines? 
Rapid expansion into new business or product lines can place tremendous financial pressure 
on a company. 
 
30. Has the company experienced a reduction in sales volume?  
A reduction in sales volume can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results. 
 
31. Does the company have strong competitors that are outperforming?  
Strong competition can place a company at greater risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
32. Is the company under pressure to  sell or merge with another company?  
Situational pressures that may lead to fraudulent acts can arise when a company is under 
pressure to sell or merge with another company. 
 
33. Does the company change auditors often? 
A frequent change in auditors is a red flag of fraud. 
 
34. Does the company delay or avoid supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete  
the audits?  
Delaying or avoiding supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete audits is 
an indicator of fraudulent activity. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
35. Does the company have problems with regulatory agencies? 
The company should determine the reasons for the problems with regulatory agencies and 
implement measures to encourage compliance with regulations. 
 
36. Does the company have poor accounting records? 
The company should implement proper accounting records. 
 
37. Does the accounting department appear to be inadequately staffed?  
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
38. Does the organization fail to disclose questionable or unusual accounting practices?  
Questionable or unusual accounting practices should be disclosed.  
 
39. Does the company have a number of la rge year-end or unusual transactions? 
Large year-end or unusual transactions should be investigated. 
 
40. Does the organization lack an adequate internal audit staff? 
The internal audit department should be adequately staffed. 
 
41. Does the organization lack an internal control syst em, or does it fail to enforce the existing internal 
controls? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
MODULE # 3 — Physical Controls to Deter Employee Theft and Fraud  
The physical controls assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a 
fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Physical controls in place to control access to accounting records and information 
• Physical controls in place to protect the assets of the organization 
 
1. Does the organization conduct pre-employment back ground checks to identify previous dishonest or 
unethical behavior?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.839 
2. Are there policies and procedures that address dishonest or unethical behavior?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures that describe (1) 
unethical conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in unethical conduct, and (3) how to report 
unethical conduct. 
 
3. Does management support the ethics and anti-fraud policies?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
 
4. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
5. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to re port suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud 
policies? 
Organizations should provide a system for anonymous reporting of suspected violations of 
the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
6. Does the organization restrict access to areas containing sensitive documents (such as invoices, receipts, 
journals, ledgers, and checks) and maintain a sy stem for providing an audit trail of access? 
Access to areas containing sensitive documents should be restricted to those individuals 
 who need the information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should  
be maintained. 
 
7. Does the organization restrict access to computer systems with sensitive documents (such as accounting 
software, inventory, and payroll) and create a system to provide an audit trail of access?  
Access to computer systems should be restricted to those individuals who need the 
information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should be maintained. 
 
8. Does the organization restrict access to areas with high value assets, such as shipping, receiving, storerooms, 
and cash?  
Organizations should restrict access to areas with high value assets and should maintain a log 
of persons accessing such areas. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
9. Does the organization use CCTV and recording equipment to monitor entries, exits,  areas with sensitive 
or high value assets, and sales areas?  
Entries, exits, areas with sensitive or high value assets, and sales areas can be monitored 
using CCTV and recording equipment. 
 
10. Does the organization conduct random, unannounced audits of inventory, ca sh, expense, purchasing, 
billing, and other accounts by in ternal or external auditors?  
Random, unannounced audits help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, 
destroy, and misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
11. Does the organization use professional loss prevention  or security personnel to monitor physical controls?  
Professional loss prevention or security personnel can be used to monitor physical controls. 
 
12. Does the organization promptly investigate incidents of suspected or reported fraud?  
Promptly investigating incidents of suspected or reported fraud can minimize losses. 
 
MODULE # 4 — Skimming Schemes  
Skimming schemes include: 
• Collecting cash, but not recording the sale 
• Collecting cash, keeping a portion of the cash, and underreporting the sale amount 
• Collecting a customer’s payment, but not cred iting the amount to the customer’s account 
• Collecting cash and holding it in a personal interest-bearing account before depositing it 
into the company account 
 
1. Is there periodic analytical review of sales a ccounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis?  
Periodic analytical review of sales accounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
2. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling?   
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
3. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.841 
4. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using ph ysical inventory counts? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using physical inventory counts can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
5. Is there periodic review of the inventory and re ceiving records using verifi cation of shipping and  
requisition documents?  
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using verification of shipping and 
requisition documents can highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
6. Is there periodic review of inventory accounts for write-offs?  
Inventory accounts should be reviewed periodically for write-offs. 
 
7. Is there periodic review of accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts to look for write-offs 
of accounts receivable?  
Accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts should be reviewed 
periodically for write-offs of accounts receivable. 
 
8. Is there periodic review of cash accounts for irregular entries?  
Cash accounts should be reviewed periodically for irregular entries. 
 
9. Is the company mail opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other accounting employees 
who make journal entries? 
Company mail should be opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other 
accounting employees who make journal entries. 
 
10. Do vouchers for credit and sales receipts contain serial numbers? 
Vouchers for credit and sales receipts should contain serial numbers. 
 
11. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from preparing the bank deposit?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from preparing the bank deposit. 
 
12. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper rest ricted from collecting cash from customers? 
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from collecting cash  
from customers. 
 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
13. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper re stricted from access to the cash receipts?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from access to the cash receipts. 
 
14. Is the cashier restricted from accessing accounts receivable records?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing accounts receivable records. 
 
15. Is the cashier restricted from accessing bank and customer statements?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing bank and customer statements. 
 
16. Is each of the following responsibilities assigned to a separate employee: general ledger entries, cash receipt 
entries, and accounts receivable billing?  
Having different employees perform these tasks helps minimize the potential for the 
concealment of theft. 
 
17. Does the employee who opens incoming checks place restrictive endorsements on all checks received?  
The employee who opens incoming checks should immediately stamp all incoming checks 
with the company’s restrictive endorsement to protect against unintended parties cashing  
the checks. 
 
18. Does the person who opens the mail prepare a list of all checks and cash received?  
A list of all checks and cash received should be prepared and reconciled daily against the 
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipts report. 
 
19. Does the person who opens the mail deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible for the daily 
bank deposit? 
The person who opens the mail should deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible 
for the daily bank deposit. 
 
20. Does an employee perform an independent verification  of the bank deposit ticket to the remittance list 
generated by the employee who opened the mail? 
An employee should perform an independent verification of the bank deposit ticket to the 
remittance list generated by the employee who opened the mail. 
 
21. Does the company use a lockbox service for cash receipts? 
Lockboxes decrease the potential for fraud and error by reducing employee handling of 
each transaction. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.843 
22. Does the company have a safe with restricted access? 
A safe can be used to physically secure excess cash on hand. Access to the safe should be 
restricted and an access log should be maintained. 
 
23. Is cash deposited daily? 
Daily bank deposits should be made so that excess cash does not remain on the premises.  
 
24. Are there pre-numbered cash receipts for cash sales?  
Pre-numbered cash receipts should be used for cash sales. 
 
25. Are employees who handle cash bonded? 
Employees who handle cash should be bonded in order to protect against theft. 
 
26. Is there a written policy and procedure for turning over delinquent accounts for collection?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures for turning over 
delinquent accounts for collection. 
 
27. Is the person who handles custom er complaints independent of the ca shier or accounts receivable function? 
The person who handles customer complaints should be independent of the cashier or 
accounts receivable function. 
 
28. Is physical access to the accounting syst em restricted to only authorized persons? 
Physical access to the accounting system should be restricted to those who require it to 
perform their job functions. 
 
MODULE # 5 — Cash Larceny Schemes  
Cash larceny schemes include: 
• Stealing cash at the point of sale or register. 
• Stealing cash receipts posted to sales and receivable journals. 
• Stealing cash from bank deposits. 
 
1. Are cash register tape totals reconc iled to the amount in the cash drawer?  
Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount in the cash drawer. Any 
discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and agreeing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register tape totals. 
 
3. Is access to registers or the cash box closely monitored? Are access codes kept secure? 
Access to registers or the cash box should be closely monitored and access codes should be 
kept secure. 
 
4. Are customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting handled by someone other than the 
employee who receives the cash?  
Customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting should be handled by 
someone other than the employee who receives the cash. 
 
5. Are register workers properly supervised? 
Register workers should be properly supervised by on-duty supervisors or CCTV recording 
of register activity. 
 
6. Are CCTV cameras and digital recorders used to monitor register areas?  
CCTV cameras and digital recorders can be used to monitor register areas. 
 
7. Is each receivable transaction reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation?  
Receivable transactions should be reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation. 
 
8. Is an independent listing of cash receipts prepared  before the receipts are submitted to the cashier or 
accounts receivable bookkeeper? 
An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are submitted 
to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
 
9. Does a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions compare entries to the cash 
receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and bank deposit statements?  
Companies should assign a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable 
functions to compare entries to the cash receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and 
bank deposit statements. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.845 
10. Are the cash receipts, cash counts, bank deposits, deposit receipt reconciliation s, bank reconciliations, 
posting of deposits, and cash disbursements duties segregated?  
The primary way to prevent cash larceny is to segregate duties. 
 
11. Does an employee other than the cashier or accounts  receivable bookkeeper make the daily bank deposit?  
Having an employee other than the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper make  
the daily bank deposit is an important segregation of duties that can help to prevent  
cash larceny. 
 
12. Is job or assignment rotation mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties?  
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. 
 
13. Are vacations mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties? 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory vacations, the concealment 
element is interrupted.  
 
14. Are surprise cash counts conducted? 
Surprise cash counts help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, destroy, and 
misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
15. Are journal entries made to  the cash accounts reviewed and analyzed on a regular basis?  
Journal entries made to the cash accounts  should be reviewed and analyzed on a  
regular basis. 
 
16. Does the company use a point of sale (POS) system?  
A POS system will allow the organization to gather sales information in a comprehensive 
and timely format. 
  
17. Does the POS system track perpetual inventory? 
The POS system should be configured to track perpetual inventory. 
  
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Does the POS system track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales,  overages, and shortages?  
The POS system should be configured to track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales, 
overages, and shortages. 
 
19. Are register exception reports reviewed on a regular basis?  
Register exception reports should be reviewed on a regular basis by management. 
 
20. Are all employees, except for managers, prohibited from making changes to the POS system? 
All employees, except for managers, should be prohibited from making changes to the  
POS system. 
 
21. Is access to the accounts receivable subledger and the general ledger restricted to authorized employees? 
Does access leave an audit trail?  
Access to the accounts receivable subledger and general ledger should be restricted to 
authorized employees. An audit trail of who accessed the ledgers, including time and date of 
access, should be kept. 
 
MODULE # 6 — Check Tampering Schemes  
• Forged maker schemes involve forging an authorized signature on a company check.  
• Forged endorsement schemes consist of forging the signature endorsement of an 
intended recipient of a company check. 
• Altered payee schemes involve changing the payee designation on the check to the 
perpetrator or an accomplice. 
• Authorized maker schemes occur when employees with signature authority write 
fraudulent checks for their own benefit. 
  
1. Are unused checks stored in a secure container with limited access? 
Blank checks, which can be used for forgery, should be stored in a secure area such as a 
safe or vault. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel. 
 
2. Are unused checks from accounts that  have been closed promptly destroyed?  
Companies should promptly destroy all unused checks from accounts that have been closed. 
 
3. Are electronic payments used where possible to limit the number of paper checks issued? 
Companies can minimize the possibility of check tampering and theft by using electronic 
payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.847 
4. Are printed and signed checks mailed immediately after signing?  
Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing.  
 
5. Are new checks purchased from reputable check vendors? 
All new checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers.  
 
6. Do company checks contain security features to ensure their integrity?  
Companies can reduce their exposure to physical check tampering by using checks 
containing security features, such as high-resolution microprinting, security inks, and 
ultraviolet ink. 
 
7. Has the company notified its bank to not accept checks over  a predetermined maximum amount?  
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud, 
establishing maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
 
8. Has the company established positive pay controls with its bank by supplying the bank with a daily list of 
checks issued and authorized for payment?  
One method for a company to help prevent check fraud is to establish positive pay controls 
by supplying its banks with a daily list of checks issued and authorized for payment. 
 
9. Is the employee who prepares the check prohibited from signing the check?  
Check preparation should not be performed by a signatory on the account. 
 
10. Are detailed comparisons made between the payees  on the checks and the payees listed in the cash 
disbursements journal?  
Companies should perform detailed comparisons of the payees on the checks and the payees 
listed in the cash disbursements journal. 
 
11. Are employees responsible for handling and coding checks periodically rotated?  
Periodic rotation of personnel responsible for handling and coding checks can be an 
effective check disbursement control.  
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
12. Are bank reconciliations completed immedi ately after bank statements are received?  
Companies should complete bank reconciliations immediately after bank statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented to the 
bank within 30 days of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable. 
 
13. Are bank statements and account reconciliations independently audited to confirm accuracy?  
Bank statements and account reconciliations should be independently audited for accuracy. 
 
14. Are cancelled checks independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries?  
Cancelled checks should be independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries. 
 
15. Are checks for a material amount matched to the supporting documentation?  
Checks for material amounts should be matched to the supporting documentation. 
 
16. Are voided checks examined for irregularities and to ensure they haven’t been processed? 
The list of voided checks should be verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank 
statements should be reviewed to ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
 
17. Are missing checks recorded and stop payments issued? 
Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
 
18. Do questionable payees or payee ad dresses trigger review of the corresponding check and support 
documentation? 
Questionable payees or payee addresses should trigger a review of the corresponding check 
and support documentation. 
 
19. With the exception of payroll, are checks issued to employees reviewed for irregularities? 
Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be closely 
scrutinized for schemes such as conflicts of interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense 
reimbursements. 
 
20. Are two signatures required for check issuance? 
Requiring dual signatures on checks can reduce the risk of check fraud. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.849 
21. Are all company payments made by check or other recordable payment device?  
Making payments by check or other recordable payment device can reduce the risk of 
disbursement frauds. 
 
22. Are handwritten checks prohibited?  
Handwritten checks are especially vulnerable to check fraud and should be prohibited. 
 
MODULE # 7 — Cash Register Schemes  
• False refund schemes occur when an employee (1) issues a refund for fictitious 
merchandise and keeps the money or (2) overstates the amount of merchandise returned 
and skims the excess money. 
• False void schemes occur when a register worker retains a customer receipt, processes a 
fictitious voided sale, and keeps the money. 
 
1. Are refunds, voids, and discounts evaluated on a routine basis to identify patterns of activity among 
employees, departments, shi fts, merchandise, etc.?  
Companies should routinely evaluate refunds, voids, and discounts to search for patterns of 
activity that might signal fraud. 
 
2. Is there a sign posted at the register asking the customer to request and examine a sales receipt? 
Signs asking customers to request and examine sales receipts should be posted at registers. 
 
3. Are cash disbursements recorded on a pre-numbered form and reconciled daily? 
Cash disbursements should be recorded on pre-numbered forms and reconciled daily. 
 
4. Do the cash disbursement forms have  an explanation section or code? 
An explanation section or code should be included on cash disbursement forms. 
 
5. Are customers that are involved in voided sales and refunds randomly contacted to  verify the accuracy of  
the transaction?  
Customers involved in voided sales and refunds should be randomly contacted to verify the 
accuracy of the transactions. 
 
6. Is access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids rest ricted to supervisors?  
Access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids should be restricted  
to supervisors. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Do void or refund transactions have to be  approved by a supervisor and documented?  
All void or refund transactions should be approved by a supervisor and documented. 
 
8. Is documentation of void and ref und transactions maintained on file? 
Documentation of void and refund transactions should be maintained on file. 
 
9. Is missing or altered register  tape thoroughly investigated? 
Companies should thoroughly investigate any missing or altered register tape. 
 
10. Are gaps in the register tape investigated?  
Companies should investigate any gaps in the register tape. 
 
11. Are multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under any review limit investigated? 
Multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under review limits should be investigated. 
 
12. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and comparing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and comparing them to register totals. 
 
13. Are customer complaints regarding pa yment errors thoroughly investigated? 
Customer complaints regarding payment errors should be thoroughly investigated. 
 
14. Does each cashier have a separate access code to the register?  
Each cashier should be assigned a separate access code to the register. 
 
15. Does each cashier have a separate cash drawer?  
Each cashier should have a separate cash drawer. 
 
16. Is an over and short log kept for each person and/or register? 
An over and short log should be kept for each person and/or register. 
 
17. Are over and short incidents thoroughly investigated and monitored? 
Over and short incidents should be thoroughly investigated and monitored. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.851 
18. Are all “no sale" receipts accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report? 
All “no sale" receipts should be accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report. 
 
19. Is access to the register area restricted to authorized employees and supervisors?  
Companies should restrict access to register areas to authorized employees and supervisors. 
 
20. Are all cashiers periodically integrity shopped? 
Companies should periodically conduct integrity shopping on all cashiers. 
 
MODULE # 8 — Purchasing and Billing Schemes  
• Shell company schemes occur when an employee submits invoices for payment from a 
fictitious company controlled by the employee. 
• Pay-and-return schemes occur when an employee arranges for overpayment of a vendor 
invoice and pockets the overpayment amount when it is returned to the company. 
• Personal purchase schemes occur when an employee submits an invoice for personal 
purchases to the company for payment, or when an employee uses a company credit 
card for personal purchases. 
 
1. Does the organization have a purchasing department? 
The organization should have a purchasing department that is separate from the  
payment function. 
 
2. Is the purchasing department independent of the accounting, receiving, and shipping departments?  
The purchasing department should be independent of the accounting, receiving, and 
shipping departments. 
 
3. Do purchase requisitions require management approval?  
Management should approve all purchase requisitions. 
 
4. Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates?  
Purchase orders should specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates. 
 
5. Are purchase order forms pre-numbered and accounted for? 
Purchase order forms should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
6. Does the company maintain a master vendor file?  
The company should maintain a master vendor file. 
 
7. Are competitive bids required for all purchases? 
Companies should require competitive bids for all purchases. 
 
8. Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? 
The receiving department should prepare receiving reports for all items received. 
 
9. Does the receiving department main tain a log of all items received?  
The receiving department should maintain a log of all items received. 
 
10. Are copies of receiving reports furnished to  the accounting and purchasing departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be furnished to the accounting and  
purchasing departments. 
 
11. Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts payable, and general 
ledger functions?  
Purchasing and receiving functions should be segregated from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions. 
 
12. Are vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related liability is recorded?  
Companies should match vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders before 
recording the related liability. 
 
13. Are purchase orders recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed through  
cash disbursements?  
Purchase orders should be recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being 
processed through cash disbursements. 
 
14. Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to the customer is 
promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a receivable and a payable?  
Companies should implement procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased 
for direct delivery to the customer is promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a 
receivable and a payable. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.853 
15. Are records of goods returned to ve ndors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Records of goods returned to vendors should be matched to vendor credit memos. 
 
16. Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register re conciled monthly to the general ledger control accounts? 
The accounts payable ledger or voucher register should be reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts. 
 
17. Do write-offs of accounts payable debit bala nces require approval of a designated manager?  
Write-offs of accounts payable debit balances should require approval of a  
designated manager. 
 
18. Is the master vendor file periodically  reviewed for unusual vendors and addresses?  
The master vendor file should be reviewed periodically for unusual vendors and addresses. 
 
19. Are vendor purchases analyzed for abnormal levels? 
Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels. 
 
20. Are control methods in place to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers? 
Companies should implement control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase 
order numbers. 
 
21. Are credit card statements re viewed monthly for irregularities?  
Credit card statements should be reviewed monthly for irregularities. 
 
22. Are vendors with post office box addresses verified? 
All vendors with post office box addresses should be verified. 
 
23. Are voucher payments reviewed regularly for proper documentation? 
Voucher payments should be reviewed regularly for proper documentation. 
 
24. Is access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger restricted? Does access create an  
audit trail? 
Access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger should be restricted and an 
audit trail should be created. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
MODULE # 9 — Payroll Schemes  
• Ghost employee schemes occur when a person not employed by the company is on  
the payroll. 
• Overpayment schemes occur when a company pays an employee based on falsified 
hours or rates. 
• Commission schemes occur when the amount of sales made or the rate of commission is 
fraudulently inflated. 
 
1. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically  for duplicate or missing Social Security numbers?  
Organizations should check the employee payroll list periodically for duplicate or missing 
Social Security numbers that may indicate a ghost employee or overlapping payments to 
current employees. 
 
2. Are personnel records maintained independ ently of payroll and timekeeping functions?  
Personnel records should be maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions. 
 
3. Are references checked on all new hires? 
Organizations should perform reference checks on all new hires. 
 
4. Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays re viewed for compliance with company policy? 
Sick leave, vacations, and holidays should be reviewed for compliance with company policy. 
 
5. Are appropriate forms completed and signed by the employee to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions? 
Employees should complete and sign appropriate forms to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions. 
 
6. Is payroll periodically compared with personnel records for terminations?  
Payroll should periodically be compared with personnel records for terminations to ensure 
that terminated employees have been removed from the payroll. 
 
7. Are payroll checks pre-numbered and issued in sequential order?  
Payroll checks should be pre-numbered and issued in sequential order. 
 
8. Is the payroll bank account reconciled by an employee who is not involved in preparing payroll checks, does 
not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution?  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.855 
The payroll bank account should be reconciled by an employee who is not involved in 
preparing payroll checks, does not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution. 
 
9. Are payroll registers reconciled to general ledger control accounts?  
Payroll registers should be reconciled to general ledger control accounts. 
 
10. Are canceled payroll checks examined for alterations and endorsements? 
Canceled payroll checks should be examined for alterations and endorsements. 
 
11. Is access restricted to payroll check stock and signature stamps? 
Access to payroll check stock and signature stamps should be restricted. 
 
12. Are payroll withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. examined to determine if any employees are not having 
these items deducted from their paychecks?  
Payroll checks that do not have withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. should  
be investigated. 
 
13. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically for duplicate or missing home addresses and  
telephone numbers? 
The employee payroll list should be reviewed for duplicate or missing home addresses and 
telephone numbers. 
 
14. Is the account information for automatically depo sited payroll checks reviewed periodically for  
duplicate entries? 
Account information for automatically deposited payroll checks should be reviewed 
periodically for duplicate entries. 
 
15. Is an employee separate from the payroll department assigned to distribute payroll checks?  
An employee separate from the payroll department should be assigned to distribute  
payroll checks. 
 
16. Are new employees required to furnish proof of immigration status? 
Companies must require new employees to furnish proof of immigration status. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.856   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
17. Does any change to an employee’s salary require more than one level of management approval?  
Changes to an employee’s salary should require more than one level of  
management approval. 
 
18. Does overtime have to be authorized by a supervisor? 
Overtime should be authorized by a supervisor. 
 
19. Do supervisors verify and sign  timecards for each pay period? 
Supervisors should verify and sign time timecards for each pay period. 
 
20. Are commission expenses compared to sales figures to verify amounts?  
Comparing commission expenses to sales figures to verify amounts is an important control 
procedure that can help to detect payroll fraud. 
 
21. Does someone separate from the sales department calculate sales commissions?  
Someone separate from the sales department should calculate sales commissions. 
 
MODULE # 10 — Expense Schemes  
• Mischaracterized expense schemes occur when an employee requests reimbursement for 
a personal expense, claiming the expense to be business related. 
• Overstated expense schemes occur when an employee overstates the cost of actual 
expenses and seeks reimbursement. 
• Fictitious expense schemes occur when an employee invents a purchase and seeks 
reimbursement for it. 
• Multiple reimbursement schemes occur when an employee submits a single expense for 
reimbursement multiple times. 
 
1. Are the expense accounts reviewed and analyzed periodically using historical comparisons or comparisons 
with budgeted amounts? 
Companies should periodically review and analyze expense accounts using historical 
comparisons or comparisons with budgeted amounts. 
 
2. Do employee expense reimbursement claims receive a detailed review before payment is made?  
Employee expense reimbursement claims should receive a detailed review before payment  
is made. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.857 
3. Are employees required to submit detailed expense reports?  
Employees should be required to submit detailed expense reports containing receipts, 
explanations, amounts, etc. 
 
4. Is a limit placed on expenses such  as hotels, meals, and entertainment?  
Companies should place a spending limit on expenses such as hotels, meals,  
and entertainment. 
 
5. Are receipts required for all expenses to be reimbursed? 
Companies should require receipts for all expenses to be reimbursed. 
 
6. Are supervisors required to review and approve all expense reimbursement requests?  
All expense reimbursement requests should be reviewed and approved by supervisors. 
 
7. Is there a random authentication of expense receipts and expenses claimed?  
A policy requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the 
appropriate detail, can help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for 
reimbursement. 
 
MODULE # 11 — Theft of Inventory and Equipment  
• Fake sale schemes occur when an accomplice of an employee “buys” merchandise, but 
the employee does not ring up the sale and the accomplice takes the merchandise 
without making any payment. 
• Purchasing schemes occur when an employee with purchasing authority uses that 
authority to purchase and misappropriate merchandise. 
• Receiving schemes occur when an employee misappropriates assets purchased by the 
company as they are received at the company. 
• False shipment schemes occur when an employee creates false sales documents and false 
shipping documents to make it appear that missing inventory was not actually stolen, but 
rather sold. 
• Misuse of company assets occurs when an employee borrows company assets for 
personal use without authorization. 
• Larceny schemes occur when an employee takes inventory from the company premises 
without attempting to conceal the theft in the accounting records. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.858   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Has a recent inventory of company equipment, list ing serial numbers and descriptions, been completed? 
Companies should inventory company equipment and maintain a list of the equipment, serial 
numbers, and descriptions. 
 
2. Does the company assign an individual from  outside of the department to conduct the  
department’s inventory? 
An employee who doesn’t work in the department should be assigned to conduct the 
department’s inventory. 
 
3. Are unexplained entries to the inventory records examined for source documentation?  
Unexplained entries to the inventory records should be examined for source documentation. 
 
4. Is the company experiencing sizeable invent ory increases without comparable sales increases? 
Sizeable inventory increases without comparable sales increases may indicate an inventory 
overstatement fraud scheme and should be investigated. 
 
5. Are analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory conducted 
periodically to look for unexplained differences? 
Analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory 
should be conducted periodically. Any discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
6. Is there an unusual volume of inventory adjustments,  write-offs, or disposals?  
Any unusual volume of inventory adjustments, write-offs, or disposals should  
be investigated. 
 
7. Does the organization have writte n inventory instructions and orders?  
Organizations should document and impl ement inventory instructions and orders. 
 
8. Does someone independent of the purchasing, receiv ing, and warehousing functions physically count  
the inventory?  
Physical inventory counts should be conducted by someone independent of the purchasing, 
receiving, and warehousing functions. 
 
9. Are pre-numbered inventory tags used? 
Pre-numbered inventory tags should be used. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.859 
10. Are the inventory tags controlled and accounted for? 
Inventory tags should be controlled and accounted for. 
 
11. Do the inventory procedures prevent double counting?  
Organizations should implement inventory procedures that prevent double counting. 
 
12. Are inventory counts subject to independent recounts?  
Inventory counts should be subject to independent recounts. 
 
13. Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for prop er classification in the accounting system, such as 
description, condition, or stage of completion?  
The inventory should be reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
system, such as description, condition, or stage of completion. 
 
14. Are differences between physical counts and invent ory records investigated be fore inventory records  
are adjusted? 
Differences between physical counts and inventory records should be investigated before 
inventory records are adjusted. 
 
15. Is scrap inventoried and is scrap disposal accounted for? 
Scrap should be inventoried and scrap disposal should be accounted for. 
 
16. Are the following duties segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of in ventory, disbursement of 
inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from the sale of scrap inventory?  
The following duties should be segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of inventory, 
disbursement of inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from 
the sale of scrap inventory. 
 
17. Is a receiving report prepared for all purchased goods?  
A receiving report should be prepared for all purchased goods. 
 
18. Are copies of receiving reports sent directly to the purchasing and ac counting departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be sent directly to the purchasing and  
accounting departments. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.860   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
19. Is the receiving department provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items to be received? 
The receiving department should be provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items 
to be received. 
 
20. Are partial shipments annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets? 
Partial shipments should be annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets. 
 
21. Are overage, shortage, and damage reports completed and sent to the purchasing and  
accounting departments?  
Overage, shortage, and damage reports should be completed and sent to the purchasing and 
accounting departments. 
 
22. Are quantities of materials received counted and compared to purchase orders?  
Quantities of materials received should be counted and compared to purchase orders. 
 
23. Is there a written policy allowing management to inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on 
company property? 
Companies should document and implement a written policy allowing management to 
inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on company property. 
 
24. Is there an equipment removal au thorization policy requiring written management approval to remove any 
company equipment from the company premises? 
Companies should document and implement an equipment removal authorization policy 
requiring written management approval to remove any company equipment from the 
company premises. 
 
25. Is there a policy requiring the in spection of packages, boxes, and other containers before they leave the 
company premises?  
Companies should document and implement a policy requiring the inspection of packages, 
boxes, and other containers before they leave the company premises. 
 
26. Is the removal of trash and trash receptacles periodically monitored? 
Companies should periodically monitor the removal of trash and trash receptacles. 
 
27. Are the shipping and receiving areas adequately supervised to prevent theft?  
Shipping and receiving areas should be adequately supervised to prevent theft. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.861 
28. Are high value items stored in secure or continuously monitored areas?  
High value items should be stored in secure or continuously monitored areas. 
 
29. Is the shipping function separate from  the purchasing and inventory functions?  
The shipping function should be separate from the purchasing and inventory functions. 
 
30. Are shipping documents pre-numbered and accounted for?  
Shipping documents should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
31. Are shipping orders matched with sales orders and contracts?  
Shipping orders should be matched with sales orders and contracts to prevent inventory and 
vendor schemes. 
 
32. Are shipments of goods required to have authorized sales orders  and contracts prior to shipping?  
Shipments of goods should be required to have authorized sales orders and sales contracts 
prior to shipping. 
 
33. Are shipping documents forwarded directly to the a ccounting department for recording inventory reduction 
and cost of sales? 
Shipping documents should be forwarded directly to the accounting department for 
recording inventory reduction and cost of sales. 
 
MODULE # 12 — Theft of Proprietary Information  
• Theft of proprietary information involves theft or disclosure of confidential or trade 
secret information for financial gain. 
 
1. Are there policies and procedures addressing the identification, classification, and handling of  
proprietary information? 
The company should implement policies and procedures addressing the identification, 
classification, and handling of proprietary information. 
 
2. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign nondisclosure agreements?  
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
nondisclosure agreements. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.862   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
3. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign no ncompete agreements to 
prevent them from working for competitors with in a stated period of time and location? 
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
noncompete agreements to prevent them from working for competitors within a stated 
period of time. 
 
4. Are employees provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, their responsibility 
to protect the information, and the company policies and procedures relating to proprietary information?  
Employees should be provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, 
their responsibility to protect proprietary information, and company policies and procedures 
relating to proprietary information. 
 
5. Is there an established procedure to identify what information should be  classified as sensitive and for  
how long? 
Companies should implement a procedure to identify what information should be classified 
as sensitive and for how long. 
 
6. Are sensitive documents properly cl assified and marked as confidential? 
Sensitive documents should be properly classified and marked as confidential. 
 
7. Is sensitive information properly secured when not being used? 
Sensitive information should be properly secured when not being used. 
 
8. Is access to sensitive information ph ysically controlled and accounted for?  
Access to sensitive information should be physically controlled and accounted for. 
 
9. Is sensitive information promptly destroyed when it is no longer needed? 
Organizations should promptly destroy sensitive information when it is no longer needed. 
 
10. Are compromises to the security of proprietary information promptly investigated to determine the source? 
Companies should promptly investigate any compromises to the security of proprietary 
information to determine the source. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.863 
11. Are employees required to use screensaver and/ or server passwords to protect unattended  
computer systems? 
Employees should be required to use screensaver and/or server passwords to protect 
unattended computer systems. 
 
12. Are confidential documents shredded when discarded? 
Confidential documents should be shredded when discarded. 
 
MODULE # 13 — Corruption  
• Bribery schemes involve the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of a thing of value to 
influence a business decision. 
• Kickback schemes occur when vendors make undisclosed payments to employees of 
purchasing companies in order to enlist the employees in overbilling schemes. 
• Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a vendor in winning a 
contract through the competitive bidding process. 
• Economic extortion schemes occur when an employee demands payment from a vendor 
for decisions made in the vendor’s favor. Ref usal to pay the extorter results in harm to 
the vendor. 
• Illegal gratuities schemes involve giving or receiving something of value to reward a 
business decision. 
 
1. Is there a company policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and services offered by a supplier or 
customer?  
Organizations should implement a policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and 
services offered by a supplier or customer. 
 
2. Is there an established bidding policy? 
Organizations should establish a bidding policy. 
 
3. Are purchases reviewed to detect out of line costs?  
Organizations should review purchases for costs that are out of line. 
 
4. Are purchases reviewed to identify favored vendors?  
Purchases should be reviewed to identify favored vendors. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.864   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
5. Are purchases reviewed to identify excessive amounts? 
Purchases should be reviewed and any excessive amounts should be investigated. 
 
6. Are pre-bid solicitation documents reviewed for any restrictions on competition?  
Pre-bid solicitation documents should be reviewed for any restrictions on competition. 
 
7. Are bid solicitation packages numbered and controlled? 
Bid solicitation packages should be numbered and controlled. 
 
8. Is communication between bidders and purchasing employees restricted? 
Companies should restrict and monitor communication between bidders and  
purchasing employees. 
 
9. Are the bids received kept confidential? 
All bids received should be kept confidential. 
 
10. Are bidders’ qualifications verified? 
Companies should verify bidders’ qualifications. 
 
11. Are contracts awarded based on predetermined criteria? 
Companies should establish predetermined criteria upon which to award contracts. 
 
12. Are purchasing account assignments rotated? 
Periodic rotation of purchasing account assignments can be an effective corruption control. 
 
13. Are vendors surveyed periodically regarding company purchasing practices?  
Organizations should periodically survey vendors regarding company purchasing practices. 
 
MODULE # 14 — Conflicts of Interest  
• Purchase schemes involve the overbilling of a company for goods or services by a 
vendor in which an employee has an undisclosed ownership or financial interest. 
• Sales schemes involve the underselling of company goods by an employee to a company 
in which the employee maintains a hidden interest. 
  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.865 
1. Are there periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee information, such as addresses and 
telephone numbers? 
Organizations should conduct periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee 
information, such as addresses and telephone numbers. 
 
2. Are vendors who employ former company employees under in creased scrutiny? 
Vendors who employ former company employees should be under increased scrutiny for 
potential conflicts of interest. 
 
3. Does the organization have a reporting procedure for personnel to report their concerns about vendors 
receiving favored treatment? 
Organizations should provide personnel with a confidential system for reporting concerns 
about vendors receiving favored treatment. 
 
4. Are employees required to complete an annual disclo sure document that includes business ownership, 
income, and investment information? 
Employees should be required to provide annual disclosures that list business ownership, 
income, and investment information. 
 
5. Does the organization require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits?  
Organizations should require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits. 
 
6. Are vendor audits conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, and  
receiving departments? 
Vendor audits should be conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, 
and receiving departments. 
 
MODULE # 15 — Fraudulent Financial Reports  
• Fictitious revenue schemes involve recording fictitious revenue from the sale of goods  
or services. 
• Improper timing schemes involve recording revenues or expenses in improper 
accounting periods. 
• Understating liabilities schemes involve concealing or understating liabilities and 
expenses, capitalizing expenses, or expensing capital expenses. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.866   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Improper disclosure schemes involve the improper disclosure of material information, 
such as contingent liabilities, significant events, management fraud, related-party 
transactions, or accounting changes. 
• Improper asset valuation schemes involve the improper valuation of inventory, accounts 
receivable, fixed assets, intangibles, or other assets. 
 
1. Are the organization’s accounting records in proper form? 
Organizations should maintain accounting records in proper form. 
 
2. Does the organization employ an adequate number of accounting employees? 
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
3. Does the organization have an effective internal audit staff? 
An effective internal audit staff can focus on high-risk areas for fraud and can identify new 
vulnerabilities, measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud 
prevention is a high priority for the company. 
 
4. Are proper internal controls established and maintained? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
5. Does the organization embrace the concept of internal controls?  
Embracing the concept of internal controls requires that senior managers and employees 
understand why internal controls are important and what adopting such measures means  
to them. 
 
6. Are senior managers visible in their support of internal controls?  
Senior managers should be visible in their support of internal controls. 
 
7. Are the organization’s financial goals and objectives realistic? 
Unrealistic financial goals and objectives can result in managers and employees committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
8. Does the organization consistently achieve its financial goals and objectives? 
Any failure to meet financial goals and objectives should be researched. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.867 
9. Is the organization’s reported financial performance stable or increasing? 
Management should investigate any unstable or decreasing financial performance. 
 
10. Does the company have stable relationships with its banks?  
The company should strive to have stable relationships with its banks. 
 
11. Are there unrealistic changes or increases in financial statement account balances?  
Management should determine the reasons for any unrealistic changes or increases in 
financial statement account balances. 
 
12. Are the account balances realistic given the nature, age, and size of the company?  
Management should investigate any unrealistic account balances. 
 
13. Do actual physical assets exist in the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements?  
An inventory of physical assets should be conducted to verify that the physical assets exist in 
the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements. 
 
14. Have there been significant changes in the nature of the or ganization’s revenues or expenses?  
The organization should determine the reasons for any significant changes in the nature of 
its revenues or expenses. 
 
15. Do one or a few large transactions account for a si gnificant portion of any a ccount balance or amount?  
Situations in which one or a few large transactions account for a significant portion of any 
account balance or amount should be researched. 
 
16. Are there significant transactions that occur near the end of a period that positively impact results of 
operations, especially transactions that are unusual or highly complex? 
Any significant transactions that occur near the end of a period and positively impact results 
of operations should be scrutinized for legitimacy, especially if the transactions are unusual 
or highly complex. 
 
17. Are financial results fairly consistent across periods? 
The company should be able to explain any variances in financial results across periods. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.868   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Is there an inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth?  
Any inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth 
should be investigated. 
 
19. Is there significant pressure to obtain additional capital necessary to stay competitive? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
20. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve unusually 
subjective judgments or uncertainties?  
Significant estimates, especially those that involve unusually subjective judgments or 
uncertainties, should be reviewed for reasonableness. 
 
21. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that are subject to 
potential significant change in the near  term in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the 
organization?  
Significant estimates that are subject to potential significant change in the near term  
in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the organization should  
be scrutinized. 
 
22. Is the company experiencing unusual ly rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that 
of other companies in the same industry? 
Unusually rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that of other 
companies in the same industry, is a red flag of fraud and should be investigated. 
 
23. Is the organization highly vulner able to changes in interest rates?  
The organization should increase review of its financial reporting during periods of  
high vulnerability. 
 
24. Are there unrealistically aggressive sa les or profitability incentive programs?  
Unrealistically aggressive sales or profitability incentive programs can place undue pressure 
on employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
25. Is there a threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover?  
A threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover places a company at 
increased risk for fraudulent activity to occur. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.869 
26. Is there a high possibility of ad verse consequences on significant pend ing transactions, such as business 
combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported? 
A high possibility of adverse consequences on significant pending transactions, such as 
business combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported can place 
extreme pressure on management to manipulate results. 
 
27. Is there a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally guaranteed significant 
debts of the entity?  
The existence of a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally 
guaranteed significant debts of the entity can result in management committing fraudulent 
acts in order to protect itself from financial harm. 
 
28. Does the firm continuously operate on a crisis basis or without a careful budget ing and planning process? 
A careful budgeting and planning process can help a firm to monitor progress toward its 
goals, control spending, and predict cash flow and profit. 
 
29. Does the organization have difficulty collecting receivables or have other cash flow problems? 
Management should determine the reasons for any collection or cash flow problems. 
 
30. Is the organization dependent on one or two key products or services, especially products or services that 
can become quickly obsolete? 
Dependence on one or two key products can place tremendous pressure on a company, 
exposing it to increased risk of fraud. 
 
31. Do the footnotes contain information about complex issues? 
Any complex issues should be explained in the footnotes. 
 
32. Are  there adequate disclosures in the financials and footnotes?  
Generally accepted accounting principles concerning disclosures require that financial 
statements (1) include all relevant and material information in the financials or footnotes and 
(2) not be misleading. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.901 



:


fraud risk assess
there ar mani thing that organ can and should do to minim the risk that fraud
can occur and go undetect a fraud risk assess can be a power proactiv tool in the
fight against fraud for ani busi
regul profession standardsett and law enforc author continu to
emphas the crucial role that fraud risk assess plai in develop and maintain
effect fraud risk manag program and control
what is fraud risk
cressei fraud triangl teach us that there ar three interrel element that enabl
someon to commit fraud the motiv that drive a person to want to commit the fraud the
opportun that enabl him to commit the fraud and the abil to ration the fraudul
behavior the vulner that an organ ha to those capabl of overcom all three
element of the fraud triangl is fraud risk fraud risk can come from sourc both intern
and extern to the organ
why should an organ be concern about fraud risk
everi organ is vulner to fraud there is no organ that ha immun to that
risk the kei to reduc that vulner is to be conscious awar and realist about
what the organ weak ar onli then can manag ensur that it can
establish mechan that effect prevent or detect fraudul activ
organiz stakehold expect their steward to be thought and prudent about
protect the busi howev even when tale of fraudster ar get a lot of public
attent mani organ still have difficulti face the realiti of how suscept thei
realli ar to fraud
there ar mani factor that influenc how at risk an organ is to fraud some of the
bigger factor ar
the busi it is in
the environ in which it oper
the effect of the intern control within the busi process
the ethic and valu of the compani and the peopl within it
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4802 2011 fraud examin manual
the busi it is in
the type of risk an organ face ar directli connect to the natur of the busi
in which it is engag for exampl the inher fraud risk face by hospit and medic
practic ar vastli differ from those face by bank and financi institut
the environ in which it oper
the environ in which the organ oper ha a direct impact on it vulner
to fraud brickandmortar busi have a veri differ risk profil than internet
busi likewis busi in urban area ha ve differ risk profil than busi in
rural area the environ in which the busi oper can plai a big role in
influenc it vulner to fraud
the effect of intern control within the busi process
a good system of intern control with the right balanc of prevent and detect
control can greatli reduc an organ vulner to fraud prevent control ar those
manual or autom process that stop someth bad from happen befor it occur
detect control can also be manual or autom but ar design to identifi someth bad
that ha alreadi occur no system of intern control can fulli elimin the risk of fraud
but welldesign and effect intern control can deter the averag fraudster by reduc
the opportun to commit the fraud
the ethic and valu of the compani and the peopl within it
it is extrem difficult if not imposs to have a compani made up of individu whose
ethic and valu ar fulli align with those of the organ the gap in that align
can significantli increas an organ fraud risk
while mani organ have code of conduct those code ar not alwai veri clear in
draw the definit line between accept and unaccept behavior that lack of
clariti leav a lot of wiggl room for fraudster to ration their action for exampl in
most organ it is gener understood that manipul financi record is
unaccept behavior that will result in termin howev it is not alwai appar
whether take a pen or pencil home that belong to the compani is unaccept behavior
or what the consequ if ani would be
an organ that is clear and consist about it ethic valu and expect for it
peopl will reduc the potenti fraudster abil to ration hi action likewis an
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4803
organ that demonstr consist and predict in how it handl and hold
account unaccept behavior can significantli reduc the risk of fraud
what is a fraud risk assess
fraud risk assess is a process aim at proactiv identifi and address an
organ vulner to intern and extern fraud as everi organ is
differ the fraud risk assess process is often more an art than a scienc what get
evalu and how it get assess should be tailor to the organ there is no onesizefitsal
approach addition organiz fraud risk continu chang it is
therefor import to think about a fraud risk assess as an ongo continu
process rather than just an activ
a fraud risk assess start with an identif and priorit of fraud risk that
exist in the busi the process evolv as the result of that identif and
priorit begin to drive educ commun organiz align and action
around effect manag fraud risk and identifi new fraud risk as thei emerg
what is the object of a fraud risk assess
in the simplest term the object of a fraud risk assess is to help an organ
identifi what make it most vulner to fraud through a fraud risk assess the
organ is abl to identifi where fraud is most like to occur enabl proactiv
measur to be consid and implement to reduc the chanc that it could happen
why should organ conduct fraud risk assess
everi organ should conduct a fraud risk assess and build procedur to keep the
assess process current and relev not onli is thi practic good corpor
govern but it make good busi sens
improv commun and awar about fraud
conduct a fraud risk assess can be a great vehicl for an organ to open up
commun and rais awar about fraud when employe ar engag in an open
discuss about fraud the convers themselv can plai a role in reduc fraud
vulner employe ar remind that the organ doe care about prevent
fraud and ar empow to come forward if thei suspect fraud is occur in the
organ open commun and awar about fraud can also deter a potenti
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4804 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster by reduc hi abil to ration bad behavior and increas hi percept
that someon might catch on to hi action and report him
identifi what activ ar the most vulner to fraud
manag must know where the compani is most vulner to fraud in order to prevent
it from happen for most compani the normal cours of busi gener involv
mani differ activ howev not all of the activ that the compani engag in ar
equal in term of increas the businesss exposur to fraud the fraud risk assess
help guid the organ to focu on the activ that realli put the compani at greatest
risk
know who put the organ at the greatest risk
the action of certain individu can significantli increas the compani vulner to
fraud the risk can be driven from the wai in which someon make decis behav or
treat other within and outsid the organ the fraud risk assess can help home
in on those peopl and their activ that mai increas the compani overal fraud risk
develop plan to mitig fraud risk
if manag know where the greatest fraud risk ar it can put plan in place to reduc
or mitig those risk the fraud risk assess provid a vehicl that can be us to gain
align among variou stakehold and drive action to decreas fraud risk
develop techniqu to determin if fraud ha occur in highrisk area
assess an area as have high fraud risk doe not conclus mean that fraud is
occur there howev the fraud risk assess is us in identifi area to
proactiv investig to determin whether fraud ha in fact occur in addit put
activ in highrisk area under increas scrutini can deter potenti fraudster by
increas their percept of detect
what make a good fraud risk assess
a good fraud risk assess is on that fit within the cultur of the organ is
sponsor and support by the right peopl encourag everyon to be open in their
particip and is gener embrac throughout the busi as an import and
valuabl process convers a fraud risk assess that is conduct without these
condit will have inferior result
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4805
the right sponsor
have the right sponsor for a fraud risk assess is extrem import in ensur it
success and effect the sponsor must be senior enough in the organ and
command the respect of the employe to elicit full cooper in the process the sponsor
ha to be someon who is commit to learn the truth about where the compani fraud
vulner realli ar he cant be someon who is prone to ration or denial he
must be a truth seeker in the ideal situat the sponsor would be an independ board
director or audit committe member howev a good ceo or other intern senior leader
can be equal as effect
an organ cultur plai a big part in influenc fraud vulner and risk if the
compani cultur is shape by a strong and domin leader it would be difficult to have
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assess and get candid honest particip from the
peopl in the busi think about how effect a fraud risk assess of tyco
intern would have been with denni kozlowski as it sponsor similarli a fraud risk
assess of enron would have been imposs with kenneth lai or jeffrei skill as
it sponsor
the right sponsor is someon who is open and will to hear the good the bad and the
ugli for exampl let sai that the fraud risk assess reveal that on of the greatest
fraud risk face the organ is briberycorrupt base on the cozi natur of on of
the kei busi leader with the compani busi ness partner for the assess to be fulli
effect the sponsor need to be independ and open in hi evalu of the situat
and most importantli appropri in hi respons to the situat
independenceobject of the peopl lead and conduct the work
a good fraud risk assess can be effect conduct either by peopl insid the
organ or with extern resourc howev the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess need to be independ and object throughout the assess
process addition thei must also be perceiv as independ and object by other
the peopl lead and conduct the work should be thought and mind about ani
person bias thei mai have regard the organ and the peopl within it take
step to reduc or elimin all bias that mai affect the fraud risk assess process for
exampl if an employe on the fraud risk assess team had a veri bad past experi
with someon in the account payabl depart he might allow that experi to affect
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4806 2011 fraud examin manual
hi evalu of the fraud risk relat to that area of the busi to compens for thi
bia someon els should perform the fraud risk assess work relat to the account
payabl depart activ
cultur neutral is an import aspect of independ and object when lead or
conduct a fraud risk assess some organ have veri strong corpor cultur
that can plai a big role in influenc the wai the peopl insid of the organ think
about fraud risk if peopl within the organ ar lead and conduct the fraud risk
assess thei must be abl to step outsid of the corpor cultur to assess and evalu
the presenc and signific of fraud risk in the busi
a good work knowledg of the busi
the individu lead and conduct the fraud risk assess need to have a good
work knowledg of the busi everi organ is uniqu even compani that
appear similar have characterist that make them and their fraud risksdiffer from
their competitor some of those differ can be obviou while other ar more subtl
to ensur a good work knowledg of the busi the fraud risk assessor must know at
a more than superfici level what the busi doe and how it oper he must also have
an understand about what make the organ both similar to and differ from
other compani in relat line of busi
obtain inform about broad industri fraud risk from extern sourc can be
extrem help such sourc includ industri new crimin civil and regulatori
complaint and settlement and profession organ such as the institut of intern
auditor the american institut of certifi public account and the associ of
certifi fraud examin
access to peopl at all level of the organ
it is often said that percept is realiti in other word how an individu perceiv a
situat is hi realiti of the situat in an organ it is import to ensur that the
percept of peopl at all level get a voic in the fraud risk assess process
leader of a busi or function often have veri differ perspect from their
subordin about how someth is perceiv or execut howev thi doe not alwai
mean that on perspect is right and the other is wrong what it doe mean is that
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4807
expect and percept within the organ ar not align which could increas
fraud risk
engend trust
if the organ and it employe do not trust the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess thei will not be open and honest about the realiti of the busi it
cultur and it vulner to fraud trust is not someth that can be grant by
author it must be earn by word and a ction as the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess engag with busi thei should deliber and carefulli plan the
initi contact with an effort to develop a rapport and gain trust
the abil to think the unthink
most honest peopl ar not natur inclin to think like a fraudster in fact mani largescal
fraud that have occur would have been deem unthink by peopl closest to
the event a good fraud risk assess ha to allow for the peopl lead and conduct
the assess to be expans in their consider and evalu of fraud risk thought
of it cant happen here should not be allow to moder the evalu of fraud risk
a plan to keep it aliv and relev
the fraud risk assess should not be treat as a onetim exercis that is execut
report on and then put on a shelf to collect dust the organ should strive to keep
the process aliv and relev through ongo dialogu activ manag of action plan
and develop of procedur to ensur the assess is maintain on a current basi
consider for develop an effect fraud risk assess
a fraud risk assess is onli effect if the organ embrac it and us the result
to monitor chang or influenc the factor that put the compani at risk for fraud
packag it right
peopl do not easili relat to or embrac thing that thei dont understand everi
organ ha it own vocabulari and prefer method of commun ie the
languag of the busi the notif and execut of the fraud risk assess
includ the report of the result will onli be effect if complet in the languag of
the busi for exampl
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4808 2011 fraud examin manual
in a creativ organ where decis ar made base on qualit assess and
instinct and where the major of commun is visual a quantit approach to
assess fraud risk driven by number and calcul would most like be reject
in an organ where the busi is built and run on quantit decisionmak
model a qualit approach with no quantit compon would most like
be reject
therefor the assessor must remain mind of the languag us throughout the fraud risk
assess specif he should stai awai from technic languag that will not reson
with peopl in the busi for exampl mani peopl in the busi might not easili relat
to or understand the term cash larceni if cash larceni is on of the organ greatest
fraud risk it might be more effect to explain the concept in layman term and describ
the risk as theft of cash instead
on size doe not fit all
do not try to fit a round peg into a squar hole what work in on organ most like
will not easili work in anoth recogn the nuanc and differ of each busi
and tailor the approach and execut to the specif organ can help make the
fraud risk assess success while a gener framework or toolset can be a valuabl
start point for the develop of the fraud risk assess it must be adapt to fit the
busi model cultur and languag of the organ
keep it simpl
the more complic the fraud risk assess is the harder it will be to execut it and
drive action whether the assessor us a gener assess framework or develop on
specif for the organ he should focu the effort and time on evalu the area
that ar most like to have fraud risk
prepar the compani for a fraud risk assess
prepar the compani for the fraud risk assess is a critic element to ensur it
success the cultur of the organ should plai a larg role in influenc the approach
taken to prepar the compani for the fraud risk assess the goal of the prepar
should be to
assembl the right team to lead and conduct the fraud risk assess
determin the best techniqu to us in conduct the fraud risk assess
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4809
obtain the sponsor agreement on the work to be perform
educ the organ and openli promot the process
assembl the right team to lead and conduct the fraud risk assess
befor conduct the fraud risk assess the organ should build a fraud
risk assess team consist of individu with divers knowledg skill and
perspect that will lead and conduct the fraud risk assess the size of the team will
depend on the size of the organ and the method us to conduct the assess
the team should have individu who ar credibl and who have experi in gather
and elicit inform
the team member might includ intern and extern resourc such as
account and financ personnel who ar familiar with the financi report
process and intern control
nonfinanci busi unit and oper personnel who have knowledg of daytodai
oper custom and vendor interact and issu within the industri
risk manag personnel who can ensur that the fraud risk assess process
integr with the organ enterpris risk manag program
the gener counsel or other member of the legal depart
member of ani ethic or complianc function within the organ
intern auditor
extern consult with fraud and risk expertis
ani busi leader with direct account for the effect of the organ
fraud risk manag effort
determin the best techniqu to us to conduct the fraud risk assess
there ar mani wai to go about conduct the fraud risk assess pick a method or
combin of method that is cultur right for the organ will help to ensur it
success the assess team should also consid the best wai to gather candid truth
inform from peopl throughout all level of the organ start by understand
what techniqu ar commonli and effect us throughout the organ
some exampl of method that can be us to conduct the fraud risk assess ar
interview
focu group
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4810 2011 fraud examin manual
survei
anonym feedback mechan
interview
interview can be an effect wai to conduct a candid oneonon convers the
us of interview as a techniqu will depend on how will peopl in the organ
ar to be open and honest in a direct dialogu with the interview the assessor must
consid whether interview ar commonli and effect us in the organ to gather
and elicit inform he should also speak with individu that have previous conduct
interview with employe to glean lesson learn for each potenti interviewe the
assessor should gaug how like and will he would be to be open and honestsom
peopl mai be good interview candid while other mai need to be engag through a
differ approach
focu group
focu group enabl the assessor to observ the interact of employe as thei discuss a
question or issu some topic mai lend themselv to be discuss in an open forum in
which peopl feel comfort among their colleagu addition when discuss tough
or thorni issu in a group an anonym realtim vote tool can be an effect wai of
open up a dialogu among the particip
the success of a focu group will be highli depend on the skill of the facilit if focu
group ar us as part of the fraud risk assess thei should be led by an experienc
facilit whom the group will relat to and trust get a group to open up and talk
honestli can be veri difficult an experienc facilit will be abl to read the group and
us techniqu such as group icebreak to make the session a success
survei
survei can be anonym or directli attribut to individu sometim peopl will
share more openli when thei feel protect behind a comput or paper questionnair in
an organ where the cultur is not on where peopl open up and freeli talk an
anonym survei can be a great wai to get feedback howev employe can be skeptic
about the true anonym of a survei especi in organ that us survei to solicit
feedback anonym but send followup email to individu delinqu respond if
the assessor determin that an anonym survei is an appropri techniqu to us in the
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4811
fraud risk assess he should clearli and explicitli explain to employe how anonym
will be maintain
anonym feedback mechan
in some organ anonym suggest box or similar mechan ar us to
encourag and solicit frequent employe feedback in these compani inform
pertain to the fraud risk assess can be request in the same wai addition us
of an anonym feedback mechan can also be effect in an environ where peopl
ar less like to be open and honest through other method and techniqu
on approach to effect us the anonym feedback techniqu involv establish a
question of the dai that is promin displai abov a collect box an exampl
question is if you thought fraud wa occur in the compani would you come forward
why or why not
anoth approach involv us a tabl lineup of five to ten opaqu box each with a
statement post abov it employe ar provid with poker chip in two differ color
and told that on color indic i agre and on indic i disagre employe ar
then encourag to respond to each statement by put a correspond chip in each box
to indic their respons
obtain the sponsor agreement on the work to be perform
befor the fraud risk assess procedur begin the sponsor and the fraud risk
assess team need to agre on
the scope of work that will be perform
the method that will be us to conduct the work eg survei interview focu
group anonym feedback mechan
the individu who will particip in the chosen method
the content of the chosen method
the form of output for the assess
educ the organ and openli promot the process
the fraud risk assess process should be visibl and commun throughout the
busi employe will be more inclin to particip in the process if thei understand
why it is be done and what the expect outcom will be
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4812 2011 fraud examin manual
sponsor should be strongli encourag to openli promot the process the more
person the commun from the sponsor the more effect it will be in
encourag employe to particip in the process whether it is a video a town hall
meet or a companywid email the commun should be aim at elimin ani
reluct employe have about particip in the fraud risk assess process
execut the fraud risk assess
the execut of the fraud risk assess can be approach in mani wai the approach
should be tailor to the organ but should be structur and ration to ensur it
success
choos a framework
when conduct a fraud risk assess it is help to us a framework for perform
evalu and report on the result of the work fraud risk can be analyz and report
both qualit and quantit us a consist framework
the follow sampl fraud risk assess framework illustr how the element of fraud
risk assess ar appli under differ approach
sampl fraud risk assess framework 1 1
us thi framework the fraud risk assess team incorpor the follow step into
the fraud risk assess strategi
1 identifi potenti inher fraud risk
2 assess the likelihood of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
3 assess the signific to the organ of the fraud risk
4 evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
5 identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
6 evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
7 identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or nonexist
control
1 thi framework is base on inform contain in manag the busi risk of fraud a practic guid
sponsor by the institut of intern auditor the american institut of certifi public account and
the associ of certifi fraud examin
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4813
the framework begin with a list of identifi fraud risk which ar assess for rel
likelihood and signific of occurr next the risk ar map to peopl and
depart impact and to relev control subsequ the relev control ar
evalu for design effect and ar test to valid their oper effect
lastli residu risk ar identifi and a fraud risk respons is develop to address them
the tabl below provid a visual represent of the step involv in thi framework
and can be fill in as the fraud risk assess is perform
fraud risk assess framework 2
identifi
fraud risk and scheme
likelihood signific peopl
andor
depart
exist
antifraud
control
control
effect
assess
residu
risk
fraud risk
respons
financi report
misappropri o f
asset
corrupt
other risk
identifi potenti inher fraud risk
the fraud risk assess team should brainstorm to identifi the fraud risk that could appli
to the organ brainstorm should includ discuss regard the follow area
2 manag the busi risk of fraud a practic guid sponsor by the institut of intern auditor the
american institut of certifi public account and the associ of certifi fraud examin pg 21
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4814 2011 fraud examin manual
incent pressur and opportun to commit fraud
when assess incent pressur and opportun to commit fraud the fraud risk
assess team should evalu
incent program and how thei mai affect employe behavior when conduct
busi or appli profession judgment
pressur on individu to achiev perform or other target and how such pressur
mai influenc employe behavior
opportun to commit fraud that aris from weak intern control such as a lack of
segreg of duti
risk of manag overrid of control
when consid the potenti for manag overrid of control the fraud risk
assess team should keep in mind that
manag personnel within the organ gener know the control and standard
oper procedur that ar in place to prevent fraud
individu who ar intent on commit fraud mai us their knowledg of the
organ control to do it in a manner that will conceal their action
popul of fraud risk
the fraud risk identif process requir an understand of the univers of fraud risk
and the subset of risk that appli to a particular organ it includ gather
inform about the busi itself includ it busi process industri and
oper environ as well as all associ potenti fraud risk such inform can
be obtain from extern sourcessuch as in dustri new outlet crimin civil and
regulatori complaint and settlement and profession organ and associationsand
from intern sourc by interview and brainstorm with personnel review
complaint on the whistleblow hotlin and perform analyt procedur
fraud risk can be classifi into three major area fraudul financi report asset
misappropri and corrupt potenti fraud risk to consid in each categori ar
discuss below
fraudul financi report
potenti fraudul financi report risk includ
inappropri report revenu expens or both
inappropri reflect balanc sheet amount includ reserv
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4815
inappropri improv or mask disclosur
conceal misappropri of asset
conceal unauthor receipt expenditur or both
conceal unauthor acquisit disposit or us of asset
asset misappropri
potenti asset misappropri risk includ misappropri of
tangibl asset
intang asset
proprietari busi opportun
corrupt
potenti corrupt risk includ
payment of bribe or gratuiti to compani privat individu or public offici
receipt of bribe kickback or gratuiti
aid and abet of fraud by outsid parti such as custom or vendor
certain other type of risk that can affect or be affect by each of the major area of fraud
risk includ regulatori and legal misconduct reput risk and risk to inform
technolog it
regulatori and legal misconduct
regulatori and legal misconduct includ a wide rang of risk such as conflict of interest
insid trade theft of competitor trade secret anticompetit practic environment
violat and trade and custom regul in area of import and export depend on
the particular organ and the natur of it busi some or all of these risk mai be
applic and should be consid in the fraud risk assess process
reput risk
the fraud risk assess team should ensur that consider of reput risk is part of
the organ risk assess process becaus fraudul act can damag an
organ reput with custom supplier capit market and other for
exampl fraud lead to a financi restat can damag an organ reput in
capit market which can increas the organ cost of borrow and depress it
market capit
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4816 2011 fraud examin manual
risk to inform technolog
inform technolog it is a critic compon of fraud risk assess organ
reli on it to conduct busi commun and process financi inform a poorli
design or inadequ control it environ can expos an organ to threat to
data integr threat from hacker to system secur and theft of financi and sensit
busi inform whether in the form of hack econom espionag web
defac sabotag of data virus or unauthor access to data it fraud risk can
result in signific financi and inform loss
assess the likelihood of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
assess the likelihood and signific of each potenti fraud risk is a subject process
that allow the organ to manag it fraud risk and appli prevent and detect
control ration the fraud risk assess team should first consid fraud risk to the
organ on an inher basi or without consider of known control by
approach the assess in thi manner the team will be better abl to consid all
relev fraud risk and then evalu and design control to address the risk
the likelihood of occurr of each fraud risk can be classifi as remot reason possibl
or probabl the fraud risk assess team should consid the follow factor in assess
the likelihood of occurr of each fraud risk
past instanc of the particular fraud occur at the organ
preval of the fraud risk in the organ industri
intern control environ of the organ
resourc avail to address fraud
support of fraud prevent effort by manag
ethic standard of the organ
number of individu transact involv
complex of the fraud risk
number of peopl involv in review or approv a relev process
unexplain loss
complaint by custom or vendor
inform from fraud survei such as acf report to the nation on occup fraud
and abus
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4817
assess the signific to the organ of the fraud risk
the fraud risk assess team should consid qualit and quantit factor when
assess the fraud risk to the organ for exampl a particular fraud risk that might
onli pose an immateri direct financi risk to the organ but that could greatli impact
it reput would be deem a more signific risk to the organ
the signific of each potenti fraud can be classifi as immateri signific or materi
in assess the signific of each fraud risk the fraud risk assess team should
consid the follow factor
financi statement and monetari signific
financi condit of the organ
valu of the threaten asset
critic of the threaten asset to the organ
revenu gener by the threaten asset
signific to the organ oper brand valu and reput
crimin civil and regulatori liabil
evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the method thei ar like to us
in identifi potenti fraud risk the risk assess team will have evalu the
incent and pressur on individu and depart to commit fraud the team should
us the inform gain in that process to identifi the individu and depart most
like to commit fraud and the method thei ar like to us thi knowledg will assist the
organ in tailor it fraud risk respons includ establish appropri
segreg of duti proper review and approv chain of author and proactiv fraud
audit procedur
identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
after identifi and assess fraud risk for likelihood of occurr and for signific
the fraud risk assess team should identifi and map exist prevent and detect
control to the relev fraud risk
prevent control
prevent control which ar intend to prevent fraud befor it occur includ
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4818 2011 fraud examin manual
bring awar to personnel throughout the organ of the fraud risk
manag program in place
perform background check on employe where permit by law
hire compet personnel and provid them with antifraud train
conduct exit interview
implement polici and procedur
segreg duti
ensur proper align between an individu author and hi level
of respons
review thirdparti and relatedparti transact
detect control
detect control which ar intend to detect fraud if it doe occur includ
establish and market the presenc of a confidenti report system such as a
whistleblow hotlin
implement proactiv fraud detect process control such as reconcili
independ review physic inspectionscount analysi and audit
implement proactiv fraud detect procedur such as data analysi continu
audit techniqu and other technolog tool
perform surpris audit
evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
the fraud risk assess team must ensur that there ar adequ control in place that
the control ar mitig fraud risk as intend and that the benefit of the control exce
the cost such an assess requir
review of the account polici and procedur in place
consider of the risk of manag overrid of control
interview with manag and employe
observ of control activ
sampl test of control complianc
review of previou audit report
review of previou report on fraud incid shrinkag and unexplain shortag
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4819
identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or nonexist control
consider of the intern control structur mai reveal certain residu fraud risk
includ manag overrid of establish control that ha not been adequ
mitig due to
lack of appropri prevent and detect control
noncompli with establish prevent and control measur
these residu fraud risk should be evalu by the fraud risk assess team in the
develop of the fraud risk respons for likelihood and signific of occurr
sampl fraud risk assess framework 2 fraud risk index
the follow is a suggest framework that ha two compon the fraud risk index
which look at indic of area that put the organ at risk for fraud and the
leadership risk profil which examin the wai busi leader oper to help determin
if thei behav or conduct busi in a wai that can increas the compani risk of fraud
fraud risk index
the fraud risk index is the overal assess of fraud risk for the organ base on
three compon
the environment risk index
the cultur quotient
the preventdetect index
the environment risk index
the environment risk index is an assess of macrolevel fraud risk indic that can
affect the organ vulner to fraud these includ factor such as pressur on
the busi the organ system of intern control the tone at the top and the
overal qualiti of the mechan that the compani ha in place to prevent and detect fraud
the cultur quotient
the cultur quotient is an assess of how the organ and it peopl behav or ar
perceiv to behav the cultur quotient includ
toler index an assess of the organi zation toler for bad behavior an
organ that ha a high toler for bad behavior can significantli increas the
compani vulner to fraud risk
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4820 2011 fraud examin manual
entitl index an assess that help determin whether peopl in the compani
displai or promot a sens of entitl an organ that sustain a strong sens
of entitl from it employe or leader can have a higher risk of fraud
notif index an assess of how like it is that employe will come forward
when thei suspect someth is wrong an organ where there is a low probabl
that employe will come forward is at significantli greater risk of fraud than an
organ where it is like that employe will come forward
both the environment risk index and cultur quotient ar element of the fraud risk
index that ar aim at identifi and evalu macrolevel indic of fraud risk that
the compani mai be expos to the content and approach for perform these part of
the assess should be tailor for the organ under review
the preventdetect index
the preventdetect index assess the qualiti of the specif mechan that the
organ ha in place to prevent or detect potenti fraud particularli those fraud
scheme for which the compani is at the greatest risk thi compon of the assess
can be us to identifi the compani greatest fraud risk by pinpoint area and method
that provid opportun for potenti fraudster to get somethingof either real or
perceiv valueout of the busi
to calcul the preventdetect index a standard comprehens popul of fraud
scheme such as the acf occup fraud classif system is us to evalu
each scheme that appli to the busi and determin which scheme ar the highrisk
scheme that the organ should focu on for those fraud scheme that appli to the
compani an evalu of each scheme should be perform to identifi
the likelihood that the scheme could be perpetr
the signific of the fraud risk to the compani
whether there ar prevent or detect intern control in place to moder the risk
to a suffici level
leadership risk profil
the leadership risk profil is develop to provid a macrolevel organiz view of
which busi leader if ani increas the organ vulner to fraud through their
leadership style
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4821
oper behavior
decisionmak practic
the fraud risk assess team should develop or obtain an organiz chart that show
the organiz structur of the busi and identifi it leader the team should then
develop a profil of each of the leader and evalu the fraud risk associ with their
leadership style oper behavior includ how thei interact with their team and
partner across the busi and decisionmak practic
as part of thi evalu the team should consid ani inform that indic uniqu
pressur on or incent for each leader that could increas the organ fraud risk
such pressur and incent can includ but ar not limit to
a signific amount of person net worth invest in the compani
a larg portion of compens ti to activ that the leader can manipul eg
sale volum or other busi perform measur
a pend divorc
recent organiz chang that have either greatli expand or reducedelimin
the leader span of control
live larger than life
depend on drug or alcohol
gambl problem
note that a comprehens approach to conduct a fraud risk assess us thi
framework would includ the assess of both the fraud risk index and the leadership
risk profil howev due to the sensit natur of the leadership risk profil the
sponsor mai decid to focu the assess on onli the fraud risk index
respond to residu fraud risk
regardless of the framework us to conduct the fraud risk assess manag will
need to address the identifi risk larri cook cfe who is the princip author of the
acf fraud risk assess tool suggest that manag can us on or a
combin of the follow approach to respond to the organ residu
fraud risk
avoid the risk
transfer the risk
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4822 2011 fraud examin manual
mitig the risk
assum the risk
avoid the risk
manag mai decid to avoid the risk by elimin an asset or exit an activ if the
control measur requir to protect the organ against an identifi threat ar too
expens thi approach requir the fraud risk assess team to complet a costbenefit
analysi of the valu of the asset or activ to the organ compar to the cost of
implement measur to protect the asset or activ
transfer the risk
manag mai transfer some or all of the risk by purchas fidel insur or a bond
the cost to the organ is the premium paid for the insur or bond the cover
risk of loss is then transfer to the insur compani less ani deduct payment
includ in the contract
mitig the risk
manag can help mitig the risk by implement appropri countermeasur such
as prevent and detect control the fraud risk assess team should evalu each
countermeasur to determin if it is cost effect and reason given the probabl of
occurr and impact of loss
assum the risk
manag mai choos to assum the risk if it determin that the probabl of
occurr and impact of loss ar low manag mai decid that it is more cost effect
to assum the risk than it is to elimin the asset or exit the activ bui insur to
transfer the risk or implement countermeasur to mitig the risk
combin approach
manag mai also elect a combin of the abov approach for exampl if the
probabl of occurr and impact of loss ar high manag mai decid to transfer
part of the risk through the purchas of insur as well as implement prevent and
detect control to mitig the risk
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4823
report the result of the fraud risk assess
the success of the fraud risk assess process hing on how effect the result ar
report and what the organ then doe with those result a poorli commun
report can undermin the entir process and bring all momentum establish to a screech
halt the report should be deliv in a style most suit to the languag of the busi if
manag prefer short punchi powerpoint present the fraud risk assess
team should not give them a 50page word document
consider when report the assess result
to maxim the effect of the process the team should consid the follow point
when develop the report of the result
report object not subject result
a lot of instinct and judgment goe into perform the fraud risk assess when
report the result of the assess the team must stick to the fact and keep all opinion
and bias out of the report a report that is pepper with the assess team subject
perspect will dilut and potenti undermin the result of the work
keep it simpl
the assess result should be report in a wai that is easi to understand and that
reson with manag the reader of the report should be abl to quickli look at and
comprehend the result a simpl onepag visual can sometim make the most impact
focu on what realli matter
less is often more when it come to report the result of the fraud risk assess the
team should take care not to turn the report into a laundri list of thing that manag
will have to sort through and priorit instead the report should be present in a wai that
focus on what realli matter clearli highlight those thing that ar most import and
that will make the most impact on the organ fraud risk manag effort
identifi action that ar clear and measur to drive result
the report should includ some kei recommend for action that ar clear measur
and will drive result the action should be present in a wai that make it appar what
exactli need to be done the report should not includ recommend that ar vagu or
that wouldnt reduc the risk of fraud addition the action reflect in the report should
have alreadi been vet with and agre to by the recommend action owner
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4824 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl report format
below ar two exampl of simpl format that can be us or adapt to report on the
result of a fraud risk assess base on the fraud risk index framework discuss earlier
in thi chapter
graphic report format
the first sampl report format shown below would work well in an organ that us
dashboard or tend to be visual orient the gaug can be substitut with ani type of
visual represent that the organ us in the normal cours of busi thi report
should be accompani by a on or twopag action plan
execut summari report format
the follow report format is a simpl onepag executivesummarytyp report it give
the reader a snapshot view of the result of the work along with insight into what is drive
the result and what action can be taken to reduc the fraud risk us a simpl format like
thi forc the assess team to focu on what realli matter and what will make the
most impact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4825
report the leadership risk assess result
the result of the leadership risk profil should be treat with great sensit the fraud
risk assess team should discuss with the sponsor what the best method would be for
convei the result of that work if a formal report is request a colorcod
organ chart can be us as quick visual to convei the fraud risk associ with each
leadership area across the busi
make an impact with the fraud risk assess
to make the most of the fraud risk assess process manag should us the
result to
begin a dialogu across the compani
look for fraud in highrisk area
hold action owner account for progress
keep the assess process aliv and relev
begin a dialogu across the compani
the result of the initi fraud risk assess can be us to begin a dialogu across the
compani that promot awar educ and action plan aim at reduc the risk
of fraud engag in an activ dialogu can be an effect wai to further establish
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4826 2011 fraud examin manual
boundari of accept and unaccept behavior open commun about fraud risk
can also increas the chanc that employe will come forward if thei believ thei have
wit potenti fraud
look for fraud in highrisk area
an intern audit or investig team within the organ can us the result of the
fraud risk assess in identifi highrisk process or activ and unusu transact
that mai indic fraud thi practic can also provid some reassur if the subsequ
search for fraud reveal that despit the assess risk fraud doe not appear to be occur
at that point in time manag should rememb howev that just becaus there is no
evid that fraud is occur in the present the risk that it could occur is not elimin
hold action owner account for progress
it is often said that what get measur get done to effect reduc identifi fraud risk
manag must hold action owner account for make progress and drive impact
the organ should track and measur progress against agreedupon action plan
publicli celebr the success of action owner that make good progress can be as or
more effect in drive the right behavior as provid consequ for the action
owner that fail to deliv result
keep it aliv and relev
sinc there ar so mani factor that can affect an organ vulner to fraud risk
manag must ensur that the fraud risk assess stai current and relev someon
should be design within the organ to own the fraud risk assess process that
person or team should build process to ensur that all chang in the busi model
compani oper environ and personnel ar consid rel to their impact on
the compani risk of fraud
the fraud risk assess and the audit process
the fraud risk assess should plai a signific role in inform and influenc the
audit process in addit to be us in the annual audit plan process the fraud risk
assess should drive think and awar in the develop of audit program for
area that have been identifi as have a moder to high risk of fraud although auditor
should alwai be on guard for thing that might be indic of fraud risk the result of the
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4827
fraud risk assess can help them design audit procedur in a wai that enabl them to
look for fraud in known area of high risk
in the cours of their work auditor should valid that the organ is appropri
manag the moder to high fraud risk identifi in the fraud risk assess by
identifi and map the exist prevent and detect control that pertain to
the moder to high fraud risk identifi in the fraud risk assess
design and perform test to evalu whether the identifi control ar oper
effect and effici
identifi within the moder to high fraud risk area whether there is a moder to
high risk of manag overrid of intern control
develop and deliv report that incorpor the result of their valid and
test of the fraud risk control
the follow templat can be us by auditor to evalu how effect the moder to
high fraud risk ar be manag by the busi
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4828 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud risk assess tool
introduct
the acf fraud risk assess tool can be us by fraud examin to identifi their
client or employ vulner to fraud
the fraud risk assess tool consist of 15 modul each contain a seri of
question design to help organ zoom in on area of risk the fraud profession
and the client or employ should begin the risk assess process by work togeth to
answer the question in each modul it is import that the client or employ select
peopl within the organ who have extens knowledg of compani oper such
as manag and intern auditor to work with the fraud profession upon complet of
all of the question the fraud profession should review the result of the assess with
the client or employ in order to
identifi the potenti inher fraud risk
assess the likelihood and signific of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or
nonexist control
respond to residu fraud risk
the fraud risk assess tool mai reveal certain residu fraud risk that have not been
adequ mitig due to lack of or noncompli with appropri prevent and
detect control the fraud profession should work with the client to develop mitig
strategi for ani residu risk with an unaccept high likelihood or signific of
occurr respons should be evalu in term of their cost versu benefit and in
light of the organ level of risk toler
be awar howev that thi assess onli provid a snapshot of a particular point in
time the dynam natur of organ requir routin monitor and updat of their
financi risk assess process in order for them to remain effect
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4829
modul 1 employe assess
the employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a fraudul
event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 ar employe provid formal written job descript
in addit to clarifi what employe ar respons for job descript signifi what
employe ar not respons for employe who perform duti outsid of their job
descript repres a signific red flag
2 ar employe provid with an organiz chart that show line of respons
organiz chart provid employe with a snapshot of an organ divis of
work level of manag and report relationship
3 doe the compani have written account polici and procedur
account polici and procedur includ those relat to fraud should be document
implement and commun to employe
4 is there a formal polici cover approv author for financi transact such as purchas or travel
in order to safeguard asset and financi report compani should develop and
implement polici for determin how financi transact ar initi author
record and review
5 doe the compani have an ethic statement
the compani should implement a formal ethic statement that 1 defin conduct that is
uneth 2 state that uneth act will be punish and 3 provid inform on
report uneth conduct
6 doe senior manag exhibit and encourag ethic behavior
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4830 2011 fraud examin manual
7 doe the compani have written fraud polici and procedur
the compani should document and implement fraud polici and procedur that describ
1 fraudul conduct 2 punish for engag in fraudul conduct and 3 how to
report fraudul conduct
8 is a senior member of manag respons for complianc with fraud polici
the respons for complianc with fraud and ethic polici should be assign to a
senior member of manag
9 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
10 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to report suspect violat of the ethic and anti
fraud program
organ should provid employe vendor and custom with a confidenti system
for report suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud polici
11 ar fraud incid promptli and thoroughli investig
promptli and thoroughli investig all report incid of fraud can minim loss
12 doe the compani maintain a record of fraud incid
a formal record of all report incid of fraud includ document of investig
activ and final disposit of each incid should be maintain
13 doe the compani conduct preemploy background check
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
14 doe the compani have a loss prevent function
respons personnel should be train to perform loss prevent function
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4831
15 doe the compani have an intern audit function
intern audit that focu on highrisk area for fraud can identifi new vulner
measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud prevent is a high
prioriti for the compani
16 ar the duti relat to author custodi of asset and record or report of transact
segreg
the compani should segreg the duti relat to author custodi of asset and
record or report of transact
17 is complianc with intern control audit period
period audit of complianc with intern control send the messag to employe that the
compani is proactiv in it antifraud effort
18 do employe feel thei ar tr eat and compens fairli
manag should establish appropri line of commun with employe such as
survei exit interview and opendoor polici to assess their attitud toward the
organ
19 do ani employe have larg person debt or credit problem
employe with larg person debt or credit problem ar a red flag of potenti fraud and
should be monitor by manag
20 do ani employe appear to be spend far more than thei ar earn
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car and extravag vacat
21 do ani employe gambl excess
employe who gambl excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani and should
be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made avail to help
employe with gambl addict
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4832 2011 fraud examin manual
22 do ani employe us alcohol or drug excess
employe who us alcohol or drug excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani
and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made
avail to help employe with alcohol or drug addict
23 do ani employe resent their superior
employe who resent their superior should be monitor by manag as thei pose a
potenti fraud risk to the compani
24 do ani employe have a close associ with vendor or competitor
employe with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
25 do ani employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest outsid interest that conflict with the organ interest should
be prohibit
26 is the compani experienc high employe turnov
high employe turnov especi in area particularli vulner to fraud is a warn sign
of fraud that should be investig
27 ar employe requir to take annual vacat
requir employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an ongo
fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run such a
scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
28 is the compani domin by a small group of individu
if control is center in the hand of a few kei employe those individu should be under
heighten secur for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
29 doe the compani have unrealist product measur and expect
unrealist product measur and expect can place undu pressur on
employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4833
30 doe manag fail to give employe positi ve feedback and recognit for job perform
provid posit feedback and recognit to employe help to reduc the likelihood of
intern fraud and theft through boost moral employe with posit feel about an
organ ar less like to commit fraud against the organ
31 ar employe afraid to deliv bad new to supervisor or manag
manag should promot a cultur in which employe arent afraid to deliv bad new
after all the sooner manag receiv the bad new the sooner it can respond
32 is there a lack of commun between employe and manag
manag can improv commun with em ploye by creat an atmospher that
encourag open commun employe should feel safe in share ani thought
comment complaint or suggest
33 is there a lack of clear organiz respons in the compani
a lack of clear organiz respons can lead to confus and frustrat for
employe organiz chart and job descript can be us to clarifi organiz
respons
34 doe manag not seem to care about or reward appropri employe behavior
manag that doe not seem to care a bout or reward appropri employe behavior
can contribut to low employe moral and increas risk of fraud against the compani
by employe
modul 2 managementkei employe assess
the managementkei employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl
of a fraudul event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 is the board of director compos of mainli offic of the compani or relat individu
the board of director should includ independ board member that ar not associ
with or emploi by the compani in theori independ director ar not subject to the
same pressur as manag and therefor ar more like to act in the best interest of
sharehold
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4834 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is there an independ audit committe
independ audit committe member with financi and account expertis can be
instrument in prevent and detect financi fraud
3 ha there been high turnov of manag and member of the board of director
manag should investig the reason for high turnov and implement measur to
reduc it
4 have an unusu high number of kei employe left the compani recent
manag should investig the reason for their departur and implement measur to
reduc turnov
5 is the compani involv in ani litig
manag should determin the reason for the litig monitor the file and take
correct action where necessari
6 doe the compani have offshor activ or bank account
manag should determin the reason for the offshor activ and account ascertain
complianc with us law and monitor activ close
7 do ani of the senior manag have off shore bank account or busi interest
the organ should requir senior manag to file annual financi disclosur report
and explain the purpos of ani offshor bank account or busi interest
8 ar ani kei employe experienc financi pressur es such as debt gambl medic bill or divorc
kei employe who ar experienc financi pressur repres a potenti fraud risk to
the compani and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can
be made avail to help employe with alcohol drug and other problem
9 do ani kei employe appear to be live beyond their mean
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car extravag vacat or expens cloth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4835
10 do ani kei employe have civil judgment or bankruptci on record
kei employe who have civil judgment or bankruptci on record repres a potenti
fraud risk to the compani and should be monitor by manag
11 do ani kei employe have a crimin convict
kei employe with known crimin convict should be subject to increas review by
manag for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
12 do on or two kei employe appear to domin the compani
if control is center in the hand of on or two kei employe then those individu
should be under heighten scrutini for complianc with intern control and other polici
and procedur
13 do ani kei employe have friend or rel report directli to them
organ should prohibit kei employe from have friend or rel report directli
to them
14 do ani of the kei employe appear to have a close associ with a vendor
kei employe who have a close associ with a vendor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
15 do ani kei employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
kei employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest interest that conflict with the organ interest should be
prohibit
16 do ani kei employe own a portion of ani compani that doe busi with thi compani
organ should requir kei employe to disclos ani potenti conflict of interest
and should close monitor ani such conflict of interest
17 ha ani kei employe fail to take vacat
requir kei employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an
ongo fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run
such a scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4836 2011 fraud examin manual
18 do ani kei employe have a signific amount of their net worth invest in the compani
manag should subject kei employe with a signific amount of their net worth
invest in the compani to increas review for complianc with intern control especi
those control relat to financi report
19 doe the compani have unusu high debt
manag should determin the reason for debt level and monitor intern control for
financi report
20 is kei employe compens prim arili base on comp ani perform
organ should monitor employe whose compens is base primarili on
compani perform for complianc with intern control especi control relat to
financi report
21 is there an incent to us inappropri mean to minim earn for tax reason
compani should remov ani incent to us inappropri mean to manipul
financi inform
22 is there excess pressur to increas the compani stock price
excess pressur to increas the compani stock price can result in manag
manipul financi result in order to meet expect
23 ha the compani recent experienc larg oper or invest loss
larg oper or invest loss ca n place undu pressur on manag to
manipul result in order to cover up the loss
24 doe the organ have suffici work capit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
25 doe the organ have suffici credit
a lack of suffici credit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul financi
result in order to obtain credit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4837
26 is the organ under pressu re to report favor earn
excess pressur to report favor earn can result in manag commit
fraudul act in order to meet expect
27 doe the compani depend heavili on onli a limit number of product or custom
depend on onli a limit number of product or custom place a compani at greater
risk for fraudul act to occur
28 ha the compani experienc diff iculti in collect receiv
cash flow problem which ar a warn sign of possibl fraud can aris when a compani
experi difficulti in collect receiv
29 ha the compani recent expand rapidli into new busi or product line
rapid expans into new busi or product line can place tremend financi pressur
on a compani
30 ha the compani experienc a reduct in sale volum
a reduct in sale volum can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
31 doe the compani have strong competitor that ar outperform
strong competit can place a compani at greater risk for fraudul act to occur
32 is the compani under pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
situat pressur that mai lead to fraudul act can aris when a compani is under
pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
33 doe the compani chang auditor often
a frequent chang in auditor is a red flag of fraud
34 doe the compani delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet
the audit
delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet audit is
an indic of fraudul activ
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4838 2011 fraud examin manual
35 doe the compani have problem with regulatori agenc
the compani should determin the reason for the problem with regulatori agenc and
implement measur to encourag complianc with regul
36 doe the compani have poor account record
the compani should implement proper account record
37 doe the account depart appear to be inadequ staf
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
38 doe the organ fail to disclos question or unusu account practic
question or unusu account practic should be disclos
39 doe the compani have a number of la rge yearend or unusu transact
larg yearend or unusu transact should be investig
40 doe the organ lack an adequ intern audit staff
the intern audit depart should be adequ staf
41 doe the organ lack an intern control syst em or doe it fail to enforc the exist intern
control
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
modul 3 physic control to deter employe theft and fraud
the physic control assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a
fraudul event occur within the organ base on
physic control in place to control access to account record and inform
physic control in place to protect the asset of the organ
1 doe the organ conduct preemploy back ground check to identifi previou dishonest or
uneth behavior
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4839
2 ar there polici and procedur that address dishonest or uneth behavior
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur that describ 1
uneth conduct 2 punish for engag in uneth conduct and 3 how to report
uneth conduct
3 doe manag support the ethic and antifraud polici
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
4 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
5 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to re port suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud
polici
organ should provid a system for anonym report of suspect violat of
the ethic and antifraud polici
6 doe the organ restrict access to area contain sensit document such as invoic receipt
journal ledger and check and maintain a sy stem for provid an audit trail of access
access to area contain sensit document should be restrict to those individu
who need the inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should
be maintain
7 doe the organ restrict access to comput system with sensit document such as account
softwar inventori and payrol and creat a system to provid an audit trail of access
access to comput system should be restrict to those individu who need the
inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should be maintain
8 doe the organ restrict access to area with high valu asset such as ship receiv storeroom
and cash
organ should restrict access to area with high valu asset and should maintain a log
of person access such area
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4840 2011 fraud examin manual
9 doe the organ us cctv and record equip to monitor entri exit area with sensit
or high valu asset and sale area
entri exit area with sensit or high valu asset and sale area can be monitor
us cctv and record equip
10 doe the organ conduct random unannounc audit of inventori ca sh expens purchas
bill and other account by in ternal or extern auditor
random unannounc audit help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter
destroi and misplac record and other evid of their offens
11 doe the organ us profession loss prevent or secur personnel to monitor physic control
profession loss prevent or secur personnel can be us to monitor physic control
12 doe the organ promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud
promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud can minim loss
modul 4 skim scheme
skim scheme includ
collect cash but not record the sale
collect cash keep a portion of the cash and underreport the sale amount
collect a custom payment but not cred it the amount to the custom account
collect cash and hold it in a person interestbear account befor deposit it
into the compani account
1 is there period analyt review of sale a ccount us vertic horizont and ratio analysi
period analyt review of sale account us vertic horizont and ratio analysi can
highlight discrep that point to skim
2 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl
period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl can highlight
discrep that point to skim
3 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi
period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi can highlight
discrep that point to skim
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4841
4 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us ph ysical inventori count
period review of the inventori and receiv record us physic inventori count can
highlight discrep that point to skim
5 is there period review of the inventori and re ceiv record us verifi cation of ship and
requisit document
period review of the inventori and receiv record us verif of ship and
requisit document can highlight discrep that point to skim
6 is there period review of inventori account for writeoff
inventori account should be review period for writeoff
7 is there period review of account receiv and allow for uncollect account to look for writeoff
of account receiv
account receiv and allow for uncollect account should be review
period for writeoff of account receiv
8 is there period review of cash account for irregular entri
cash account should be review period for irregular entri
9 is the compani mail open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other account employe
who make journal entri
compani mail should be open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other
account employe who make journal entri
10 do voucher for credit and sale receipt contain serial number
voucher for credit and sale receipt should contain serial number
11 is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from prepar the bank deposit
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from prepar the bank deposit
12 is the account receiv bookkeep rest rict from collect cash from custom
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from collect cash
from custom
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4842 2011 fraud examin manual
13 is the account receiv bookkeep re strict from access to the cash receipt
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from access to the cash receipt
14 is the cashier restrict from access account receiv record
the cashier should be restrict from access account receiv record
15 is the cashier restrict from access bank and custom statement
the cashier should be restrict from access bank and custom statement
16 is each of the follow respons assign to a separ employe gener ledger entri cash receipt
entri and account receiv bill
have differ employe perform these task help minim the potenti for the
conceal of theft
17 doe the employe who open incom check place restrict endors on all check receiv
the employe who open incom check should immedi stamp all incom check
with the compani restrict endors to protect against unintend parti cash
the check
18 doe the person who open the mail prepar a list of all check and cash receiv
a list of all check and cash receiv should be prepar and reconcil daili against the
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipt report
19 doe the person who open the mail deliv all check and cash to the person respons for the daili
bank deposit
the person who open the mail should deliv all check and cash to the person respons
for the daili bank deposit
20 doe an employe perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the remitt list
gener by the employe who open the mail
an employe should perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the
remitt list gener by the employe who open the mail
21 doe the compani us a lockbox servic for cash receipt
lockbox decreas the potenti for fraud and error by reduc employe handl of
each transact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4843
22 doe the compani have a safe with restrict access
a safe can be us to physic secur excess cash on hand access to the safe should be
restrict and an access log should be maintain
23 is cash deposit daili
daili bank deposit should be made so that excess cash doe not remain on the premis
24 ar there prenumb cash receipt for cash sale
prenumb cash receipt should be us for cash sale
25 ar employe who handl cash bond
employe who handl cash should be bond in order to protect against theft
26 is there a written polici and procedur for turn over delinqu account for collect
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur for turn over
delinqu account for collect
27 is the person who handl custom er complaint independ of the ca shier or account receiv function
the person who handl custom complaint should be independ of the cashier or
account receiv function
28 is physic access to the account syst em restrict to onli author person
physic access to the account system should be restrict to those who requir it to
perform their job function
modul 5 cash larceni scheme
cash larceni scheme includ
steal cash at the point of sale or regist
steal cash receipt post to sale and receiv journal
steal cash from bank deposit
1 ar cash regist tape total reconc il to the amount in the cash drawer
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount in the cash drawer ani
discrep should be investig
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4844 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and agre
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist tape total
3 is access to regist or the cash box close monitor ar access code kept secur
access to regist or the cash box should be close monitor and access code should be
kept secur
4 ar custom complaint regard short chang or improp post handl by someon other than the
employe who receiv the cash
custom complaint regard short chang or improp post should be handl by
someon other than the employe who receiv the cash
5 ar regist worker properli supervis
regist worker should be properli supervis by onduti supervisor or cctv record
of regist activ
6 ar cctv camera and digit record us to monitor regist area
cctv camera and digit record can be us to monitor regist area
7 is each receiv transact review for legitimaci and support document
receiv transact should be review for legitimaci and support document
8 is an independ list of cash receipt prepar befor the receipt ar submit to the cashier or
account receiv bookkeep
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar submit
to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
9 doe a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv function compar entri to the cash
receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and bank deposit statement
compani should assign a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv
function to compar entri to the cash receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and
bank deposit statement
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4845
10 ar the cash receipt cash count bank deposit deposit receipt reconcili s bank reconcili
post of deposit and cash disburs duti segreg
the primari wai to prevent cash larceni is to segreg duti
11 doe an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make the daili bank deposit
have an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make
the daili bank deposit is an import segreg of duti that can help to prevent
cash larceni
12 is job or assign rotat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt
13 ar vacat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori vacat the conceal
element is interrupt
14 ar surpris cash count conduct
surpris cash count help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter destroi and
misplac record and other evid of their offens
15 ar journal entri made to the cash account review and analyz on a regular basi
journal entri made to the cash account should be review and analyz on a
regular basi
16 doe the compani us a point of sale po system
a po system will allow the organ to gather sale inform in a comprehens
and time format
17 doe the po system track perpetu inventori
the po system should be configur to track perpetu inventori
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4846 2011 fraud examin manual
18 doe the po system track except such as void refund no sale overag and shortag
the po system should be configur to track except such as void refund no sale
overag and shortag
19 ar regist except report review on a regular basi
regist except report should be review on a regular basi by manag
20 ar all employe except for manag prohibit from make chang to the po system
all employe except for manag should be prohibit from make chang to the
po system
21 is access to the account receiv subledg and the gener ledger restrict to author employe
doe access leav an audit trail
access to the account receiv subledg and gener ledger should be restrict to
author employe an audit trail of who access the ledger includ time and date of
access should be kept
modul 6 check tamper scheme
forg maker scheme involv forg an author signatur on a compani check
forg endors scheme consist of forg the signatur endors of an
intend recipi of a compani check
alter paye scheme involv chang the paye design on the check to the
perpetr or an accomplic
author maker scheme occur when employe with signatur author write
fraudul check for their own benefit
1 ar unus check store in a secur contain with limit access
blank check which can be us for forgeri should be store in a secur area such as a
safe or vault secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel
2 ar unus check from account that have been close promptli destroi
compani should promptli destroi all unus check from account that have been close
3 ar electron payment us where possibl to limit the number of paper check issu
compani can minim the possibl of check tamper and theft by us electron
payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4847
4 ar print and sign check mail immedi after sign
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
5 ar new check purchas from reput check vendor
all new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
6 do compani check contain secur featur to ensur their integr
compani can reduc their exposur to physic check tamper by us check
contain secur featur such as highresolut microprint secur ink and
ultraviolet ink
7 ha the compani notifi it bank to not accept check over a predetermin maximum amount
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
8 ha the compani establish posit pai control with it bank by suppli the bank with a daili list of
check issu and author for payment
on method for a compani to help prevent check fraud is to establish posit pai control
by suppli it bank with a daili list of check issu and author for payment
9 is the employe who prepar the check prohibit from sign the check
check prepar should not be perform by a signatori on the account
10 ar detail comparison made between the paye on the check and the paye list in the cash
disburs journal
compani should perform detail comparison of the paye on the check and the paye
list in the cash disburs journal
11 ar employe respons for handl and code check period rotat
period rotat of personnel respons for handl and code check can be an
effect check disburs control
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4848 2011 fraud examin manual
12 ar bank reconcili complet immedi at after bank statement ar receiv
compani should complet bank reconcili immedi after bank statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present to the
bank within 30 dai of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
13 ar bank statement and account reconcili independ audit to confirm accuraci
bank statement and account reconcili should be independ audit for accuraci
14 ar cancel check independ review for alter and forgeri
cancel check should be independ review for alter and forgeri
15 ar check for a materi amount match to the support document
check for materi amount should be match to the support document
16 ar void check examin for irregular and to ensur thei havent been process
the list of void check should be verifi against physic copi of the check bank
statement should be review to ensur that void check have not been process
17 ar miss check record and stop payment issu
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
18 do question paye or paye ad dress trigger review of the correspond check and support
document
question paye or paye address should trigger a review of the correspond check
and support document
19 with the except of payrol ar check issu to employe review for irregular
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be close
scrutin for scheme such as conflict of interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens
reimburs
20 ar two signatur requir for check issuanc
requir dual signatur on check can reduc the risk of check fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4849
21 ar all compani payment made by check or other record payment devic
make payment by check or other record payment devic can reduc the risk of
disburs fraud
22 ar handwritten check prohibit
handwritten check ar especi vulner to check fraud and should be prohibit
modul 7 cash regist scheme
fals refund scheme occur when an employe 1 issu a refund for fictiti
merchandis and keep the monei or 2 overst the amount of merchandis return
and skim the excess monei
fals void scheme occur when a regist worker retain a custom receipt process a
fictiti void sale and keep the monei
1 ar refund void and discount evalu on a routin basi to identifi pattern of activ among
employe depart shi ft merchandis etc
compani should routin evalu refund void and discount to search for pattern of
activ that might signal fraud
2 is there a sign post at the regist ask the custom to request and examin a sale receipt
sign ask custom to request and examin sale receipt should be post at regist
3 ar cash disburs record on a prenumb form and reconcil daili
cash disburs should be record on prenumb form and reconcil daili
4 do the cash disburs form have an explan section or code
an explan section or code should be includ on cash disburs form
5 ar custom that ar involv in void sale and refund randomli contact to verifi the accuraci of
the transact
custom involv in void sale and refund should be randomli contact to verifi the
accuraci of the transact
6 is access to the necessari control kei for refund and void rest rict to supervisor
access to the necessari control kei for refund and void should be restrict
to supervisor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4850 2011 fraud examin manual
7 do void or refund transact have to be approv by a supervisor and document
all void or refund transact should be approv by a supervisor and document
8 is document of void and ref und transact maintain on file
document of void and refund transact should be maintain on file
9 is miss or alter regist tape thoroughli investig
compani should thoroughli investig ani miss or alter regist tape
10 ar gap in the regist tape investig
compani should investig ani gap in the regist tape
11 ar multipl void or refund for amount just under ani review limit investig
multipl void or refund for amount just under review limit should be investig
12 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and compar
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and compar them to regist total
13 ar custom complaint regard pa yment error thoroughli investig
custom complaint regard payment error should be thoroughli investig
14 doe each cashier have a separ access code to the regist
each cashier should be assign a separ access code to the regist
15 doe each cashier have a separ cash drawer
each cashier should have a separ cash drawer
16 is an over and short log kept for each person andor regist
an over and short log should be kept for each person andor regist
17 ar over and short incid thoroughli investig and monitor
over and short incid should be thoroughli investig and monitor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4851
18 ar all no sale receipt account for and attach to a daili cashier report
all no sale receipt should be account for and attach to a daili cashier report
19 is access to the regist area restrict to author employe and supervisor
compani should restrict access to regist area to author employe and supervisor
20 ar all cashier period integr shop
compani should period conduct integr shop on all cashier
modul 8 purchas and bill scheme
shell compani scheme occur when an employe submit invoic for payment from a
fictiti compani control by the employe
payandreturn scheme occur when an employe arrang for overpay of a vendor
invoic and pocket the overpay amount when it is return to the compani
person purchas scheme occur when an employe submit an invoic for person
purchas to the compani for payment or when an employe us a compani credit
card for person purchas
1 doe the organ have a purchas depart
the organ should have a purchas depart that is separ from the
payment function
2 is the purchas depart independ of the account receiv and ship depart
the purchas depart should be independ of the account receiv and
ship depart
3 do purchas requisit requir manag approv
manag should approv all purchas requisit
4 do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
purchas order should specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
5 ar purchas order form prenumb and account for
purchas order form should be prenumb and account for
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4852 2011 fraud examin manual
6 doe the compani maintain a master vendor file
the compani should maintain a master vendor file
7 ar competit bid requir for all purchas
compani should requir competit bid for all purchas
8 doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv
the receiv depart should prepar receiv report for all item receiv
9 doe the receiv depart main tain a log of all item receiv
the receiv depart should maintain a log of all item receiv
10 ar copi of receiv report furnish to the account and purchas depart
copi of receiv report should be furnish to the account and
purchas depart
11 ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account payabl and gener
ledger function
purchas and receiv function should be segreg from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
12 ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat liabil is record
compani should match vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order befor
record the relat liabil
13 ar purchas order record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process through
cash disburs
purchas order should be record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be
process through cash disburs
14 ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to the custom is
promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and a payabl
compani should implement procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas
for direct deliveri to the custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a
receiv and a payabl
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4853
15 ar record of good return to ve ndor match to vendor credit memo
record of good return to vendor should be match to vendor credit memo
16 is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist re concil monthli to the gener ledger control account
the account payabl ledger or voucher regist should be reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
17 do writeoff of account payabl debit bala nce requir approv of a design manag
writeoff of account payabl debit balanc should requir approv of a
design manag
18 is the master vendor file period review for unusu vendor and address
the master vendor file should be review period for unusu vendor and address
19 ar vendor purchas analyz for abnorm level
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level
20 ar control method in place to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number
compani should implement control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas
order number
21 ar credit card statement re view monthli for irregular
credit card statement should be review monthli for irregular
22 ar vendor with post offic box address verifi
all vendor with post offic box address should be verifi
23 ar voucher payment review regularli for proper document
voucher payment should be review regularli for proper document
24 is access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger restrict doe access creat an
audit trail
access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger should be restrict and an
audit trail should be creat
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4854 2011 fraud examin manual
modul 9 payrol scheme
ghost employe scheme occur when a person not emploi by the compani is on
the payrol
overpay scheme occur when a compani pai an employe base on falsifi
hour or rate
commiss scheme occur when the amount of sale made or the rate of commiss is
fraudul inflat
1 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss social secur number
organ should check the employe payrol list period for duplic or miss
social secur number that mai indic a ghost employe or overlap payment to
current employe
2 ar personnel record maintain independ entli of payrol and timekeep function
personnel record should be maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
3 ar refer check on all new hire
organ should perform refer check on all new hire
4 ar sick leav vacat and holidai re view for complianc with compani polici
sick leav vacat and holidai should be review for complianc with compani polici
5 ar appropri form complet and sign by the employe to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
employe should complet and sign appropri form to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
6 is payrol period compar with personnel record for termin
payrol should period be compar with personnel record for termin to ensur
that termin employe have been remov from the payrol
7 ar payrol check prenumb and issu in sequenti order
payrol check should be prenumb and issu in sequenti order
8 is the payrol bank account reconcil by an employe who is not involv in prepar payrol check doe
not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4855
the payrol bank account should be reconcil by an employe who is not involv in
prepar payrol check doe not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
9 ar payrol regist reconcil to gener ledger control account
payrol regist should be reconcil to gener ledger control account
10 ar cancel payrol check examin for alter and endors
cancel payrol check should be examin for alter and endors
11 is access restrict to payrol check stock and signatur stamp
access to payrol check stock and signatur stamp should be restrict
12 ar payrol withhold for tax insur etc examin to determin if ani employe ar not have
these item deduct from their paycheck
payrol check that do not have withhold for tax insur etc should
be investig
13 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
the employe payrol list should be review for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
14 is the account inform for automat depo site payrol check review period for
duplic entri
account inform for automat deposit payrol check should be review
period for duplic entri
15 is an employe separ from the payrol depart assign to distribut payrol check
an employe separ from the payrol depart should be assign to distribut
payrol check
16 ar new employe requir to furnish proof of immigr statu
compani must requir new employe to furnish proof of immigr statu
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4856 2011 fraud examin manual
17 doe ani chang to an employe salari requir more than on level of manag approv
chang to an employe salari should requir more than on level of
manag approv
18 doe overtim have to be author by a supervisor
overtim should be author by a supervisor
19 do supervisor verifi and sign timecard for each pai period
supervisor should verifi and sign time timecard for each pai period
20 ar commiss expens compar to sale figur to verifi amount
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi amount is an import control
procedur that can help to detect payrol fraud
21 doe someon separ from the sale depart calcul sale commiss
someon separ from the sale depart should calcul sale commiss
modul 10 expens scheme
mischaracter expens scheme occur when an employe request reimburs for
a person expens claim the expens to be busi relat
overst expens scheme occur when an employe overst the cost of actual
expens and seek reimburs
fictiti expens scheme occur when an employe invent a purchas and seek
reimburs for it
multipl reimburs scheme occur when an employe submit a singl expens for
reimburs multipl time
1 ar the expens account review and analyz period us histor comparison or comparison
with budget amount
compani should period review and analyz expens account us histor
comparison or comparison with budget amount
2 do employe expens reimburs claim receiv a detail review befor payment is made
employe expens reimburs claim should receiv a detail review befor payment
is made
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4857
3 ar employe requir to submit detail expens report
employe should be requir to submit detail expens report contain receipt
explan amount etc
4 is a limit place on expens such as hotel meal and entertain
compani should place a spend limit on expens such as hotel meal
and entertain
5 ar receipt requir for all expens to be reimburs
compani should requir receipt for all expens to be reimburs
6 ar supervisor requir to review and approv all expens reimburs request
all expens reimburs request should be review and approv by supervisor
7 is there a random authent of expens receipt and expens claim
a polici requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the
appropri detail can help deter employe from submit person expens for
reimburs
modul 11 theft of inventori and equip
fake sale scheme occur when an accomplic of an employe bui merchandis but
the employe doe not ring up the sale and the accomplic take the merchandis
without make ani payment
purchas scheme occur when an employe with purchas author us that
author to purchas and misappropri merchandis
receiv scheme occur when an employe misappropri asset purchas by the
compani as thei ar receiv at the compani
fals shipment scheme occur when an employe creat fals sale document and fals
ship document to make it appear that miss inventori wa not actual stolen but
rather sold
misus of compani asset occur when an employe borrow compani asset for
person us without author
larceni scheme occur when an employe take inventori from the compani premis
without attempt to conceal the theft in the account record
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4858 2011 fraud examin manual
1 ha a recent inventori of compani equip list ing serial number and descript been complet
compani should inventori compani equip and maintain a list of the equip serial
number and descript
2 doe the compani assign an individu from outsid of the depart to conduct the
depart inventori
an employe who doesnt work in the depart should be assign to conduct the
depart inventori
3 ar unexplain entri to the inventori record examin for sourc document
unexplain entri to the inventori record should be examin for sourc document
4 is the compani experienc sizeabl invent ori increas without compar sale increas
sizeabl inventori increas without compar sale increas mai indic an inventori
overstat fraud scheme and should be investig
5 ar analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori conduct
period to look for unexplain differ
analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori
should be conduct period ani discrep should be investig
6 is there an unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos
ani unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos should
be investig
7 doe the organ have writt n inventori instruct and order
organ should document and impl ement inventori instruct and order
8 doe someon independ of the purchas receiv ing and wareh function physic count
the inventori
physic inventori count should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas
receiv and wareh function
9 ar prenumb inventori tag us
prenumb inventori tag should be us
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4859
10 ar the inventori tag control and account for
inventori tag should be control and account for
11 do the inventori procedur prevent doubl count
organ should implement inventori procedur that prevent doubl count
12 ar inventori count subject to independ recount
inventori count should be subject to independ recount
13 is the inventori reason identifi for prop er classif in the account system such as
descript condit or stage of complet
the inventori should be reason identifi for proper classif in the account
system such as descript condit or stage of complet
14 ar differ between physic count and invent ori record investig be fore inventori record
ar adjust
differ between physic count and inventori record should be investig befor
inventori record ar adjust
15 is scrap inventori and is scrap dispos account for
scrap should be inventori and scrap dispos should be account for
16 ar the follow duti segreg requisit of inventori receiv of in ventori disburs of
inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from the sale of scrap inventori
the follow duti should be segreg requisit of inventori receiv of inventori
disburs of inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from
the sale of scrap inventori
17 is a receiv report prepar for all purchas good
a receiv report should be prepar for all purchas good
18 ar copi of receiv report sent directli to the purchas and ac count depart
copi of receiv report should be sent directli to the purchas and
account depart
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4860 2011 fraud examin manual
19 is the receiv depart provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item to be receiv
the receiv depart should be provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item
to be receiv
20 ar partial shipment annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
partial shipment should be annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
21 ar overag shortag and damag report complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
overag shortag and damag report should be complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
22 ar quantiti of materi receiv count and compar to purchas order
quantiti of materi receiv should be count and compar to purchas order
23 is there a written polici allow manag to inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on
compani properti
compani should document and implement a written polici allow manag to
inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on compani properti
24 is there an equip remov au thoriz polici requir written manag approv to remov ani
compani equip from the compani premis
compani should document and implement an equip remov author polici
requir written manag approv to remov ani compani equip from the
compani premis
25 is there a polici requir the in spection of packag box and other contain befor thei leav the
compani premis
compani should document and implement a polici requir the inspect of packag
box and other contain befor thei leav the compani premis
26 is the remov of trash and trash receptacl period monitor
compani should period monitor the remov of trash and trash receptacl
27 ar the ship and receiv area adequ supervis to prevent theft
ship and receiv area should be adequ supervis to prevent theft
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4861
28 ar high valu item store in secur or continu monitor area
high valu item should be store in secur or continu monitor area
29 is the ship function separ from the purchas and inventori function
the ship function should be separ from the purchas and inventori function
30 ar ship document prenumb and account for
ship document should be prenumb and account for
31 ar ship order match with sale order and contract
ship order should be match with sale order and contract to prevent inventori and
vendor scheme
32 ar shipment of good requir to have author sale order and contract prior to ship
shipment of good should be requir to have author sale order and sale contract
prior to ship
33 ar ship document forward directli to the a ccount depart for record inventori reduct
and cost of sale
ship document should be forward directli to the account depart for
record inventori reduct and cost of sale
modul 12 theft of proprietari inform
theft of proprietari inform involv theft or disclosur of confidenti or trade
secret inform for financi gain
1 ar there polici and procedur address the identif classif and handl of
proprietari inform
the compani should implement polici and procedur address the identif
classif and handl of proprietari inform
2 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign nondisclosur agreement
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
nondisclosur agreement
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4862 2011 fraud examin manual
3 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign no ncompet agreement to
prevent them from work for competitor with in a state period of time and locat
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
noncompet agreement to prevent them from work for competitor within a state
period of time
4 ar employe provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform their respons
to protect the inform and the compani polici and procedur relat to proprietari inform
employe should be provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform
their respons to protect proprietari inform and compani polici and procedur
relat to proprietari inform
5 is there an establish procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi as sensit and for
how long
compani should implement a procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi
as sensit and for how long
6 ar sensit document properli cl assifi and mark as confidenti
sensit document should be properli classifi and mark as confidenti
7 is sensit inform properli secur when not be us
sensit inform should be properli secur when not be us
8 is access to sensit inform ph ysical control and account for
access to sensit inform should be physic control and account for
9 is sensit inform promptli destroi when it is no longer need
organ should promptli destroi sensit inform when it is no longer need
10 ar compromis to the secur of proprietari inform promptli investig to determin the sourc
compani should promptli investig ani compromis to the secur of proprietari
inform to determin the sourc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4863
11 ar employe requir to us screensav and or server password to protect unattend
comput system
employe should be requir to us screensav andor server password to protect
unattend comput system
12 ar confidenti document shred when discard
confidenti document should be shred when discard
modul 13 corrupt
briberi scheme involv the offer give receiv or solicit of a thing of valu to
influenc a busi decis
kickback scheme occur when vendor make undisclos payment to employe of
purchas compani in order to enlist the employe in overbil scheme
bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a vendor in win a
contract through the competit bid process
econom extort scheme occur when an employe demand payment from a vendor
for decis made in the vendor favor ref usal to pai the extort result in harm to
the vendor
illeg gratuiti scheme involv give or receiv someth of valu to reward a
busi decis
1 is there a compani polici that address the receipt of gift discount and servic offer by a supplier or
custom
organ should implement a polici that address the receipt of gift discount and
servic offer by a supplier or custom
2 is there an establish bid polici
organ should establish a bid polici
3 ar purchas review to detect out of line cost
organ should review purchas for cost that ar out of line
4 ar purchas review to identifi favor vendor
purchas should be review to identifi favor vendor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4864 2011 fraud examin manual
5 ar purchas review to identifi excess amount
purchas should be review and ani excess amount should be investig
6 ar prebid solicit document review for ani restrict on competit
prebid solicit document should be review for ani restrict on competit
7 ar bid solicit packag number and control
bid solicit packag should be number and control
8 is commun between bidder and purchas employe restrict
compani should restrict and monitor commun between bidder and
purchas employe
9 ar the bid receiv kept confidenti
all bid receiv should be kept confidenti
10 ar bidder qualif verifi
compani should verifi bidder qualif
11 ar contract award base on predetermin criteria
compani should establish predetermin criteria upon which to award contract
12 ar purchas account assign rotat
period rotat of purchas account assign can be an effect corrupt control
13 ar vendor survei period regard compani purchas practic
organ should period survei vendor regard compani purchas practic
modul 14 conflict of interest
purchas scheme involv the overbil of a compani for good or servic by a
vendor in which an employe ha an undisclos ownership or financi interest
sale scheme involv the undersel of compani good by an employe to a compani
in which the employe maintain a hidden interest
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4865
1 ar there period comparison of vendor inform with employe inform such as address and
telephon number
organ should conduct period comparison of vendor inform with employe
inform such as address and telephon number
2 ar vendor who emploi former compani employe under in creas scrutini
vendor who emploi former compani employe should be under increas scrutini for
potenti conflict of interest
3 doe the organ have a report procedur for personnel to report their concern about vendor
receiv favor treatment
organ should provid personnel with a confidenti system for report concern
about vendor receiv favor treatment
4 ar employe requir to complet an annual disclo sure document that includ busi ownership
incom and invest inform
employe should be requir to provid annual disclosur that list busi ownership
incom and invest inform
5 doe the organ requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
organ should requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
6 ar vendor audit conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill and
receiv depart
vendor audit should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill
and receiv depart
modul 15 fraudul financi report
fictiti revenu scheme involv record fictiti revenu from the sale of good
or servic
improp time scheme involv record revenu or expens in improp
account period
underst liabil scheme involv conceal or underst liabil and
expens capit expens or expens capit expens
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4866 2011 fraud examin manual
improp disclosur scheme involv the improp disclosur of materi inform
such as conting liabil signific event manag fraud relatedparti
transact or account chang
improp asset valuat scheme involv the improp valuat of inventori account
receiv fix asset intang or other asset
1 ar the organ account record in proper form
organ should maintain account record in proper form
2 doe the organ emploi an adequ number of account employe
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
3 doe the organ have an effect intern audit staff
an effect intern audit staff can focu on highrisk area for fraud and can identifi new
vulner measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud
prevent is a high prioriti for the compani
4 ar proper intern control establish and maintain
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
5 doe the organ embrac the concept of intern control
embrac the concept of intern control requir that senior manag and employe
understand why intern control ar import and what adopt such measur mean
to them
6 ar senior manag visibl in their support of intern control
senior manag should be visibl in their support of intern control
7 ar the organ financi goal and object realist
unrealist financi goal and object can result in manag and employe commit
fraudul act in order to meet them
8 doe the organ consist achiev it financi goal and object
ani failur to meet financi goal and object should be research
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4867
9 is the organ report financi perform stabl or increas
manag should investig ani unstabl or decreas financi perform
10 doe the compani have stabl relationship with it bank
the compani should strive to have stabl relationship with it bank
11 ar there unrealist chang or increas in financi statement account balanc
manag should determin the reason for ani unrealist chang or increas in
financi statement account balanc
12 ar the account balanc realist given the natur ag and size of the compani
manag should investig ani unrealist account balanc
13 do actual physic asset exist in the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
an inventori of physic asset should be conduct to verifi that the physic asset exist in
the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
14 have there been signific chang in the natur of the or ganiz revenu or expens
the organ should determin the reason for ani signific chang in the natur of
it revenu or expens
15 do on or a few larg transact account for a si gnific portion of ani a ccount balanc or amount
situat in which on or a few larg transact account for a signific portion of ani
account balanc or amount should be research
16 ar there signific transact that occur near the end of a period that posit impact result of
oper especi transact that ar unusu or highli complex
ani signific transact that occur near the end of a period and posit impact result
of oper should be scrutin for legitimaci especi if the transact ar unusu
or highli complex
17 ar financi result fairli consist across period
the compani should be abl to explain ani varianc in financi result across period
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4868 2011 fraud examin manual
18 is there an inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
ani inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
should be investig
19 is there signific pressur to obtain addit capit necessari to stai competit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
20 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv unusu
subject judgment or uncertainti
signific estim especi those that involv unusu subject judgment or
uncertainti should be review for reason
21 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that ar subject to
potenti signific chang in the near term in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the
organ
signific estim that ar subject to potenti signific chang in the near term
in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the organ should
be scrutin
22 is the compani experienc unusu ly rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that
of other compani in the same industri
unusu rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that of other
compani in the same industri is a red flag of fraud and should be investig
23 is the organ highli vulner abl to chang in interest rate
the organ should increas review of it financi report dure period of
high vulner
24 ar there unrealist aggress sa le or profit incent program
unrealist aggress sale or profit incent program can place undu pressur
on employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
25 is there a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov
a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov place a compani at
increas risk for fraudul activ to occur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4869
26 is there a high possibl of ad vers consequ on signific pend ing transact such as busi
combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report
a high possibl of advers consequ on signific pend transact such as
busi combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report can place
extrem pressur on manag to manipul result
27 is there a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person guarante signific
debt of the entiti
the exist of a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person
guarante signific debt of the entiti can result in manag commit fraudul
act in order to protect itself from financi harm
28 doe the firm continu oper on a crisi basi or without a care budget ing and plan process
a care budget and plan process can help a firm to monitor progress toward it
goal control spend and predict cash flow and profit
29 doe the organ have difficulti collect receiv or have other cash flow problem
manag should determin the reason for ani collect or cash flow problem
30 is the organ depend on on or two kei product or servic especi product or servic that
can becom quickli obsolet
depend on on or two kei product can place tremend pressur on a compani
expos it to increas risk of fraud
31 do the footnot contain inform about complex issu
ani complex issu should be explain in the footnot
32 ar there adequ disclosur in the financi and footnot
gener accept account principl concern disclosur requir that financi
statement 1 includ all relev and materi inform in the financi or footnot and
2 not be mislead
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4901
