2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/What Is Fraud Risk?


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


What Is Fraud Risk? 
Cressey’s fraud triangle teaches us that there are three interrelated elements that enable 
someone to commit fraud: the motive  that drives a person to want to commit the fraud, the 
opportunity  that enables him to commit the fraud, and the ability to rationalize  the fraudulent 
behavior. The vulnerability that an organization has to those capable of overcoming all three 
elements of the fraud triangle is fraud risk. Fraud risk can come from sources both internal 
and external to the organization.  
 
Why Should an Organization Be Concerned About Fraud Risk?  
Every organization is vulnerable to fraud; there is no organization that has immunity to that 
risk. The key to reducing that vulnerability is to be consciously aware and realistic about 
what the organization’s weaknesses are. Only  then can management ensure that it can 
establish mechanisms that effectively prevent or detect fraudulent activities. 
 
Organizational stakeholders expect their stewards to be thoughtful and prudent about 
protecting the business. However, even when tales of fraudsters are getting a lot of public 
attention, many organizations still have difficulty facing the realities of how susceptible they 
really are to fraud.  
 
There are many factors that influence how at risk an organization is to fraud. Some of the 
bigger factors are:  
• The business it is in 
• The environment in which it operates 
• The effectiveness of the internal controls within the business processes 
• The ethics and values of the company and the people within it 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.802   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
The Business It Is In  
The types of risks an organization faces are directly connected to the nature of the business 
in which it is engaged. For example, the inherent fraud risks faced by hospitals and medical 
practices are vastly different from those faced by banks and financial institutions.  
 
The Environment in Which It Operates  
The environment in which the organization operates has a direct impact on its vulnerability 
to fraud. Brick-and-mortar businesses have a very different risk profile than Internet 
businesses. Likewise, businesses in urban areas ha ve different risk profiles than businesses in 
rural areas. The environment in which the business operates can play a big role in 
influencing its vulnerability to fraud. 
 
The Effectiveness of Internal Controls Within the Business Processes  
A good system of internal controls, with the right balance of preventive and detective 
controls, can greatly reduce an organization’s vulnerability to fraud. Preventive controls  are those 
manual or automated processes that stop something bad from happening before it occurs. 
Detective controls  can also be manual or automated, but are designed to identify something bad 
that has already occurred. No system of internal controls can fully eliminate the risk of fraud, 
but well-designed and effective internal controls can deter the average fraudster by reducing 
the opportunity to commit the fraud. 
 
The Ethics and Values of the Company and the People Within It  
It is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to have a company made up of individuals whose 
ethics and values are fully aligned with those of the organization. The gap in that alignment 
can significantly increase an organization’s fraud risk.  
 
While many organizations have codes of conduct, those codes are not always very clear in 
drawing the definitive line between acceptable and unacceptable behavior. That lack of 
clarity leaves a lot of wiggle room for fraudsters to rationalize their actions. For example, in 
most organizations, it is generally understood that manipulating financial records is 
unacceptable behavior that will result in termination. However, it is not always apparent 
whether taking a pen or pencil home that belongs to the company is unacceptable behavior, 
or what the consequence, if any, would be.  
 
An organization that is clear and consistent about its ethics, values, and expectations for its 
people will reduce the potential fraudster’s ability to rationalize his actions. Likewise, an 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.803 
organization that demonstrates consistency and predictability in how it handles and holds 
accountable unacceptable behaviors can significantly reduce the risk of fraud.  
 
 



:


what is fraud risk
cressei fraud triangl teach us that there ar three interrel element that enabl
someon to commit fraud the motiv that drive a person to want to commit the fraud the
opportun that enabl him to commit the fraud and the abil to ration the fraudul
behavior the vulner that an organ ha to those capabl of overcom all three
element of the fraud triangl is fraud risk fraud risk can come from sourc both intern
and extern to the organ
why should an organ be concern about fraud risk
everi organ is vulner to fraud there is no organ that ha immun to that
risk the kei to reduc that vulner is to be conscious awar and realist about
what the organ weak ar onli then can manag ensur that it can
establish mechan that effect prevent or detect fraudul activ
organiz stakehold expect their steward to be thought and prudent about
protect the busi howev even when tale of fraudster ar get a lot of public
attent mani organ still have difficulti face the realiti of how suscept thei
realli ar to fraud
there ar mani factor that influenc how at risk an organ is to fraud some of the
bigger factor ar
the busi it is in
the environ in which it oper
the effect of the intern control within the busi process
the ethic and valu of the compani and the peopl within it
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4802 2011 fraud examin manual
the busi it is in
the type of risk an organ face ar directli connect to the natur of the busi
in which it is engag for exampl the inher fraud risk face by hospit and medic
practic ar vastli differ from those face by bank and financi institut
the environ in which it oper
the environ in which the organ oper ha a direct impact on it vulner
to fraud brickandmortar busi have a veri differ risk profil than internet
busi likewis busi in urban area ha ve differ risk profil than busi in
rural area the environ in which the busi oper can plai a big role in
influenc it vulner to fraud
the effect of intern control within the busi process
a good system of intern control with the right balanc of prevent and detect
control can greatli reduc an organ vulner to fraud prevent control ar those
manual or autom process that stop someth bad from happen befor it occur
detect control can also be manual or autom but ar design to identifi someth bad
that ha alreadi occur no system of intern control can fulli elimin the risk of fraud
but welldesign and effect intern control can deter the averag fraudster by reduc
the opportun to commit the fraud
the ethic and valu of the compani and the peopl within it
it is extrem difficult if not imposs to have a compani made up of individu whose
ethic and valu ar fulli align with those of the organ the gap in that align
can significantli increas an organ fraud risk
while mani organ have code of conduct those code ar not alwai veri clear in
draw the definit line between accept and unaccept behavior that lack of
clariti leav a lot of wiggl room for fraudster to ration their action for exampl in
most organ it is gener understood that manipul financi record is
unaccept behavior that will result in termin howev it is not alwai appar
whether take a pen or pencil home that belong to the compani is unaccept behavior
or what the consequ if ani would be
an organ that is clear and consist about it ethic valu and expect for it
peopl will reduc the potenti fraudster abil to ration hi action likewis an
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4803
organ that demonstr consist and predict in how it handl and hold
account unaccept behavior can significantli reduc the risk of fraud
