2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/What Is a Fraud Risk Assessment?


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


What Is a Fraud Risk Assessment?  
Fraud risk assessment  is a process aimed at proactively identifying and addressing an 
organization’s vulnerabilities to internal and external fraud. As every organization is 
different, the fraud risk assessment process is often more an art than a science. What gets 
evaluated and how it gets assessed should be tailored to the organization — there is no one-size-fits-all 
approach. Additionally, organizational fraud risks continually change. It is 
therefore important to think about a fraud risk assessment as an ongoing, continuous 
process, rather than just an activity.  
 
A fraud risk assessment starts with an identification and prioritization of fraud risks that 
exist in the business. The process evolves as the results of that identification and 
prioritization begin to drive education, communication, organizational alignment, and action 
around effectively managing fraud risk and identifying new fraud risks as they emerge.  
 
What Is the Objective of a Fraud Risk Assessment?  
In the simplest terms, the objective of a fraud risk assessment is to help an organization 
identify what makes it most vulnerable to fraud. Through a fraud risk assessment, the 
organization is able to identify where fraud is most likely to occur, enabling proactive 
measures to be considered and implemented to reduce the chance that it could happen. 
 
Why Should Organizations Conduct Fraud Risk Assessments?  
Every organization should conduct a fraud risk assessment and build procedures to keep the 
assessment process current and relevant. Not only is this practice good corporate 
governance, but it makes good business sense.  
 
Improve Communication and Awareness About Fraud  
Conducting a fraud risk assessment can be a great vehicle for an organization to open up 
communication and raise awareness about fraud. When employees are engaged in an open 
discussion about fraud, the conversations themselves can play a role in reducing fraud 
vulnerability. Employees are reminded that the organization does care about preventing 
fraud and are empowered to come forward if they suspect fraud is occurring in the 
organization. Open communication and awareness about fraud can also deter a potential 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.804   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
fraudster by reducing his ability to rationalize bad behavior and increasing his perception 
that someone might catch on to his actions and report him. 
 
Identify What Activities Are the Most Vulnerable to Fraud  
Management must know where the company is most vulnerable to fraud in order to prevent 
it from happening. For most companies, the normal course of business generally involves 
many different activities. However, not all of the activities that the company engages in are 
equal in terms of increasing the business’s exposure to fraud. The fraud risk assessment 
helps guide the organization to focus on the activities that really put the company at greatest 
risk.  
 
Know Who Puts the Organization at the Greatest Risk  
The actions of certain individuals can significantly increase the company’s vulnerability to 
fraud. The risk can be driven from the way in which someone makes decisions, behaves, or 
treats others within and outside the organization. The fraud risk assessment can help home 
in on those people and their activities that may increase the company’s overall fraud risk. 
 
Develop Plans to Mitigate Fraud Risk  
If management knows where the greatest fraud risks are, it can put plans in place to reduce 
or mitigate those risks. The fraud risk assessment provides a vehicle that can be used to gain 
alignment among various stakeholders and drive action to decrease fraud risk.  
 
Develop Techniques to Determine If Fraud Has Occurred in High-Risk Areas  
Assessing an area as having high fraud risk does not conclusively mean that fraud is 
occurring there. However, the fraud risk assessment is useful in identifying areas to 
proactively investigate to determine whether fraud has in fact occurred. In addition, putting 
activity in high-risk areas under increased scrutiny can deter potential fraudsters by 
increasing their perception of detection.  
 
What Makes a Good Fraud Risk Assessment?  
A good fraud risk assessment is one that fits within the culture of the organization, is 
sponsored and supported by the right people, encourages everyone to be open in their 
participation, and is generally embraced throughout the business as an important and 
valuable process. Conversely, a fraud risk assessment that is conducted without these 
conditions will have inferior results.  
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.805 
The Right Sponsor  
Having the right sponsor for a fraud risk assessment is extremely important in ensuring its 
success and effectiveness. The sponsor must be senior enough in the organization and 
command the respect of the employees to elicit full cooperation in the process. The sponsor 
has to be someone who is committed to learning the truth about where the company’s fraud 
vulnerabilities really are. He can’t be someone who is prone to rationalization or denial; he 
must be a truth seeker. In the ideal situation, the sponsor would be an independent board 
director or audit committee member. However, a good CEO or other internal senior leader 
can be equally as effective. 
 
An organization’s culture plays a big part in influencing fraud vulnerability and risk. If the 
company’s culture is shaped by a strong and domineering leader, it would be difficult to have 
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assessment and get candid, honest participation from the 
people in the business. Think about how effective a fraud risk assessment of Tyco 
International would have been with Dennis Kozlowski as its sponsor. Similarly, a fraud risk 
assessment of Enron would have been impossible with Kenneth Lay or Jeffrey Skilling as  
its sponsor.  
 
The right sponsor is someone who is open and willing to hear the good, the bad, and the 
ugly. For example, let’s say that the fraud risk assessment reveals that one of the greatest 
fraud risks facing the organization is bribery/corruption based on the cozy nature of one of 
the key business leaders with the company’s busi ness partners. For the assessment to be fully 
effective, the sponsor needs to be independent and open in his evaluation of the situation 
and, most importantly, appropriate in his response to the situation.  
 
Independence/Objectivity of the People Leading and Conducting the Work  
A good fraud risk assessment can be effectively conducted either by people inside the 
organization or with external resources. However, the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment need to be independent and objective throughout the assessment 
process. Additionally, they must also be perceived as independent and objective by others.  
 
The people leading and conducting the work should be thoughtful and mindful about any 
personal biases they may have regarding the organization and the people within it, taking 
steps to reduce or eliminate all biases that may affect the fraud risk assessment process. For 
example, if an employee on the fraud risk assessment team had a very bad past experience 
with someone in the accounts payable department, he might allow that experience to affect 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
his evaluation of the fraud risks related to that area of the business. To compensate for this 
bias, someone else should perform the fraud risk assessment work related to the accounts 
payable department’s activities.  
 
Cultural neutrality is an important aspect of independence and objectivity when leading or 
conducting a fraud risk assessment. Some organizations have very strong corporate cultures 
that can play a big role in influencing the way the people inside of the organization think 
about fraud risk. If people within the organization are leading and conducting the fraud risk 
assessment, they must be able to step outside of the corporate culture to assess and evaluate 
the presence and significance of fraud risks in the business.  
 
A Good Working Knowledge of the Business  
The individuals leading and conducting the fraud risk assessment need to have a good 
working knowledge of the business. Every organization is unique; even companies that 
appear similar have characteristics that make them — and their fraud risks—different from 
their competitors. Some of those differences can be obvious, while others are more subtle.  
 
To ensure a good working knowledge of the business, the fraud risk assessor must know, at 
a more than superficial level, what the business does and how it operates. He must also have 
an understanding about what makes the organization both similar to and different from 
other companies in related lines of business. 
 
Obtaining information about broad industry fraud risks from external sources can be 
extremely helpful. Such sources include industry news; criminal, civil, and regulatory 
complaints and settlements; and professional organizations, such as the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, and the Association of 
Certified Fraud Examiners.  
 
Access to People at All Levels of the Organization  
It is often said that perception is reality. In other words, how an individual perceives a 
situation is his reality of the situation. In an organization, it is important to ensure that the 
perceptions of people at all levels get a voice in the fraud risk assessment process.  
 
Leaders of a business or function often have very different perspectives from their 
subordinates about how something is perceived or executed. However, this does not always 
mean that one perspective is right and the other is wrong. What it does mean is that 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.807 
expectations and perceptions within the organization are not aligned, which could increase 
fraud risk.  
 
Engendered Trust  
If the organization and its employees do not trust the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment, they will not be open and honest about the realities of the business, its 
culture, and its vulnerability to fraud. Trust is not something that can be granted by 
authority; it must be earned by words and a ctions. As the people leading and conducting the 
fraud risk assessment engage with business, they should deliberately and carefully plan the 
initial contact with an effort to develop a rapport and gain trust.  
 
The Ability to Think the Unthinkable  
Most honest people are not naturally inclined to  think like a fraudster. In fact, many large-scale 
frauds that have occurred would have been deemed unthinkable by people closest to 
the events. A good fraud risk assessment has to allow for the people leading and conducting 
the assessment to be expansive in their consideration and evaluation of fraud risk. Thoughts 
of “it can’t happen here” should not be allowed  to moderate the evaluation of fraud risk.  
 
A Plan to Keep It Alive and Relevant  
The fraud risk assessment should not be treated as a onetime exercise that is executed, 
reported on, and then put on a shelf to collect dust. The organization should strive to keep 
the process alive and relevant through ongoing dialogue, active management of action plans, 
and development of procedures to ensure the assessment is maintained on a current basis. 
 
Considerations for Developing an Effective Fraud Risk Assessment 
A fraud risk assessment is only effective if the organization embraces it and uses the results 
to monitor, change, or influence the factors that put the company at risk for fraud.  
 
Packaging It Right  
People do not easily relate to or embrace things that they don’t understand. Every 
organization has its own vocabulary and preferred methods of communication (i.e., the 
language of the business). The notification and execution of the fraud risk assessment, 
including the reporting of the results, will only be effective if completed in the language of 
the business. For example: 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.808   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• In a creative organization where decisions are made based on qualitative assessments and 
instinct and where the majority of communication is visual, a quantitative approach to 
assessing fraud risk driven by numbers and calculations would most likely be rejected. 
• In an organization where the business is built and run on quantitative decision-making 
models, a qualitative approach with no quantitative components would most likely 
 be rejected. 
 
Therefore, the assessor must remain mindful of the language used throughout the fraud risk 
assessment. Specifically, he should stay away from technical language that will not resonate 
with people in the business. For example, many people in the business might not easily relate 
to or understand the term cash larceny. If cash larceny is one of the organization’s greatest 
fraud risks, it might be more effective to explain the concept in layman’s terms and describe 
the risk as theft of cash  instead.  
 
One Size Does Not Fit All  
Do not try to fit a round peg into a square hole; what works in one organization most likely 
will not easily work in another. Recognizing the nuances and differences of each business 
and tailoring the approach and execution to the specific organization can help make the 
fraud risk assessment successful. While a generic framework or toolset can be a valuable 
starting point for the development of the fraud risk assessment, it must be adapted to fit the 
business model, culture, and language of the organization.  
 
Keeping It Simple  
The more complicated the fraud risk assessment is, the harder it will be to execute it and 
drive action. Whether the assessor uses a generic assessment framework or develops one 
specifically for the organization, he should focus the effort and time on evaluating the areas 
that are most likely to have fraud risk.  
  
 



:


what is a fraud risk assess
fraud risk assess is a process aim at proactiv identifi and address an
organ vulner to intern and extern fraud as everi organ is
differ the fraud risk assess process is often more an art than a scienc what get
evalu and how it get assess should be tailor to the organ there is no onesizefitsal
approach addition organiz fraud risk continu chang it is
therefor import to think about a fraud risk assess as an ongo continu
process rather than just an activ
a fraud risk assess start with an identif and priorit of fraud risk that
exist in the busi the process evolv as the result of that identif and
priorit begin to drive educ commun organiz align and action
around effect manag fraud risk and identifi new fraud risk as thei emerg
what is the object of a fraud risk assess
in the simplest term the object of a fraud risk assess is to help an organ
identifi what make it most vulner to fraud through a fraud risk assess the
organ is abl to identifi where fraud is most like to occur enabl proactiv
measur to be consid and implement to reduc the chanc that it could happen
why should organ conduct fraud risk assess
everi organ should conduct a fraud risk assess and build procedur to keep the
assess process current and relev not onli is thi practic good corpor
govern but it make good busi sens
improv commun and awar about fraud
conduct a fraud risk assess can be a great vehicl for an organ to open up
commun and rais awar about fraud when employe ar engag in an open
discuss about fraud the convers themselv can plai a role in reduc fraud
vulner employe ar remind that the organ doe care about prevent
fraud and ar empow to come forward if thei suspect fraud is occur in the
organ open commun and awar about fraud can also deter a potenti
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4804 2011 fraud examin manual
fraudster by reduc hi abil to ration bad behavior and increas hi percept
that someon might catch on to hi action and report him
identifi what activ ar the most vulner to fraud
manag must know where the compani is most vulner to fraud in order to prevent
it from happen for most compani the normal cours of busi gener involv
mani differ activ howev not all of the activ that the compani engag in ar
equal in term of increas the businesss exposur to fraud the fraud risk assess
help guid the organ to focu on the activ that realli put the compani at greatest
risk
know who put the organ at the greatest risk
the action of certain individu can significantli increas the compani vulner to
fraud the risk can be driven from the wai in which someon make decis behav or
treat other within and outsid the organ the fraud risk assess can help home
in on those peopl and their activ that mai increas the compani overal fraud risk
develop plan to mitig fraud risk
if manag know where the greatest fraud risk ar it can put plan in place to reduc
or mitig those risk the fraud risk assess provid a vehicl that can be us to gain
align among variou stakehold and drive action to decreas fraud risk
develop techniqu to determin if fraud ha occur in highrisk area
assess an area as have high fraud risk doe not conclus mean that fraud is
occur there howev the fraud risk assess is us in identifi area to
proactiv investig to determin whether fraud ha in fact occur in addit put
activ in highrisk area under increas scrutini can deter potenti fraudster by
increas their percept of detect
what make a good fraud risk assess
a good fraud risk assess is on that fit within the cultur of the organ is
sponsor and support by the right peopl encourag everyon to be open in their
particip and is gener embrac throughout the busi as an import and
valuabl process convers a fraud risk assess that is conduct without these
condit will have inferior result
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4805
the right sponsor
have the right sponsor for a fraud risk assess is extrem import in ensur it
success and effect the sponsor must be senior enough in the organ and
command the respect of the employe to elicit full cooper in the process the sponsor
ha to be someon who is commit to learn the truth about where the compani fraud
vulner realli ar he cant be someon who is prone to ration or denial he
must be a truth seeker in the ideal situat the sponsor would be an independ board
director or audit committe member howev a good ceo or other intern senior leader
can be equal as effect
an organ cultur plai a big part in influenc fraud vulner and risk if the
compani cultur is shape by a strong and domin leader it would be difficult to have
that leader sponsor the fraud risk assess and get candid honest particip from the
peopl in the busi think about how effect a fraud risk assess of tyco
intern would have been with denni kozlowski as it sponsor similarli a fraud risk
assess of enron would have been imposs with kenneth lai or jeffrei skill as
it sponsor
the right sponsor is someon who is open and will to hear the good the bad and the
ugli for exampl let sai that the fraud risk assess reveal that on of the greatest
fraud risk face the organ is briberycorrupt base on the cozi natur of on of
the kei busi leader with the compani busi ness partner for the assess to be fulli
effect the sponsor need to be independ and open in hi evalu of the situat
and most importantli appropri in hi respons to the situat
independenceobject of the peopl lead and conduct the work
a good fraud risk assess can be effect conduct either by peopl insid the
organ or with extern resourc howev the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess need to be independ and object throughout the assess
process addition thei must also be perceiv as independ and object by other
the peopl lead and conduct the work should be thought and mind about ani
person bias thei mai have regard the organ and the peopl within it take
step to reduc or elimin all bias that mai affect the fraud risk assess process for
exampl if an employe on the fraud risk assess team had a veri bad past experi
with someon in the account payabl depart he might allow that experi to affect
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4806 2011 fraud examin manual
hi evalu of the fraud risk relat to that area of the busi to compens for thi
bia someon els should perform the fraud risk assess work relat to the account
payabl depart activ
cultur neutral is an import aspect of independ and object when lead or
conduct a fraud risk assess some organ have veri strong corpor cultur
that can plai a big role in influenc the wai the peopl insid of the organ think
about fraud risk if peopl within the organ ar lead and conduct the fraud risk
assess thei must be abl to step outsid of the corpor cultur to assess and evalu
the presenc and signific of fraud risk in the busi
a good work knowledg of the busi
the individu lead and conduct the fraud risk assess need to have a good
work knowledg of the busi everi organ is uniqu even compani that
appear similar have characterist that make them and their fraud risksdiffer from
their competitor some of those differ can be obviou while other ar more subtl
to ensur a good work knowledg of the busi the fraud risk assessor must know at
a more than superfici level what the busi doe and how it oper he must also have
an understand about what make the organ both similar to and differ from
other compani in relat line of busi
obtain inform about broad industri fraud risk from extern sourc can be
extrem help such sourc includ industri new crimin civil and regulatori
complaint and settlement and profession organ such as the institut of intern
auditor the american institut of certifi public account and the associ of
certifi fraud examin
access to peopl at all level of the organ
it is often said that percept is realiti in other word how an individu perceiv a
situat is hi realiti of the situat in an organ it is import to ensur that the
percept of peopl at all level get a voic in the fraud risk assess process
leader of a busi or function often have veri differ perspect from their
subordin about how someth is perceiv or execut howev thi doe not alwai
mean that on perspect is right and the other is wrong what it doe mean is that
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4807
expect and percept within the organ ar not align which could increas
fraud risk
engend trust
if the organ and it employe do not trust the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess thei will not be open and honest about the realiti of the busi it
cultur and it vulner to fraud trust is not someth that can be grant by
author it must be earn by word and a ction as the peopl lead and conduct the
fraud risk assess engag with busi thei should deliber and carefulli plan the
initi contact with an effort to develop a rapport and gain trust
the abil to think the unthink
most honest peopl ar not natur inclin to think like a fraudster in fact mani largescal
fraud that have occur would have been deem unthink by peopl closest to
the event a good fraud risk assess ha to allow for the peopl lead and conduct
the assess to be expans in their consider and evalu of fraud risk thought
of it cant happen here should not be allow to moder the evalu of fraud risk
a plan to keep it aliv and relev
the fraud risk assess should not be treat as a onetim exercis that is execut
report on and then put on a shelf to collect dust the organ should strive to keep
the process aliv and relev through ongo dialogu activ manag of action plan
and develop of procedur to ensur the assess is maintain on a current basi
consider for develop an effect fraud risk assess
a fraud risk assess is onli effect if the organ embrac it and us the result
to monitor chang or influenc the factor that put the compani at risk for fraud
packag it right
peopl do not easili relat to or embrac thing that thei dont understand everi
organ ha it own vocabulari and prefer method of commun ie the
languag of the busi the notif and execut of the fraud risk assess
includ the report of the result will onli be effect if complet in the languag of
the busi for exampl
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4808 2011 fraud examin manual
in a creativ organ where decis ar made base on qualit assess and
instinct and where the major of commun is visual a quantit approach to
assess fraud risk driven by number and calcul would most like be reject
in an organ where the busi is built and run on quantit decisionmak
model a qualit approach with no quantit compon would most like
be reject
therefor the assessor must remain mind of the languag us throughout the fraud risk
assess specif he should stai awai from technic languag that will not reson
with peopl in the busi for exampl mani peopl in the busi might not easili relat
to or understand the term cash larceni if cash larceni is on of the organ greatest
fraud risk it might be more effect to explain the concept in layman term and describ
the risk as theft of cash instead
on size doe not fit all
do not try to fit a round peg into a squar hole what work in on organ most like
will not easili work in anoth recogn the nuanc and differ of each busi
and tailor the approach and execut to the specif organ can help make the
fraud risk assess success while a gener framework or toolset can be a valuabl
start point for the develop of the fraud risk assess it must be adapt to fit the
busi model cultur and languag of the organ
keep it simpl
the more complic the fraud risk assess is the harder it will be to execut it and
drive action whether the assessor us a gener assess framework or develop on
specif for the organ he should focu the effort and time on evalu the area
that ar most like to have fraud risk
