2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/Reporting the Results of the Fraud Risk Assessment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


Reporting the Results of the Fraud Risk Assessment  
The success of the fraud risk assessment process hinges on how effectively the results are 
reported and what the organization then does with those results. A poorly communicated 
report can undermine the entire process and bring all momentum established to a screeching 
halt. The report should be delivered in a style most suited to the language of the business. If 
management prefers short, punchy PowerPoint presentations, the fraud risk assessment 
team should not give them a 50-page Word document.  
 
Considerations When Reporting the Assessment Results 
To maximize the effectiveness of the process, the team should consider the following points 
when developing the report of the results.  
 
Report Objective — Not Subjective — Results  
A lot of instinct and judgment goes into performing the fraud risk assessment. When 
reporting the results of the assessment, the team must stick to the facts and keep all opinions 
and biases out of the report. A report that is peppered with the assessment team’s subjective 
perspective will dilute and potentially undermine the results of the work.  
 
Keep It Simple  
The assessment results should be reported in a way that is easy to understand and that 
resonates with management. The reader of the report should be able to quickly look at and 
comprehend the results. A simple one-page visual can sometimes make the most impact.  
 
Focus On What Really Matters  
Less is often more when it comes to reporting the results of the fraud risk assessment. The 
team should take care not to turn the report into a laundry list of things that management 
will have to sort through and prioritize. Instead, the report should be presented in a way that 
focuses on what really matters, clearly highlighting those things that are most important and 
that will make the most impact on the organization’s fraud risk management efforts.  
 
Identify Actions That Are Clear and Measurable to Drive Results  
The report should include some key recommendations for action that are clear, measurable, 
and will drive results. The actions should be presented in a way that makes it apparent what 
exactly needs to be done. The report should not include recommendations that are vague or 
that wouldn’t reduce the risk of fraud. Additionally, the actions reflected in the report should 
have already been vetted with and agreed to by the recommended action owners.  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
Sample Report Formats 
Below are two examples of simple formats that can be used or adapted to report on the 
results of a fraud risk assessment based on the Fraud Risk Index framework discussed earlier 
in this chapter. 
 
Graphic Report Format  
The first sample report format, shown below, would work well in an organization that uses 
dashboards or tends to be visually oriented. The gauges can be substituted with any type of 
visual representation that the organization uses in the normal course of business. This report 
should be accompanied by a one- or two-page action plan.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Executive Summary Report Format  
The following report format is a simple one-page executive-summary-type report. It gives 
the reader a snapshot view of the results of the work, along with insight into what is driving 
the results and what actions can be taken to reduce the fraud risk. Using a simple format like 
this forces the assessment team to focus on what really matters and what will make the  
most impact. 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.825 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Reporting the Leadership Risk Assessment Results  
The results of the Leadership Risk Profile should  be treated with great sensitivity. The fraud 
risk assessment team should discuss with the sponsor what the best method would be for 
conveying the results of that work. If a formal report is requested, a color-coded 
organization chart can be used as quick visual to convey the fraud risk associated with each 
leadership area across the business. 
 
 



:


report the result of the fraud risk assess
the success of the fraud risk assess process hing on how effect the result ar
report and what the organ then doe with those result a poorli commun
report can undermin the entir process and bring all momentum establish to a screech
halt the report should be deliv in a style most suit to the languag of the busi if
manag prefer short punchi powerpoint present the fraud risk assess
team should not give them a 50page word document
consider when report the assess result
to maxim the effect of the process the team should consid the follow point
when develop the report of the result
report object not subject result
a lot of instinct and judgment goe into perform the fraud risk assess when
report the result of the assess the team must stick to the fact and keep all opinion
and bias out of the report a report that is pepper with the assess team subject
perspect will dilut and potenti undermin the result of the work
keep it simpl
the assess result should be report in a wai that is easi to understand and that
reson with manag the reader of the report should be abl to quickli look at and
comprehend the result a simpl onepag visual can sometim make the most impact
focu on what realli matter
less is often more when it come to report the result of the fraud risk assess the
team should take care not to turn the report into a laundri list of thing that manag
will have to sort through and priorit instead the report should be present in a wai that
focus on what realli matter clearli highlight those thing that ar most import and
that will make the most impact on the organ fraud risk manag effort
identifi action that ar clear and measur to drive result
the report should includ some kei recommend for action that ar clear measur
and will drive result the action should be present in a wai that make it appar what
exactli need to be done the report should not includ recommend that ar vagu or
that wouldnt reduc the risk of fraud addition the action reflect in the report should
have alreadi been vet with and agre to by the recommend action owner
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4824 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl report format
below ar two exampl of simpl format that can be us or adapt to report on the
result of a fraud risk assess base on the fraud risk index framework discuss earlier
in thi chapter
graphic report format
the first sampl report format shown below would work well in an organ that us
dashboard or tend to be visual orient the gaug can be substitut with ani type of
visual represent that the organ us in the normal cours of busi thi report
should be accompani by a on or twopag action plan
execut summari report format
the follow report format is a simpl onepag executivesummarytyp report it give
the reader a snapshot view of the result of the work along with insight into what is drive
the result and what action can be taken to reduc the fraud risk us a simpl format like
thi forc the assess team to focu on what realli matter and what will make the
most impact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4825
report the leadership risk assess result
the result of the leadership risk profil should be treat with great sensit the fraud
risk assess team should discuss with the sponsor what the best method would be for
convei the result of that work if a formal report is request a colorcod
organ chart can be us as quick visual to convei the fraud risk associ with each
leadership area across the busi
