2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/Making an Impact with the Fraud Risk Assessment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


Making an Impact with the Fraud Risk Assessment  
To make the most of the fraud risk assessment process, management should use the  
results to: 
• Begin a dialogue across the company. 
• Look for fraud in high-risk areas. 
• Hold action owners accountable for progress. 
• Keep the assessment process alive and relevant.  
 
Begin a Dialogue Across the Company  
The results of the initial fraud risk assessment can be used to begin a dialogue across the 
company that promotes awareness, education, and action planning aimed at reducing the risk 
of fraud. Engaging in an active dialogue can be an effective way to further establish 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
boundaries of acceptable and unacceptable behavior. Open communication about fraud risks 
can also increase the chances that employees will come forward if they believe they have 
witnessed potential fraud.  
 
Look for Fraud in High-Risk Areas 
An internal audit or investigative team within the organization can use the results of the 
fraud risk assessment in identifying high-risk processes or activities and unusual transactions 
that may indicate fraud. This practice can also provide some reassurance if the subsequent 
search for fraud reveals that, despite the assessed risk, fraud does not appear to be occurring 
at that point in time. Management should remember, however, that just because there is no 
evidence that fraud is occurring in the present, the risk that it could occur is not eliminated.  
 
Hold Action Owners Accountable for Progress 
It is often said that what gets measured gets done. To effectively reduce identified fraud risk, 
management must hold action owners accountable for making progress and driving impact. 
The organization should track and measure progress against agreed-upon action plans. 
Publicly celebrating the successes of action owners that make good progress can be as or 
more effective in driving the right behaviors as providing consequences for the action 
owners that fail to deliver results.  
 
Keep It Alive and Relevant  
Since there are so many factors that can affect an organization’s vulnerability to fraud risk, 
management must ensure that the fraud risk assessment stays current and relevant. Someone 
should be designated within the organization to own the fraud risk assessment process. That 
person or team should build processes to ensure that all changes in the business model, 
company operating environment, and personnel are considered relative to their impact on 
the company’s risk of fraud.  
 
 



:


make an impact with the fraud risk assess
to make the most of the fraud risk assess process manag should us the
result to
begin a dialogu across the compani
look for fraud in highrisk area
hold action owner account for progress
keep the assess process aliv and relev
begin a dialogu across the compani
the result of the initi fraud risk assess can be us to begin a dialogu across the
compani that promot awar educ and action plan aim at reduc the risk
of fraud engag in an activ dialogu can be an effect wai to further establish
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4826 2011 fraud examin manual
boundari of accept and unaccept behavior open commun about fraud risk
can also increas the chanc that employe will come forward if thei believ thei have
wit potenti fraud
look for fraud in highrisk area
an intern audit or investig team within the organ can us the result of the
fraud risk assess in identifi highrisk process or activ and unusu transact
that mai indic fraud thi practic can also provid some reassur if the subsequ
search for fraud reveal that despit the assess risk fraud doe not appear to be occur
at that point in time manag should rememb howev that just becaus there is no
evid that fraud is occur in the present the risk that it could occur is not elimin
hold action owner account for progress
it is often said that what get measur get done to effect reduc identifi fraud risk
manag must hold action owner account for make progress and drive impact
the organ should track and measur progress against agreedupon action plan
publicli celebr the success of action owner that make good progress can be as or
more effect in drive the right behavior as provid consequ for the action
owner that fail to deliv result
keep it aliv and relev
sinc there ar so mani factor that can affect an organ vulner to fraud risk
manag must ensur that the fraud risk assess stai current and relev someon
should be design within the organ to own the fraud risk assess process that
person or team should build process to ensur that all chang in the busi model
compani oper environ and personnel ar consid rel to their impact on
the compani risk of fraud
