2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool 
 
Introduction  
The ACFE’s Fraud Risk Assessment Tool can be  used by fraud examiners to identify their 
clients’ or employers’ vulnerabilities to fraud. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool consists of 15 modules, each containing a series of 
questions designed to help organizations zoom in on areas of risk. The fraud professional 
and the client or employer should begin the risk assessment process by working together to 
answer the questions in each module. It is important that the client or employer select 
people within the organization who have extensive knowledge of company operations, such 
as managers and internal auditors, to work with the fraud professional. Upon completion of 
all of the questions, the fraud professional should review the results of the assessment with 
the client or employer in order to: 
• Identify the potential inherent fraud risks. 
• Assess the likelihood and significance of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
• Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
• Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
• Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
• Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or  
nonexistent controls. 
• Respond to residual fraud risks. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool may reveal certain residual fraud risks that have not been 
adequately mitigated due to lack of, or non-compliance with, appropriate preventive and 
detective controls. The fraud professional should work with the client to develop mitigation 
strategies for any residual risks with an unacceptably high likelihood or significance of 
occurrence. Responses should be evaluated in terms of their costs versus benefits and in 
light of the organization’s level of risk tolerance. 
 
Be aware, however, that this assessment only provides a snapshot of a particular point in 
time. The dynamic nature of organizations requires routine monitoring and updating of their 
financial risk assessment processes in order for them to remain effective. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.829 
MODULE # 1 — Employee Assessment  
The employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a fraudulent 
event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls.  
• Internal control environment.  
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud. 
 
1. Are employees provided formal written job descriptions? 
In addition to clarifying what employees are responsible for, job descriptions signify what 
employees are not responsible for. Employees who perform duties outside of their job 
descriptions represent a significant red flag. 
 
2. Are employees provided with an organizational chart that shows lines of responsibility? 
Organizational charts provide employees with a snapshot of an organization’s division of 
work, levels of management, and reporting relationships. 
 
3. Does the company have written accounting policies and procedures?  
Accounting policies and procedures, including those related to fraud, should be documented, 
implemented, and communicated to employees. 
 
4. Is there a formal policy covering approval authority for financial transactions, such  as purchasing or travel?  
In order to safeguard assets and financial reporting, companies should develop and 
implement policies for determining how financial transactions are initiated, authorized, 
recorded, and reviewed. 
 
5. Does the company have an ethics statement?  
The company should implement a formal ethics statement that (1) defines conduct that is 
unethical, (2) states that unethical acts will be punished, and (3) provides information on 
reporting unethical conduct. 
 
6. Does senior management exhibit and encourage ethical behavior?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Does the company have written fraud policies and procedures?  
The company should document and implement fraud policies and procedures that describe 
(1) fraudulent conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in fraudulent conduct, and (3) how to 
report fraudulent conduct. 
 
8. Is a senior member of management responsible for compliance with fraud policies?  
The responsibility for compliance with fraud and ethics policies should be assigned to a 
senior member of management. 
 
9. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
10. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to report suspected violations of the ethics and anti-
 fraud programs? 
Organizations should provide employees, vendors,  and customers with a confidential system 
for reporting suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
11. Are fraud incidents promptly  and thoroughly investigated? 
Promptly and thoroughly investigating all reported incidents of fraud can minimize losses. 
 
12. Does the company maintain a record of fraud incidents? 
A formal record of all reported incidents of fraud, including documentation of investigative 
activities and final disposition of each incident, should be maintained. 
 
13. Does  the company conduct pre-employment background checks?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
14. Does the company have a loss prevention function?  
Responsible personnel should be trained to perform loss prevention functions. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.831 
15. Does the company have an internal audit function?  
Internal audits that focus on high-risk areas for fraud can identify new vulnerabilities, 
measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud prevention is a high 
priority for the company. 
 
16. Are the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and recording or reporting of transactions 
segregated? 
The company should segregate the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and 
recording or reporting of transactions. 
 
17. Is compliance with internal controls audited periodically?  
Periodic audits of compliance with internal controls send the message to employees that the 
company is proactive in its anti-fraud efforts. 
 
18. Do employees feel they are tr eated and compensated fairly? 
Management should establish appropriate lines  of communication with employees (such as 
surveys, exit interviews, and open-door policies) to assess their attitudes toward the 
organization. 
 
19. Do any employees have large personal debts or credit problems?  
Employees with large personal debts or credit problems are a red flag of potential fraud and 
should be monitored by management. 
 
20. Do any employees appear to be spending  far more than they are earning? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars and extravagant vacations. 
 
21. Do any employees gamble excessively?  
Employees who gamble excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company and should 
be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made available to help 
employees with gambling addictions. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
22. Do any employees use alcohol or drugs excessively? 
Employees who use alcohol or drugs excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company 
and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made 
available to help employees with alcohol or drug addictions. 
 
23. Do any employees resent their superiors? 
Employees who resent their superiors should be monitored by management, as they pose a 
potential fraud risk to the company. 
 
24. Do any employees have a close association with vendors or competitors? 
Employees with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
25. Do any employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company? 
Employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Outside interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should  
be prohibited. 
 
26. Is the company experiencing high employee turnover? 
High employee turnover, especially in areas particularly vulnerable to fraud, is a warning sign 
of fraud that should be investigated. 
 
27. Are employees required to take annual vacations?  
Requiring employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an ongoing 
fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running such a 
scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
28. Is the company dominated by a small group of individuals? 
If control is centered in the hands of a few key employees, those individuals should be under 
heightened security for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
29. Does the company have unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations?  
Unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations can place undue pressure on 
employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.833 
30. Does management fail to give employees positi ve feedback and recognition for job performance?  
Providing positive feedback and recognition to employees helps to reduce the likelihood of 
internal fraud and theft through boosting morale. Employees with positive feelings about an 
organization are less likely to commit fraud against the organization. 
 
31. Are employees afraid to deliver bad news to supervisors or management? 
Management should promote a culture in which employees aren’t afraid to deliver bad news. 
After all, the sooner management receives the bad news, the sooner it can respond. 
 
32. Is there a lack of communication between employees and management? 
Management can improve communication with em ployees by creating an atmosphere that 
encourages open communication. Employees should feel safe in sharing any thoughts, 
comments, complaints, or suggestions. 
 
33. Is there a lack of clear organizational responsibilities in the company? 
A lack of clear organizational responsibilities can lead to confusion and frustration for 
employees. Organizational charts and job descriptions can be used to clarify organizational 
responsibilities. 
 
34. Does management not seem to care about  or reward appropriate employee behavior? 
Management that does not seem to care a bout or reward appropriate employee behavior  
can contribute to low employee morale and increased risk of fraud against the company  
by employees. 
 
MODULE # 2 — Management/Key Employee Assessment  
The management/key employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability 
of a fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls 
• Internal control environment 
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud 
 
1. Is the board of directors composed of mainly officers of the company or related individuals? 
The board of directors should include independent board members that are not associated 
with or employed by the company. In theory, independent directors are not subject to the 
same pressures as management and, therefore, are more likely to act in the best interest of 
shareholders. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is there an independent audit committee?  
Independent audit committee members with financial and accounting expertise can be 
instrumental in preventing and detecting financial fraud. 
 
3. Has there been high turnover of managers  and members of the board of directors? 
Management should investigate the reasons for high turnover and implement measures to 
reduce it. 
 
4. Have an unusually high number of key employees left the company recently?  
Management should investigate the reasons for their departure and implement measures to 
reduce turnover. 
 
5. Is the company involved in any litigation?  
Management should determine the reason for the litigation, monitor the filings, and take 
corrective action where necessary. 
 
6. Does the company have offshore activities or bank accounts?  
Management should determine the reason for the offshore activities and accounts, ascertain 
compliance with U.S. laws, and monitor activity closely. 
 
7. Do any of the senior managers have off shore bank accounts or business interests?  
The organization should require senior managers to file annual financial disclosure reports 
and explain the purpose of any offshore bank accounts or business interests. 
 
8. Are any key employees experiencing financial pressur es such as debts, gambling, medical bills, or divorce?  
Key employees who are experiencing financial pressures represent a potential fraud risk to 
the company and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can 
be made available to help employees with alcohol, drug, and other problems. 
 
9. Do any key employees appear to be living beyond their means? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars, extravagant vacations, or expensive clothing. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.835 
10. Do any key employees have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record? 
Key employees who have civil judgments or bankruptcies on record represent a potential 
fraud risk to the company and should be monitored by management. 
 
11. Do any key employees have a criminal conviction? 
Key employees with known criminal convictions should be subjected to increased review by 
management for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
12. Do one or two key employees appear to dominate the company?  
If control is centered in the hands of one or two key employees, then those individuals 
should be under heightened scrutiny for compliance with internal controls and other policies 
and procedures. 
 
13. Do any key employees have friends or relatives reporting directly to them?  
Organizations should prohibit key employees from  having friends or relatives report directly 
to them. 
 
14. Do any of the key employees appear to have a close association with a vendor?  
Key employees who have a close association with a vendor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
15. Do any key employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company?   
Key employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should be 
prohibited. 
 
16. Do any key employees own a portion of any company that does business with this company?  
Organizations should require key employees to disclose any potential conflicts of interest 
and should closely monitor any such conflicts of interest. 
 
17. Has any key employee failed to take vacation?  
Requiring key employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an 
ongoing fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running 
such a scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Do any key employees have a significant amount  of their net worth invested in the company?  
Management should subject key employees with  a significant amount of their net worth 
invested in the company to increased review for compliance with internal controls, especially 
those controls related to financial reporting. 
 
19. Does the company have unusually high debts? 
Management should determine the reason for debt levels and monitor internal controls for 
financial reporting. 
 
20. Is key employee compensation prim arily based on comp any performance? 
Organizations should monitor employees whose compensation is based primarily on 
company performance for compliance with internal controls, especially controls related to 
financial reporting. 
 
21. Is there an incentive to use inappropriate means to minimize earnings for tax reasons? 
Companies should remove any incentive to use inappropriate means to manipulate  
financial information. 
 
22. Is there excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price? 
Excessive pressure to increase the company’s stock price can result in management 
manipulating financial results in order to meet expectations. 
 
23. Has the company recently experienced large operating or investment losses? 
Large operating or investment losses ca n place undue pressure on management to 
manipulate results in order to cover up the losses. 
 
24. Does the organization have sufficient working capital? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
25. Does the organization have sufficient credit?  
A lack of sufficient credit can place undue pressure on management to manipulate financial 
results in order to obtain credit. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.837 
26. Is the organization under pressu re to report favorable earnings?  
Excessive pressure to report favorable earnings can result in management committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet expectations. 
 
27. Does the company depend heavily on only a limited number of products or customers?  
Dependence on only a limited number of products or customers places a company at greater 
risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
28. Has the company experienced diff iculty in collecting receivables? 
Cash flow problems, which are a warning sign of possible fraud, can arise when a company 
experiences difficulty in collecting receivables. 
 
29. Has the company recently expanded rapidly into new business or product lines? 
Rapid expansion into new business or product lines can place tremendous financial pressure 
on a company. 
 
30. Has the company experienced a reduction in sales volume?  
A reduction in sales volume can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results. 
 
31. Does the company have strong competitors that are outperforming?  
Strong competition can place a company at greater risk for fraudulent acts to occur. 
 
32. Is the company under pressure to  sell or merge with another company?  
Situational pressures that may lead to fraudulent acts can arise when a company is under 
pressure to sell or merge with another company. 
 
33. Does the company change auditors often? 
A frequent change in auditors is a red flag of fraud. 
 
34. Does the company delay or avoid supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete  
the audits?  
Delaying or avoiding supplying auditors with the information necessary to complete audits is 
an indicator of fraudulent activity. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
35. Does the company have problems with regulatory agencies? 
The company should determine the reasons for the problems with regulatory agencies and 
implement measures to encourage compliance with regulations. 
 
36. Does the company have poor accounting records? 
The company should implement proper accounting records. 
 
37. Does the accounting department appear to be inadequately staffed?  
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
38. Does the organization fail to disclose questionable or unusual accounting practices?  
Questionable or unusual accounting practices should be disclosed.  
 
39. Does the company have a number of la rge year-end or unusual transactions? 
Large year-end or unusual transactions should be investigated. 
 
40. Does the organization lack an adequate internal audit staff? 
The internal audit department should be adequately staffed. 
 
41. Does the organization lack an internal control syst em, or does it fail to enforce the existing internal 
controls? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
MODULE # 3 — Physical Controls to Deter Employee Theft and Fraud  
The physical controls assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a 
fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Physical controls in place to control access to accounting records and information 
• Physical controls in place to protect the assets of the organization 
 
1. Does the organization conduct pre-employment back ground checks to identify previous dishonest or 
unethical behavior?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.839 
2. Are there policies and procedures that address dishonest or unethical behavior?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures that describe (1) 
unethical conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in unethical conduct, and (3) how to report 
unethical conduct. 
 
3. Does management support the ethics and anti-fraud policies?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
 
4. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
5. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to re port suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud 
policies? 
Organizations should provide a system for anonymous reporting of suspected violations of 
the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
6. Does the organization restrict access to areas containing sensitive documents (such as invoices, receipts, 
journals, ledgers, and checks) and maintain a sy stem for providing an audit trail of access? 
Access to areas containing sensitive documents should be restricted to those individuals 
 who need the information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should  
be maintained. 
 
7. Does the organization restrict access to computer systems with sensitive documents (such as accounting 
software, inventory, and payroll) and create a system to provide an audit trail of access?  
Access to computer systems should be restricted to those individuals who need the 
information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should be maintained. 
 
8. Does the organization restrict access to areas with high value assets, such as shipping, receiving, storerooms, 
and cash?  
Organizations should restrict access to areas with high value assets and should maintain a log 
of persons accessing such areas. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
9. Does the organization use CCTV and recording equipment to monitor entries, exits,  areas with sensitive 
or high value assets, and sales areas?  
Entries, exits, areas with sensitive or high value assets, and sales areas can be monitored 
using CCTV and recording equipment. 
 
10. Does the organization conduct random, unannounced audits of inventory, ca sh, expense, purchasing, 
billing, and other accounts by in ternal or external auditors?  
Random, unannounced audits help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, 
destroy, and misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
11. Does the organization use professional loss prevention  or security personnel to monitor physical controls?  
Professional loss prevention or security personnel can be used to monitor physical controls. 
 
12. Does the organization promptly investigate incidents of suspected or reported fraud?  
Promptly investigating incidents of suspected or reported fraud can minimize losses. 
 
MODULE # 4 — Skimming Schemes  
Skimming schemes include: 
• Collecting cash, but not recording the sale 
• Collecting cash, keeping a portion of the cash, and underreporting the sale amount 
• Collecting a customer’s payment, but not cred iting the amount to the customer’s account 
• Collecting cash and holding it in a personal interest-bearing account before depositing it 
into the company account 
 
1. Is there periodic analytical review of sales a ccounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis?  
Periodic analytical review of sales accounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
2. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling?   
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
3. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.841 
4. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using ph ysical inventory counts? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using physical inventory counts can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
5. Is there periodic review of the inventory and re ceiving records using verifi cation of shipping and  
requisition documents?  
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using verification of shipping and 
requisition documents can highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
6. Is there periodic review of inventory accounts for write-offs?  
Inventory accounts should be reviewed periodically for write-offs. 
 
7. Is there periodic review of accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts to look for write-offs 
of accounts receivable?  
Accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts should be reviewed 
periodically for write-offs of accounts receivable. 
 
8. Is there periodic review of cash accounts for irregular entries?  
Cash accounts should be reviewed periodically for irregular entries. 
 
9. Is the company mail opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other accounting employees 
who make journal entries? 
Company mail should be opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other 
accounting employees who make journal entries. 
 
10. Do vouchers for credit and sales receipts contain serial numbers? 
Vouchers for credit and sales receipts should contain serial numbers. 
 
11. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from preparing the bank deposit?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from preparing the bank deposit. 
 
12. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper rest ricted from collecting cash from customers? 
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from collecting cash  
from customers. 
 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
13. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper re stricted from access to the cash receipts?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from access to the cash receipts. 
 
14. Is the cashier restricted from accessing accounts receivable records?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing accounts receivable records. 
 
15. Is the cashier restricted from accessing bank and customer statements?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing bank and customer statements. 
 
16. Is each of the following responsibilities assigned to a separate employee: general ledger entries, cash receipt 
entries, and accounts receivable billing?  
Having different employees perform these tasks helps minimize the potential for the 
concealment of theft. 
 
17. Does the employee who opens incoming checks place restrictive endorsements on all checks received?  
The employee who opens incoming checks should immediately stamp all incoming checks 
with the company’s restrictive endorsement to protect against unintended parties cashing  
the checks. 
 
18. Does the person who opens the mail prepare a list of all checks and cash received?  
A list of all checks and cash received should be prepared and reconciled daily against the 
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipts report. 
 
19. Does the person who opens the mail deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible for the daily 
bank deposit? 
The person who opens the mail should deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible 
for the daily bank deposit. 
 
20. Does an employee perform an independent verification  of the bank deposit ticket to the remittance list 
generated by the employee who opened the mail? 
An employee should perform an independent verification of the bank deposit ticket to the 
remittance list generated by the employee who opened the mail. 
 
21. Does the company use a lockbox service for cash receipts? 
Lockboxes decrease the potential for fraud and error by reducing employee handling of 
each transaction. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.843 
22. Does the company have a safe with restricted access? 
A safe can be used to physically secure excess cash on hand. Access to the safe should be 
restricted and an access log should be maintained. 
 
23. Is cash deposited daily? 
Daily bank deposits should be made so that excess cash does not remain on the premises.  
 
24. Are there pre-numbered cash receipts for cash sales?  
Pre-numbered cash receipts should be used for cash sales. 
 
25. Are employees who handle cash bonded? 
Employees who handle cash should be bonded in order to protect against theft. 
 
26. Is there a written policy and procedure for turning over delinquent accounts for collection?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures for turning over 
delinquent accounts for collection. 
 
27. Is the person who handles custom er complaints independent of the ca shier or accounts receivable function? 
The person who handles customer complaints should be independent of the cashier or 
accounts receivable function. 
 
28. Is physical access to the accounting syst em restricted to only authorized persons? 
Physical access to the accounting system should be restricted to those who require it to 
perform their job functions. 
 
MODULE # 5 — Cash Larceny Schemes  
Cash larceny schemes include: 
• Stealing cash at the point of sale or register. 
• Stealing cash receipts posted to sales and receivable journals. 
• Stealing cash from bank deposits. 
 
1. Are cash register tape totals reconc iled to the amount in the cash drawer?  
Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount in the cash drawer. Any 
discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
2. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and agreeing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register tape totals. 
 
3. Is access to registers or the cash box closely monitored? Are access codes kept secure? 
Access to registers or the cash box should be closely monitored and access codes should be 
kept secure. 
 
4. Are customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting handled by someone other than the 
employee who receives the cash?  
Customer complaints regarding short change or improper posting should be handled by 
someone other than the employee who receives the cash. 
 
5. Are register workers properly supervised? 
Register workers should be properly supervised by on-duty supervisors or CCTV recording 
of register activity. 
 
6. Are CCTV cameras and digital recorders used to monitor register areas?  
CCTV cameras and digital recorders can be used to monitor register areas. 
 
7. Is each receivable transaction reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation?  
Receivable transactions should be reviewed for legitimacy and supporting documentation. 
 
8. Is an independent listing of cash receipts prepared  before the receipts are submitted to the cashier or 
accounts receivable bookkeeper? 
An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are submitted 
to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
 
9. Does a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable functions compare entries to the cash 
receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and bank deposit statements?  
Companies should assign a person independent of the cash receipts and accounts receivable 
functions to compare entries to the cash receipts journals with the bank deposit slips and 
bank deposit statements. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.845 
10. Are the cash receipts, cash counts, bank deposits, deposit receipt reconciliation s, bank reconciliations, 
posting of deposits, and cash disbursements duties segregated?  
The primary way to prevent cash larceny is to segregate duties. 
 
11. Does an employee other than the cashier or accounts  receivable bookkeeper make the daily bank deposit?  
Having an employee other than the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper make  
the daily bank deposit is an important segregation of duties that can help to prevent  
cash larceny. 
 
12. Is job or assignment rotation mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties?  
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. 
 
13. Are vacations mandatory for employees who handle cash receipts and accounting duties? 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. By establishing mandatory vacations, the concealment 
element is interrupted.  
 
14. Are surprise cash counts conducted? 
Surprise cash counts help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, destroy, and 
misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
15. Are journal entries made to  the cash accounts reviewed and analyzed on a regular basis?  
Journal entries made to the cash accounts  should be reviewed and analyzed on a  
regular basis. 
 
16. Does the company use a point of sale (POS) system?  
A POS system will allow the organization to gather sales information in a comprehensive 
and timely format. 
  
17. Does the POS system track perpetual inventory? 
The POS system should be configured to track perpetual inventory. 
  
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Does the POS system track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales,  overages, and shortages?  
The POS system should be configured to track exceptions, such as voids, refunds, no sales, 
overages, and shortages. 
 
19. Are register exception reports reviewed on a regular basis?  
Register exception reports should be reviewed on a regular basis by management. 
 
20. Are all employees, except for managers, prohibited from making changes to the POS system? 
All employees, except for managers, should be prohibited from making changes to the  
POS system. 
 
21. Is access to the accounts receivable subledger and the general ledger restricted to authorized employees? 
Does access leave an audit trail?  
Access to the accounts receivable subledger and general ledger should be restricted to 
authorized employees. An audit trail of who accessed the ledgers, including time and date of 
access, should be kept. 
 
MODULE # 6 — Check Tampering Schemes  
• Forged maker schemes involve forging an authorized signature on a company check.  
• Forged endorsement schemes consist of forging the signature endorsement of an 
intended recipient of a company check. 
• Altered payee schemes involve changing the payee designation on the check to the 
perpetrator or an accomplice. 
• Authorized maker schemes occur when employees with signature authority write 
fraudulent checks for their own benefit. 
  
1. Are unused checks stored in a secure container with limited access? 
Blank checks, which can be used for forgery, should be stored in a secure area such as a 
safe or vault. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel. 
 
2. Are unused checks from accounts that  have been closed promptly destroyed?  
Companies should promptly destroy all unused checks from accounts that have been closed. 
 
3. Are electronic payments used where possible to limit the number of paper checks issued? 
Companies can minimize the possibility of check tampering and theft by using electronic 
payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.847 
4. Are printed and signed checks mailed immediately after signing?  
Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing.  
 
5. Are new checks purchased from reputable check vendors? 
All new checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers.  
 
6. Do company checks contain security features to ensure their integrity?  
Companies can reduce their exposure to physical check tampering by using checks 
containing security features, such as high-resolution microprinting, security inks, and 
ultraviolet ink. 
 
7. Has the company notified its bank to not accept checks over  a predetermined maximum amount?  
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud, 
establishing maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
 
8. Has the company established positive pay controls with its bank by supplying the bank with a daily list of 
checks issued and authorized for payment?  
One method for a company to help prevent check fraud is to establish positive pay controls 
by supplying its banks with a daily list of checks issued and authorized for payment. 
 
9. Is the employee who prepares the check prohibited from signing the check?  
Check preparation should not be performed by a signatory on the account. 
 
10. Are detailed comparisons made between the payees  on the checks and the payees listed in the cash 
disbursements journal?  
Companies should perform detailed comparisons of the payees on the checks and the payees 
listed in the cash disbursements journal. 
 
11. Are employees responsible for handling and coding checks periodically rotated?  
Periodic rotation of personnel responsible for handling and coding checks can be an 
effective check disbursement control.  
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
12. Are bank reconciliations completed immedi ately after bank statements are received?  
Companies should complete bank reconciliations immediately after bank statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented to the 
bank within 30 days of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable. 
 
13. Are bank statements and account reconciliations independently audited to confirm accuracy?  
Bank statements and account reconciliations should be independently audited for accuracy. 
 
14. Are cancelled checks independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries?  
Cancelled checks should be independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries. 
 
15. Are checks for a material amount matched to the supporting documentation?  
Checks for material amounts should be matched to the supporting documentation. 
 
16. Are voided checks examined for irregularities and to ensure they haven’t been processed? 
The list of voided checks should be verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank 
statements should be reviewed to ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
 
17. Are missing checks recorded and stop payments issued? 
Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
 
18. Do questionable payees or payee ad dresses trigger review of the corresponding check and support 
documentation? 
Questionable payees or payee addresses should trigger a review of the corresponding check 
and support documentation. 
 
19. With the exception of payroll, are checks issued to employees reviewed for irregularities? 
Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be closely 
scrutinized for schemes such as conflicts of interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense 
reimbursements. 
 
20. Are two signatures required for check issuance? 
Requiring dual signatures on checks can reduce the risk of check fraud. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.849 
21. Are all company payments made by check or other recordable payment device?  
Making payments by check or other recordable payment device can reduce the risk of 
disbursement frauds. 
 
22. Are handwritten checks prohibited?  
Handwritten checks are especially vulnerable to check fraud and should be prohibited. 
 
MODULE # 7 — Cash Register Schemes  
• False refund schemes occur when an employee (1) issues a refund for fictitious 
merchandise and keeps the money or (2) overstates the amount of merchandise returned 
and skims the excess money. 
• False void schemes occur when a register worker retains a customer receipt, processes a 
fictitious voided sale, and keeps the money. 
 
1. Are refunds, voids, and discounts evaluated on a routine basis to identify patterns of activity among 
employees, departments, shi fts, merchandise, etc.?  
Companies should routinely evaluate refunds, voids, and discounts to search for patterns of 
activity that might signal fraud. 
 
2. Is there a sign posted at the register asking the customer to request and examine a sales receipt? 
Signs asking customers to request and examine sales receipts should be posted at registers. 
 
3. Are cash disbursements recorded on a pre-numbered form and reconciled daily? 
Cash disbursements should be recorded on pre-numbered forms and reconciled daily. 
 
4. Do the cash disbursement forms have  an explanation section or code? 
An explanation section or code should be included on cash disbursement forms. 
 
5. Are customers that are involved in voided sales and refunds randomly contacted to  verify the accuracy of  
the transaction?  
Customers involved in voided sales and refunds should be randomly contacted to verify the 
accuracy of the transactions. 
 
6. Is access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids rest ricted to supervisors?  
Access to the necessary control keys for refunds and voids should be restricted  
to supervisors. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Do void or refund transactions have to be  approved by a supervisor and documented?  
All void or refund transactions should be approved by a supervisor and documented. 
 
8. Is documentation of void and ref und transactions maintained on file? 
Documentation of void and refund transactions should be maintained on file. 
 
9. Is missing or altered register  tape thoroughly investigated? 
Companies should thoroughly investigate any missing or altered register tape. 
 
10. Are gaps in the register tape investigated?  
Companies should investigate any gaps in the register tape. 
 
11. Are multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under any review limit investigated? 
Multiple voids or refunds for amounts just under review limits should be investigated. 
 
12. Is an employee other than the register worker responsible for preparing register count sheets and comparing 
them to register totals?  
An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and comparing them to register totals. 
 
13. Are customer complaints regarding pa yment errors thoroughly investigated? 
Customer complaints regarding payment errors should be thoroughly investigated. 
 
14. Does each cashier have a separate access code to the register?  
Each cashier should be assigned a separate access code to the register. 
 
15. Does each cashier have a separate cash drawer?  
Each cashier should have a separate cash drawer. 
 
16. Is an over and short log kept for each person and/or register? 
An over and short log should be kept for each person and/or register. 
 
17. Are over and short incidents thoroughly investigated and monitored? 
Over and short incidents should be thoroughly investigated and monitored. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.851 
18. Are all “no sale" receipts accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report? 
All “no sale" receipts should be accounted for and attached to a daily cashier’s report. 
 
19. Is access to the register area restricted to authorized employees and supervisors?  
Companies should restrict access to register areas to authorized employees and supervisors. 
 
20. Are all cashiers periodically integrity shopped? 
Companies should periodically conduct integrity shopping on all cashiers. 
 
MODULE # 8 — Purchasing and Billing Schemes  
• Shell company schemes occur when an employee submits invoices for payment from a 
fictitious company controlled by the employee. 
• Pay-and-return schemes occur when an employee arranges for overpayment of a vendor 
invoice and pockets the overpayment amount when it is returned to the company. 
• Personal purchase schemes occur when an employee submits an invoice for personal 
purchases to the company for payment, or when an employee uses a company credit 
card for personal purchases. 
 
1. Does the organization have a purchasing department? 
The organization should have a purchasing department that is separate from the  
payment function. 
 
2. Is the purchasing department independent of the accounting, receiving, and shipping departments?  
The purchasing department should be independent of the accounting, receiving, and 
shipping departments. 
 
3. Do purchase requisitions require management approval?  
Management should approve all purchase requisitions. 
 
4. Do purchase orders specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates?  
Purchase orders should specify a description of items, quantities, prices, and dates. 
 
5. Are purchase order forms pre-numbered and accounted for? 
Purchase order forms should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
6. Does the company maintain a master vendor file?  
The company should maintain a master vendor file. 
 
7. Are competitive bids required for all purchases? 
Companies should require competitive bids for all purchases. 
 
8. Does the receiving department prepare receiving reports for all items received? 
The receiving department should prepare receiving reports for all items received. 
 
9. Does the receiving department main tain a log of all items received?  
The receiving department should maintain a log of all items received. 
 
10. Are copies of receiving reports furnished to  the accounting and purchasing departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be furnished to the accounting and  
purchasing departments. 
 
11. Are purchasing and receiving functions separate from invoice processing, accounts payable, and general 
ledger functions?  
Purchasing and receiving functions should be segregated from invoice processing, accounts 
payable, and general ledger functions. 
 
12. Are vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders matched before the related liability is recorded?  
Companies should match vendor invoices, receiving reports, and purchase orders before 
recording the related liability. 
 
13. Are purchase orders recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being processed through  
cash disbursements?  
Purchase orders should be recorded in a purchase register or voucher register before being 
processed through cash disbursements. 
 
14. Are procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased for direct delivery to the customer is 
promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a receivable and a payable?  
Companies should implement procedures adequate to ensure that merchandise purchased 
for direct delivery to the customer is promptly billed to the customer and recorded as both a 
receivable and a payable. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.853 
15. Are records of goods returned to ve ndors matched to vendor credit memos? 
Records of goods returned to vendors should be matched to vendor credit memos. 
 
16. Is the accounts payable ledger or voucher register re conciled monthly to the general ledger control accounts? 
The accounts payable ledger or voucher register should be reconciled monthly to the general 
ledger control accounts. 
 
17. Do write-offs of accounts payable debit bala nces require approval of a designated manager?  
Write-offs of accounts payable debit balances should require approval of a  
designated manager. 
 
18. Is the master vendor file periodically  reviewed for unusual vendors and addresses?  
The master vendor file should be reviewed periodically for unusual vendors and addresses. 
 
19. Are vendor purchases analyzed for abnormal levels? 
Vendor purchases should be analyzed for abnormal levels. 
 
20. Are control methods in place to check for duplicate invoices and purchase order numbers? 
Companies should implement control methods to check for duplicate invoices and purchase 
order numbers. 
 
21. Are credit card statements re viewed monthly for irregularities?  
Credit card statements should be reviewed monthly for irregularities. 
 
22. Are vendors with post office box addresses verified? 
All vendors with post office box addresses should be verified. 
 
23. Are voucher payments reviewed regularly for proper documentation? 
Voucher payments should be reviewed regularly for proper documentation. 
 
24. Is access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger restricted? Does access create an  
audit trail? 
Access to the accounts payable subledger and the general ledger should be restricted and an 
audit trail should be created. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
MODULE # 9 — Payroll Schemes  
• Ghost employee schemes occur when a person not employed by the company is on  
the payroll. 
• Overpayment schemes occur when a company pays an employee based on falsified 
hours or rates. 
• Commission schemes occur when the amount of sales made or the rate of commission is 
fraudulently inflated. 
 
1. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically  for duplicate or missing Social Security numbers?  
Organizations should check the employee payroll list periodically for duplicate or missing 
Social Security numbers that may indicate a ghost employee or overlapping payments to 
current employees. 
 
2. Are personnel records maintained independ ently of payroll and timekeeping functions?  
Personnel records should be maintained independently of payroll and timekeeping functions. 
 
3. Are references checked on all new hires? 
Organizations should perform reference checks on all new hires. 
 
4. Are sick leave, vacations, and holidays re viewed for compliance with company policy? 
Sick leave, vacations, and holidays should be reviewed for compliance with company policy. 
 
5. Are appropriate forms completed and signed by the employee to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions? 
Employees should complete and sign appropriate forms to authorize payroll deductions and 
withholding exemptions. 
 
6. Is payroll periodically compared with personnel records for terminations?  
Payroll should periodically be compared with personnel records for terminations to ensure 
that terminated employees have been removed from the payroll. 
 
7. Are payroll checks pre-numbered and issued in sequential order?  
Payroll checks should be pre-numbered and issued in sequential order. 
 
8. Is the payroll bank account reconciled by an employee who is not involved in preparing payroll checks, does 
not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution?  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.855 
The payroll bank account should be reconciled by an employee who is not involved in 
preparing payroll checks, does not sign the checks, and does not handle payroll distribution. 
 
9. Are payroll registers reconciled to general ledger control accounts?  
Payroll registers should be reconciled to general ledger control accounts. 
 
10. Are canceled payroll checks examined for alterations and endorsements? 
Canceled payroll checks should be examined for alterations and endorsements. 
 
11. Is access restricted to payroll check stock and signature stamps? 
Access to payroll check stock and signature stamps should be restricted. 
 
12. Are payroll withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. examined to determine if any employees are not having 
these items deducted from their paychecks?  
Payroll checks that do not have withholdings for taxes, insurance, etc. should  
be investigated. 
 
13. Is the employee payroll list reviewed periodically for duplicate or missing home addresses and  
telephone numbers? 
The employee payroll list should be reviewed for duplicate or missing home addresses and 
telephone numbers. 
 
14. Is the account information for automatically depo sited payroll checks reviewed periodically for  
duplicate entries? 
Account information for automatically deposited payroll checks should be reviewed 
periodically for duplicate entries. 
 
15. Is an employee separate from the payroll department assigned to distribute payroll checks?  
An employee separate from the payroll department should be assigned to distribute  
payroll checks. 
 
16. Are new employees required to furnish proof of immigration status? 
Companies must require new employees to furnish proof of immigration status. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.856   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
17. Does any change to an employee’s salary require more than one level of management approval?  
Changes to an employee’s salary should require more than one level of  
management approval. 
 
18. Does overtime have to be authorized by a supervisor? 
Overtime should be authorized by a supervisor. 
 
19. Do supervisors verify and sign  timecards for each pay period? 
Supervisors should verify and sign time timecards for each pay period. 
 
20. Are commission expenses compared to sales figures to verify amounts?  
Comparing commission expenses to sales figures to verify amounts is an important control 
procedure that can help to detect payroll fraud. 
 
21. Does someone separate from the sales department calculate sales commissions?  
Someone separate from the sales department should calculate sales commissions. 
 
MODULE # 10 — Expense Schemes  
• Mischaracterized expense schemes occur when an employee requests reimbursement for 
a personal expense, claiming the expense to be business related. 
• Overstated expense schemes occur when an employee overstates the cost of actual 
expenses and seeks reimbursement. 
• Fictitious expense schemes occur when an employee invents a purchase and seeks 
reimbursement for it. 
• Multiple reimbursement schemes occur when an employee submits a single expense for 
reimbursement multiple times. 
 
1. Are the expense accounts reviewed and analyzed periodically using historical comparisons or comparisons 
with budgeted amounts? 
Companies should periodically review and analyze expense accounts using historical 
comparisons or comparisons with budgeted amounts. 
 
2. Do employee expense reimbursement claims receive a detailed review before payment is made?  
Employee expense reimbursement claims should receive a detailed review before payment  
is made. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.857 
3. Are employees required to submit detailed expense reports?  
Employees should be required to submit detailed expense reports containing receipts, 
explanations, amounts, etc. 
 
4. Is a limit placed on expenses such  as hotels, meals, and entertainment?  
Companies should place a spending limit on expenses such as hotels, meals,  
and entertainment. 
 
5. Are receipts required for all expenses to be reimbursed? 
Companies should require receipts for all expenses to be reimbursed. 
 
6. Are supervisors required to review and approve all expense reimbursement requests?  
All expense reimbursement requests should be reviewed and approved by supervisors. 
 
7. Is there a random authentication of expense receipts and expenses claimed?  
A policy requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the 
appropriate detail, can help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for 
reimbursement. 
 
MODULE # 11 — Theft of Inventory and Equipment  
• Fake sale schemes occur when an accomplice of an employee “buys” merchandise, but 
the employee does not ring up the sale and the accomplice takes the merchandise 
without making any payment. 
• Purchasing schemes occur when an employee with purchasing authority uses that 
authority to purchase and misappropriate merchandise. 
• Receiving schemes occur when an employee misappropriates assets purchased by the 
company as they are received at the company. 
• False shipment schemes occur when an employee creates false sales documents and false 
shipping documents to make it appear that missing inventory was not actually stolen, but 
rather sold. 
• Misuse of company assets occurs when an employee borrows company assets for 
personal use without authorization. 
• Larceny schemes occur when an employee takes inventory from the company premises 
without attempting to conceal the theft in the accounting records. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.858   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Has a recent inventory of company equipment, list ing serial numbers and descriptions, been completed? 
Companies should inventory company equipment and maintain a list of the equipment, serial 
numbers, and descriptions. 
 
2. Does the company assign an individual from  outside of the department to conduct the  
department’s inventory? 
An employee who doesn’t work in the department should be assigned to conduct the 
department’s inventory. 
 
3. Are unexplained entries to the inventory records examined for source documentation?  
Unexplained entries to the inventory records should be examined for source documentation. 
 
4. Is the company experiencing sizeable invent ory increases without comparable sales increases? 
Sizeable inventory increases without comparable sales increases may indicate an inventory 
overstatement fraud scheme and should be investigated. 
 
5. Are analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory conducted 
periodically to look for unexplained differences? 
Analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory 
should be conducted periodically. Any discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
6. Is there an unusual volume of inventory adjustments,  write-offs, or disposals?  
Any unusual volume of inventory adjustments, write-offs, or disposals should  
be investigated. 
 
7. Does the organization have writte n inventory instructions and orders?  
Organizations should document and impl ement inventory instructions and orders. 
 
8. Does someone independent of the purchasing, receiv ing, and warehousing functions physically count  
the inventory?  
Physical inventory counts should be conducted by someone independent of the purchasing, 
receiving, and warehousing functions. 
 
9. Are pre-numbered inventory tags used? 
Pre-numbered inventory tags should be used. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.859 
10. Are the inventory tags controlled and accounted for? 
Inventory tags should be controlled and accounted for. 
 
11. Do the inventory procedures prevent double counting?  
Organizations should implement inventory procedures that prevent double counting. 
 
12. Are inventory counts subject to independent recounts?  
Inventory counts should be subject to independent recounts. 
 
13. Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for prop er classification in the accounting system, such as 
description, condition, or stage of completion?  
The inventory should be reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
system, such as description, condition, or stage of completion. 
 
14. Are differences between physical counts and invent ory records investigated be fore inventory records  
are adjusted? 
Differences between physical counts and inventory records should be investigated before 
inventory records are adjusted. 
 
15. Is scrap inventoried and is scrap disposal accounted for? 
Scrap should be inventoried and scrap disposal should be accounted for. 
 
16. Are the following duties segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of in ventory, disbursement of 
inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from the sale of scrap inventory?  
The following duties should be segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of inventory, 
disbursement of inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from 
the sale of scrap inventory. 
 
17. Is a receiving report prepared for all purchased goods?  
A receiving report should be prepared for all purchased goods. 
 
18. Are copies of receiving reports sent directly to the purchasing and ac counting departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be sent directly to the purchasing and  
accounting departments. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.860   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
19. Is the receiving department provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items to be received? 
The receiving department should be provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items 
to be received. 
 
20. Are partial shipments annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets? 
Partial shipments should be annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets. 
 
21. Are overage, shortage, and damage reports completed and sent to the purchasing and  
accounting departments?  
Overage, shortage, and damage reports should be completed and sent to the purchasing and 
accounting departments. 
 
22. Are quantities of materials received counted and compared to purchase orders?  
Quantities of materials received should be counted and compared to purchase orders. 
 
23. Is there a written policy allowing management to inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on 
company property? 
Companies should document and implement a written policy allowing management to 
inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on company property. 
 
24. Is there an equipment removal au thorization policy requiring written management approval to remove any 
company equipment from the company premises? 
Companies should document and implement an equipment removal authorization policy 
requiring written management approval to remove any company equipment from the 
company premises. 
 
25. Is there a policy requiring the in spection of packages, boxes, and other containers before they leave the 
company premises?  
Companies should document and implement a policy requiring the inspection of packages, 
boxes, and other containers before they leave the company premises. 
 
26. Is the removal of trash and trash receptacles periodically monitored? 
Companies should periodically monitor the removal of trash and trash receptacles. 
 
27. Are the shipping and receiving areas adequately supervised to prevent theft?  
Shipping and receiving areas should be adequately supervised to prevent theft. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.861 
28. Are high value items stored in secure or continuously monitored areas?  
High value items should be stored in secure or continuously monitored areas. 
 
29. Is the shipping function separate from  the purchasing and inventory functions?  
The shipping function should be separate from the purchasing and inventory functions. 
 
30. Are shipping documents pre-numbered and accounted for?  
Shipping documents should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
31. Are shipping orders matched with sales orders and contracts?  
Shipping orders should be matched with sales orders and contracts to prevent inventory and 
vendor schemes. 
 
32. Are shipments of goods required to have authorized sales orders  and contracts prior to shipping?  
Shipments of goods should be required to have authorized sales orders and sales contracts 
prior to shipping. 
 
33. Are shipping documents forwarded directly to the a ccounting department for recording inventory reduction 
and cost of sales? 
Shipping documents should be forwarded directly to the accounting department for 
recording inventory reduction and cost of sales. 
 
MODULE # 12 — Theft of Proprietary Information  
• Theft of proprietary information involves theft or disclosure of confidential or trade 
secret information for financial gain. 
 
1. Are there policies and procedures addressing the identification, classification, and handling of  
proprietary information? 
The company should implement policies and procedures addressing the identification, 
classification, and handling of proprietary information. 
 
2. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign nondisclosure agreements?  
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
nondisclosure agreements. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.862   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
3. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign no ncompete agreements to 
prevent them from working for competitors with in a stated period of time and location? 
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
noncompete agreements to prevent them from working for competitors within a stated 
period of time. 
 
4. Are employees provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, their responsibility 
to protect the information, and the company policies and procedures relating to proprietary information?  
Employees should be provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, 
their responsibility to protect proprietary information, and company policies and procedures 
relating to proprietary information. 
 
5. Is there an established procedure to identify what information should be  classified as sensitive and for  
how long? 
Companies should implement a procedure to identify what information should be classified 
as sensitive and for how long. 
 
6. Are sensitive documents properly cl assified and marked as confidential? 
Sensitive documents should be properly classified and marked as confidential. 
 
7. Is sensitive information properly secured when not being used? 
Sensitive information should be properly secured when not being used. 
 
8. Is access to sensitive information ph ysically controlled and accounted for?  
Access to sensitive information should be physically controlled and accounted for. 
 
9. Is sensitive information promptly destroyed when it is no longer needed? 
Organizations should promptly destroy sensitive information when it is no longer needed. 
 
10. Are compromises to the security of proprietary information promptly investigated to determine the source? 
Companies should promptly investigate any compromises to the security of proprietary 
information to determine the source. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.863 
11. Are employees required to use screensaver and/ or server passwords to protect unattended  
computer systems? 
Employees should be required to use screensaver and/or server passwords to protect 
unattended computer systems. 
 
12. Are confidential documents shredded when discarded? 
Confidential documents should be shredded when discarded. 
 
MODULE # 13 — Corruption  
• Bribery schemes involve the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of a thing of value to 
influence a business decision. 
• Kickback schemes occur when vendors make undisclosed payments to employees of 
purchasing companies in order to enlist the employees in overbilling schemes. 
• Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a vendor in winning a 
contract through the competitive bidding process. 
• Economic extortion schemes occur when an employee demands payment from a vendor 
for decisions made in the vendor’s favor. Ref usal to pay the extorter results in harm to 
the vendor. 
• Illegal gratuities schemes involve giving or receiving something of value to reward a 
business decision. 
 
1. Is there a company policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and services offered by a supplier or 
customer?  
Organizations should implement a policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and 
services offered by a supplier or customer. 
 
2. Is there an established bidding policy? 
Organizations should establish a bidding policy. 
 
3. Are purchases reviewed to detect out of line costs?  
Organizations should review purchases for costs that are out of line. 
 
4. Are purchases reviewed to identify favored vendors?  
Purchases should be reviewed to identify favored vendors. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.864   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
5. Are purchases reviewed to identify excessive amounts? 
Purchases should be reviewed and any excessive amounts should be investigated. 
 
6. Are pre-bid solicitation documents reviewed for any restrictions on competition?  
Pre-bid solicitation documents should be reviewed for any restrictions on competition. 
 
7. Are bid solicitation packages numbered and controlled? 
Bid solicitation packages should be numbered and controlled. 
 
8. Is communication between bidders and purchasing employees restricted? 
Companies should restrict and monitor communication between bidders and  
purchasing employees. 
 
9. Are the bids received kept confidential? 
All bids received should be kept confidential. 
 
10. Are bidders’ qualifications verified? 
Companies should verify bidders’ qualifications. 
 
11. Are contracts awarded based on predetermined criteria? 
Companies should establish predetermined criteria upon which to award contracts. 
 
12. Are purchasing account assignments rotated? 
Periodic rotation of purchasing account assignments can be an effective corruption control. 
 
13. Are vendors surveyed periodically regarding company purchasing practices?  
Organizations should periodically survey vendors regarding company purchasing practices. 
 
MODULE # 14 — Conflicts of Interest  
• Purchase schemes involve the overbilling of a company for goods or services by a 
vendor in which an employee has an undisclosed ownership or financial interest. 
• Sales schemes involve the underselling of company goods by an employee to a company 
in which the employee maintains a hidden interest. 
  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.865 
1. Are there periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee information, such as addresses and 
telephone numbers? 
Organizations should conduct periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee 
information, such as addresses and telephone numbers. 
 
2. Are vendors who employ former company employees under in creased scrutiny? 
Vendors who employ former company employees should be under increased scrutiny for 
potential conflicts of interest. 
 
3. Does the organization have a reporting procedure for personnel to report their concerns about vendors 
receiving favored treatment? 
Organizations should provide personnel with a confidential system for reporting concerns 
about vendors receiving favored treatment. 
 
4. Are employees required to complete an annual disclo sure document that includes business ownership, 
income, and investment information? 
Employees should be required to provide annual disclosures that list business ownership, 
income, and investment information. 
 
5. Does the organization require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits?  
Organizations should require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits. 
 
6. Are vendor audits conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, and  
receiving departments? 
Vendor audits should be conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, 
and receiving departments. 
 
MODULE # 15 — Fraudulent Financial Reports  
• Fictitious revenue schemes involve recording fictitious revenue from the sale of goods  
or services. 
• Improper timing schemes involve recording revenues or expenses in improper 
accounting periods. 
• Understating liabilities schemes involve concealing or understating liabilities and 
expenses, capitalizing expenses, or expensing capital expenses. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.866   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Improper disclosure schemes involve the improper disclosure of material information, 
such as contingent liabilities, significant events, management fraud, related-party 
transactions, or accounting changes. 
• Improper asset valuation schemes involve the improper valuation of inventory, accounts 
receivable, fixed assets, intangibles, or other assets. 
 
1. Are the organization’s accounting records in proper form? 
Organizations should maintain accounting records in proper form. 
 
2. Does the organization employ an adequate number of accounting employees? 
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
3. Does the organization have an effective internal audit staff? 
An effective internal audit staff can focus on high-risk areas for fraud and can identify new 
vulnerabilities, measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud 
prevention is a high priority for the company. 
 
4. Are proper internal controls established and maintained? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
5. Does the organization embrace the concept of internal controls?  
Embracing the concept of internal controls requires that senior managers and employees 
understand why internal controls are important and what adopting such measures means  
to them. 
 
6. Are senior managers visible in their support of internal controls?  
Senior managers should be visible in their support of internal controls. 
 
7. Are the organization’s financial goals and objectives realistic? 
Unrealistic financial goals and objectives can result in managers and employees committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
8. Does the organization consistently achieve its financial goals and objectives? 
Any failure to meet financial goals and objectives should be researched. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.867 
9. Is the organization’s reported financial performance stable or increasing? 
Management should investigate any unstable or decreasing financial performance. 
 
10. Does the company have stable relationships with its banks?  
The company should strive to have stable relationships with its banks. 
 
11. Are there unrealistic changes or increases in financial statement account balances?  
Management should determine the reasons for any unrealistic changes or increases in 
financial statement account balances. 
 
12. Are the account balances realistic given the nature, age, and size of the company?  
Management should investigate any unrealistic account balances. 
 
13. Do actual physical assets exist in the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements?  
An inventory of physical assets should be conducted to verify that the physical assets exist in 
the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements. 
 
14. Have there been significant changes in the nature of the or ganization’s revenues or expenses?  
The organization should determine the reasons for any significant changes in the nature of 
its revenues or expenses. 
 
15. Do one or a few large transactions account for a si gnificant portion of any a ccount balance or amount?  
Situations in which one or a few large transactions account for a significant portion of any 
account balance or amount should be researched. 
 
16. Are there significant transactions that occur near the end of a period that positively impact results of 
operations, especially transactions that are unusual or highly complex? 
Any significant transactions that occur near the end of a period and positively impact results 
of operations should be scrutinized for legitimacy, especially if the transactions are unusual 
or highly complex. 
 
17. Are financial results fairly consistent across periods? 
The company should be able to explain any variances in financial results across periods. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.868   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Is there an inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth?  
Any inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth 
should be investigated. 
 
19. Is there significant pressure to obtain additional capital necessary to stay competitive? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
20. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve unusually 
subjective judgments or uncertainties?  
Significant estimates, especially those that involve unusually subjective judgments or 
uncertainties, should be reviewed for reasonableness. 
 
21. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that are subject to 
potential significant change in the near  term in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the 
organization?  
Significant estimates that are subject to potential significant change in the near term  
in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the organization should  
be scrutinized. 
 
22. Is the company experiencing unusual ly rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that 
of other companies in the same industry? 
Unusually rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that of other 
companies in the same industry, is a red flag of fraud and should be investigated. 
 
23. Is the organization highly vulner able to changes in interest rates?  
The organization should increase review of its financial reporting during periods of  
high vulnerability. 
 
24. Are there unrealistically aggressive sa les or profitability incentive programs?  
Unrealistically aggressive sales or profitability incentive programs can place undue pressure 
on employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
25. Is there a threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover?  
A threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover places a company at 
increased risk for fraudulent activity to occur. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.869 
26. Is there a high possibility of ad verse consequences on significant pend ing transactions, such as business 
combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported? 
A high possibility of adverse consequences on significant pending transactions, such as 
business combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported can place 
extreme pressure on management to manipulate results. 
 
27. Is there a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally guaranteed significant 
debts of the entity?  
The existence of a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally 
guaranteed significant debts of the entity can result in management committing fraudulent 
acts in order to protect itself from financial harm. 
 
28. Does the firm continuously operate on a crisis basis or without a careful budget ing and planning process? 
A careful budgeting and planning process can help a firm to monitor progress toward its 
goals, control spending, and predict cash flow and profit. 
 
29. Does the organization have difficulty collecting receivables or have other cash flow problems? 
Management should determine the reasons for any collection or cash flow problems. 
 
30. Is the organization dependent on one or two key products or services, especially products or services that 
can become quickly obsolete? 
Dependence on one or two key products can place tremendous pressure on a company, 
exposing it to increased risk of fraud. 
 
31. Do the footnotes contain information about complex issues? 
Any complex issues should be explained in the footnotes. 
 
32. Are  there adequate disclosures in the financials and footnotes?  
Generally accepted accounting principles concerning disclosures require that financial 
statements (1) include all relevant and material information in the financials or footnotes and 
(2) not be misleading. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.901 



:


the fraud risk assess tool
introduct
the acf fraud risk assess tool can be us by fraud examin to identifi their
client or employ vulner to fraud
the fraud risk assess tool consist of 15 modul each contain a seri of
question design to help organ zoom in on area of risk the fraud profession
and the client or employ should begin the risk assess process by work togeth to
answer the question in each modul it is import that the client or employ select
peopl within the organ who have extens knowledg of compani oper such
as manag and intern auditor to work with the fraud profession upon complet of
all of the question the fraud profession should review the result of the assess with
the client or employ in order to
identifi the potenti inher fraud risk
assess the likelihood and signific of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or
nonexist control
respond to residu fraud risk
the fraud risk assess tool mai reveal certain residu fraud risk that have not been
adequ mitig due to lack of or noncompli with appropri prevent and
detect control the fraud profession should work with the client to develop mitig
strategi for ani residu risk with an unaccept high likelihood or signific of
occurr respons should be evalu in term of their cost versu benefit and in
light of the organ level of risk toler
be awar howev that thi assess onli provid a snapshot of a particular point in
time the dynam natur of organ requir routin monitor and updat of their
financi risk assess process in order for them to remain effect
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4829
modul 1 employe assess
the employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a fraudul
event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 ar employe provid formal written job descript
in addit to clarifi what employe ar respons for job descript signifi what
employe ar not respons for employe who perform duti outsid of their job
descript repres a signific red flag
2 ar employe provid with an organiz chart that show line of respons
organiz chart provid employe with a snapshot of an organ divis of
work level of manag and report relationship
3 doe the compani have written account polici and procedur
account polici and procedur includ those relat to fraud should be document
implement and commun to employe
4 is there a formal polici cover approv author for financi transact such as purchas or travel
in order to safeguard asset and financi report compani should develop and
implement polici for determin how financi transact ar initi author
record and review
5 doe the compani have an ethic statement
the compani should implement a formal ethic statement that 1 defin conduct that is
uneth 2 state that uneth act will be punish and 3 provid inform on
report uneth conduct
6 doe senior manag exhibit and encourag ethic behavior
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4830 2011 fraud examin manual
7 doe the compani have written fraud polici and procedur
the compani should document and implement fraud polici and procedur that describ
1 fraudul conduct 2 punish for engag in fraudul conduct and 3 how to
report fraudul conduct
8 is a senior member of manag respons for complianc with fraud polici
the respons for complianc with fraud and ethic polici should be assign to a
senior member of manag
9 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
10 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to report suspect violat of the ethic and anti
fraud program
organ should provid employe vendor and custom with a confidenti system
for report suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud polici
11 ar fraud incid promptli and thoroughli investig
promptli and thoroughli investig all report incid of fraud can minim loss
12 doe the compani maintain a record of fraud incid
a formal record of all report incid of fraud includ document of investig
activ and final disposit of each incid should be maintain
13 doe the compani conduct preemploy background check
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
14 doe the compani have a loss prevent function
respons personnel should be train to perform loss prevent function
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4831
15 doe the compani have an intern audit function
intern audit that focu on highrisk area for fraud can identifi new vulner
measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud prevent is a high
prioriti for the compani
16 ar the duti relat to author custodi of asset and record or report of transact
segreg
the compani should segreg the duti relat to author custodi of asset and
record or report of transact
17 is complianc with intern control audit period
period audit of complianc with intern control send the messag to employe that the
compani is proactiv in it antifraud effort
18 do employe feel thei ar tr eat and compens fairli
manag should establish appropri line of commun with employe such as
survei exit interview and opendoor polici to assess their attitud toward the
organ
19 do ani employe have larg person debt or credit problem
employe with larg person debt or credit problem ar a red flag of potenti fraud and
should be monitor by manag
20 do ani employe appear to be spend far more than thei ar earn
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car and extravag vacat
21 do ani employe gambl excess
employe who gambl excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani and should
be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made avail to help
employe with gambl addict
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4832 2011 fraud examin manual
22 do ani employe us alcohol or drug excess
employe who us alcohol or drug excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani
and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made
avail to help employe with alcohol or drug addict
23 do ani employe resent their superior
employe who resent their superior should be monitor by manag as thei pose a
potenti fraud risk to the compani
24 do ani employe have a close associ with vendor or competitor
employe with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
25 do ani employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest outsid interest that conflict with the organ interest should
be prohibit
26 is the compani experienc high employe turnov
high employe turnov especi in area particularli vulner to fraud is a warn sign
of fraud that should be investig
27 ar employe requir to take annual vacat
requir employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an ongo
fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run such a
scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
28 is the compani domin by a small group of individu
if control is center in the hand of a few kei employe those individu should be under
heighten secur for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
29 doe the compani have unrealist product measur and expect
unrealist product measur and expect can place undu pressur on
employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4833
30 doe manag fail to give employe positi ve feedback and recognit for job perform
provid posit feedback and recognit to employe help to reduc the likelihood of
intern fraud and theft through boost moral employe with posit feel about an
organ ar less like to commit fraud against the organ
31 ar employe afraid to deliv bad new to supervisor or manag
manag should promot a cultur in which employe arent afraid to deliv bad new
after all the sooner manag receiv the bad new the sooner it can respond
32 is there a lack of commun between employe and manag
manag can improv commun with em ploye by creat an atmospher that
encourag open commun employe should feel safe in share ani thought
comment complaint or suggest
33 is there a lack of clear organiz respons in the compani
a lack of clear organiz respons can lead to confus and frustrat for
employe organiz chart and job descript can be us to clarifi organiz
respons
34 doe manag not seem to care about or reward appropri employe behavior
manag that doe not seem to care a bout or reward appropri employe behavior
can contribut to low employe moral and increas risk of fraud against the compani
by employe
modul 2 managementkei employe assess
the managementkei employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl
of a fraudul event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 is the board of director compos of mainli offic of the compani or relat individu
the board of director should includ independ board member that ar not associ
with or emploi by the compani in theori independ director ar not subject to the
same pressur as manag and therefor ar more like to act in the best interest of
sharehold
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4834 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is there an independ audit committe
independ audit committe member with financi and account expertis can be
instrument in prevent and detect financi fraud
3 ha there been high turnov of manag and member of the board of director
manag should investig the reason for high turnov and implement measur to
reduc it
4 have an unusu high number of kei employe left the compani recent
manag should investig the reason for their departur and implement measur to
reduc turnov
5 is the compani involv in ani litig
manag should determin the reason for the litig monitor the file and take
correct action where necessari
6 doe the compani have offshor activ or bank account
manag should determin the reason for the offshor activ and account ascertain
complianc with us law and monitor activ close
7 do ani of the senior manag have off shore bank account or busi interest
the organ should requir senior manag to file annual financi disclosur report
and explain the purpos of ani offshor bank account or busi interest
8 ar ani kei employe experienc financi pressur es such as debt gambl medic bill or divorc
kei employe who ar experienc financi pressur repres a potenti fraud risk to
the compani and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can
be made avail to help employe with alcohol drug and other problem
9 do ani kei employe appear to be live beyond their mean
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car extravag vacat or expens cloth
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4835
10 do ani kei employe have civil judgment or bankruptci on record
kei employe who have civil judgment or bankruptci on record repres a potenti
fraud risk to the compani and should be monitor by manag
11 do ani kei employe have a crimin convict
kei employe with known crimin convict should be subject to increas review by
manag for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
12 do on or two kei employe appear to domin the compani
if control is center in the hand of on or two kei employe then those individu
should be under heighten scrutini for complianc with intern control and other polici
and procedur
13 do ani kei employe have friend or rel report directli to them
organ should prohibit kei employe from have friend or rel report directli
to them
14 do ani of the kei employe appear to have a close associ with a vendor
kei employe who have a close associ with a vendor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
15 do ani kei employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
kei employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest interest that conflict with the organ interest should be
prohibit
16 do ani kei employe own a portion of ani compani that doe busi with thi compani
organ should requir kei employe to disclos ani potenti conflict of interest
and should close monitor ani such conflict of interest
17 ha ani kei employe fail to take vacat
requir kei employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an
ongo fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run
such a scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4836 2011 fraud examin manual
18 do ani kei employe have a signific amount of their net worth invest in the compani
manag should subject kei employe with a signific amount of their net worth
invest in the compani to increas review for complianc with intern control especi
those control relat to financi report
19 doe the compani have unusu high debt
manag should determin the reason for debt level and monitor intern control for
financi report
20 is kei employe compens prim arili base on comp ani perform
organ should monitor employe whose compens is base primarili on
compani perform for complianc with intern control especi control relat to
financi report
21 is there an incent to us inappropri mean to minim earn for tax reason
compani should remov ani incent to us inappropri mean to manipul
financi inform
22 is there excess pressur to increas the compani stock price
excess pressur to increas the compani stock price can result in manag
manipul financi result in order to meet expect
23 ha the compani recent experienc larg oper or invest loss
larg oper or invest loss ca n place undu pressur on manag to
manipul result in order to cover up the loss
24 doe the organ have suffici work capit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
25 doe the organ have suffici credit
a lack of suffici credit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul financi
result in order to obtain credit
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4837
26 is the organ under pressu re to report favor earn
excess pressur to report favor earn can result in manag commit
fraudul act in order to meet expect
27 doe the compani depend heavili on onli a limit number of product or custom
depend on onli a limit number of product or custom place a compani at greater
risk for fraudul act to occur
28 ha the compani experienc diff iculti in collect receiv
cash flow problem which ar a warn sign of possibl fraud can aris when a compani
experi difficulti in collect receiv
29 ha the compani recent expand rapidli into new busi or product line
rapid expans into new busi or product line can place tremend financi pressur
on a compani
30 ha the compani experienc a reduct in sale volum
a reduct in sale volum can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
31 doe the compani have strong competitor that ar outperform
strong competit can place a compani at greater risk for fraudul act to occur
32 is the compani under pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
situat pressur that mai lead to fraudul act can aris when a compani is under
pressur to sell or merg with anoth compani
33 doe the compani chang auditor often
a frequent chang in auditor is a red flag of fraud
34 doe the compani delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet
the audit
delai or avoid suppli auditor with the inform necessari to complet audit is
an indic of fraudul activ
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4838 2011 fraud examin manual
35 doe the compani have problem with regulatori agenc
the compani should determin the reason for the problem with regulatori agenc and
implement measur to encourag complianc with regul
36 doe the compani have poor account record
the compani should implement proper account record
37 doe the account depart appear to be inadequ staf
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
38 doe the organ fail to disclos question or unusu account practic
question or unusu account practic should be disclos
39 doe the compani have a number of la rge yearend or unusu transact
larg yearend or unusu transact should be investig
40 doe the organ lack an adequ intern audit staff
the intern audit depart should be adequ staf
41 doe the organ lack an intern control syst em or doe it fail to enforc the exist intern
control
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
modul 3 physic control to deter employe theft and fraud
the physic control assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a
fraudul event occur within the organ base on
physic control in place to control access to account record and inform
physic control in place to protect the asset of the organ
1 doe the organ conduct preemploy back ground check to identifi previou dishonest or
uneth behavior
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4839
2 ar there polici and procedur that address dishonest or uneth behavior
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur that describ 1
uneth conduct 2 punish for engag in uneth conduct and 3 how to report
uneth conduct
3 doe manag support the ethic and antifraud polici
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
4 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
5 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to re port suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud
polici
organ should provid a system for anonym report of suspect violat of
the ethic and antifraud polici
6 doe the organ restrict access to area contain sensit document such as invoic receipt
journal ledger and check and maintain a sy stem for provid an audit trail of access
access to area contain sensit document should be restrict to those individu
who need the inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should
be maintain
7 doe the organ restrict access to comput system with sensit document such as account
softwar inventori and payrol and creat a system to provid an audit trail of access
access to comput system should be restrict to those individu who need the
inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should be maintain
8 doe the organ restrict access to area with high valu asset such as ship receiv storeroom
and cash
organ should restrict access to area with high valu asset and should maintain a log
of person access such area
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4840 2011 fraud examin manual
9 doe the organ us cctv and record equip to monitor entri exit area with sensit
or high valu asset and sale area
entri exit area with sensit or high valu asset and sale area can be monitor
us cctv and record equip
10 doe the organ conduct random unannounc audit of inventori ca sh expens purchas
bill and other account by in ternal or extern auditor
random unannounc audit help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter
destroi and misplac record and other evid of their offens
11 doe the organ us profession loss prevent or secur personnel to monitor physic control
profession loss prevent or secur personnel can be us to monitor physic control
12 doe the organ promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud
promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud can minim loss
modul 4 skim scheme
skim scheme includ
collect cash but not record the sale
collect cash keep a portion of the cash and underreport the sale amount
collect a custom payment but not cred it the amount to the custom account
collect cash and hold it in a person interestbear account befor deposit it
into the compani account
1 is there period analyt review of sale a ccount us vertic horizont and ratio analysi
period analyt review of sale account us vertic horizont and ratio analysi can
highlight discrep that point to skim
2 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl
period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl can highlight
discrep that point to skim
3 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi
period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi can highlight
discrep that point to skim
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4841
4 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us ph ysical inventori count
period review of the inventori and receiv record us physic inventori count can
highlight discrep that point to skim
5 is there period review of the inventori and re ceiv record us verifi cation of ship and
requisit document
period review of the inventori and receiv record us verif of ship and
requisit document can highlight discrep that point to skim
6 is there period review of inventori account for writeoff
inventori account should be review period for writeoff
7 is there period review of account receiv and allow for uncollect account to look for writeoff
of account receiv
account receiv and allow for uncollect account should be review
period for writeoff of account receiv
8 is there period review of cash account for irregular entri
cash account should be review period for irregular entri
9 is the compani mail open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other account employe
who make journal entri
compani mail should be open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other
account employe who make journal entri
10 do voucher for credit and sale receipt contain serial number
voucher for credit and sale receipt should contain serial number
11 is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from prepar the bank deposit
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from prepar the bank deposit
12 is the account receiv bookkeep rest rict from collect cash from custom
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from collect cash
from custom
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4842 2011 fraud examin manual
13 is the account receiv bookkeep re strict from access to the cash receipt
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from access to the cash receipt
14 is the cashier restrict from access account receiv record
the cashier should be restrict from access account receiv record
15 is the cashier restrict from access bank and custom statement
the cashier should be restrict from access bank and custom statement
16 is each of the follow respons assign to a separ employe gener ledger entri cash receipt
entri and account receiv bill
have differ employe perform these task help minim the potenti for the
conceal of theft
17 doe the employe who open incom check place restrict endors on all check receiv
the employe who open incom check should immedi stamp all incom check
with the compani restrict endors to protect against unintend parti cash
the check
18 doe the person who open the mail prepar a list of all check and cash receiv
a list of all check and cash receiv should be prepar and reconcil daili against the
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipt report
19 doe the person who open the mail deliv all check and cash to the person respons for the daili
bank deposit
the person who open the mail should deliv all check and cash to the person respons
for the daili bank deposit
20 doe an employe perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the remitt list
gener by the employe who open the mail
an employe should perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the
remitt list gener by the employe who open the mail
21 doe the compani us a lockbox servic for cash receipt
lockbox decreas the potenti for fraud and error by reduc employe handl of
each transact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4843
22 doe the compani have a safe with restrict access
a safe can be us to physic secur excess cash on hand access to the safe should be
restrict and an access log should be maintain
23 is cash deposit daili
daili bank deposit should be made so that excess cash doe not remain on the premis
24 ar there prenumb cash receipt for cash sale
prenumb cash receipt should be us for cash sale
25 ar employe who handl cash bond
employe who handl cash should be bond in order to protect against theft
26 is there a written polici and procedur for turn over delinqu account for collect
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur for turn over
delinqu account for collect
27 is the person who handl custom er complaint independ of the ca shier or account receiv function
the person who handl custom complaint should be independ of the cashier or
account receiv function
28 is physic access to the account syst em restrict to onli author person
physic access to the account system should be restrict to those who requir it to
perform their job function
modul 5 cash larceni scheme
cash larceni scheme includ
steal cash at the point of sale or regist
steal cash receipt post to sale and receiv journal
steal cash from bank deposit
1 ar cash regist tape total reconc il to the amount in the cash drawer
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount in the cash drawer ani
discrep should be investig
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4844 2011 fraud examin manual
2 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and agre
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist tape total
3 is access to regist or the cash box close monitor ar access code kept secur
access to regist or the cash box should be close monitor and access code should be
kept secur
4 ar custom complaint regard short chang or improp post handl by someon other than the
employe who receiv the cash
custom complaint regard short chang or improp post should be handl by
someon other than the employe who receiv the cash
5 ar regist worker properli supervis
regist worker should be properli supervis by onduti supervisor or cctv record
of regist activ
6 ar cctv camera and digit record us to monitor regist area
cctv camera and digit record can be us to monitor regist area
7 is each receiv transact review for legitimaci and support document
receiv transact should be review for legitimaci and support document
8 is an independ list of cash receipt prepar befor the receipt ar submit to the cashier or
account receiv bookkeep
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar submit
to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
9 doe a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv function compar entri to the cash
receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and bank deposit statement
compani should assign a person independ of the cash receipt and account receiv
function to compar entri to the cash receipt journal with the bank deposit slip and
bank deposit statement
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4845
10 ar the cash receipt cash count bank deposit deposit receipt reconcili s bank reconcili
post of deposit and cash disburs duti segreg
the primari wai to prevent cash larceni is to segreg duti
11 doe an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make the daili bank deposit
have an employe other than the cashier or account receiv bookkeep make
the daili bank deposit is an import segreg of duti that can help to prevent
cash larceni
12 is job or assign rotat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt
13 ar vacat mandatori for employe who handl cash receipt and account duti
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc by establish mandatori vacat the conceal
element is interrupt
14 ar surpris cash count conduct
surpris cash count help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter destroi and
misplac record and other evid of their offens
15 ar journal entri made to the cash account review and analyz on a regular basi
journal entri made to the cash account should be review and analyz on a
regular basi
16 doe the compani us a point of sale po system
a po system will allow the organ to gather sale inform in a comprehens
and time format
17 doe the po system track perpetu inventori
the po system should be configur to track perpetu inventori
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4846 2011 fraud examin manual
18 doe the po system track except such as void refund no sale overag and shortag
the po system should be configur to track except such as void refund no sale
overag and shortag
19 ar regist except report review on a regular basi
regist except report should be review on a regular basi by manag
20 ar all employe except for manag prohibit from make chang to the po system
all employe except for manag should be prohibit from make chang to the
po system
21 is access to the account receiv subledg and the gener ledger restrict to author employe
doe access leav an audit trail
access to the account receiv subledg and gener ledger should be restrict to
author employe an audit trail of who access the ledger includ time and date of
access should be kept
modul 6 check tamper scheme
forg maker scheme involv forg an author signatur on a compani check
forg endors scheme consist of forg the signatur endors of an
intend recipi of a compani check
alter paye scheme involv chang the paye design on the check to the
perpetr or an accomplic
author maker scheme occur when employe with signatur author write
fraudul check for their own benefit
1 ar unus check store in a secur contain with limit access
blank check which can be us for forgeri should be store in a secur area such as a
safe or vault secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel
2 ar unus check from account that have been close promptli destroi
compani should promptli destroi all unus check from account that have been close
3 ar electron payment us where possibl to limit the number of paper check issu
compani can minim the possibl of check tamper and theft by us electron
payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4847
4 ar print and sign check mail immedi after sign
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
5 ar new check purchas from reput check vendor
all new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
6 do compani check contain secur featur to ensur their integr
compani can reduc their exposur to physic check tamper by us check
contain secur featur such as highresolut microprint secur ink and
ultraviolet ink
7 ha the compani notifi it bank to not accept check over a predetermin maximum amount
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
8 ha the compani establish posit pai control with it bank by suppli the bank with a daili list of
check issu and author for payment
on method for a compani to help prevent check fraud is to establish posit pai control
by suppli it bank with a daili list of check issu and author for payment
9 is the employe who prepar the check prohibit from sign the check
check prepar should not be perform by a signatori on the account
10 ar detail comparison made between the paye on the check and the paye list in the cash
disburs journal
compani should perform detail comparison of the paye on the check and the paye
list in the cash disburs journal
11 ar employe respons for handl and code check period rotat
period rotat of personnel respons for handl and code check can be an
effect check disburs control
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4848 2011 fraud examin manual
12 ar bank reconcili complet immedi at after bank statement ar receiv
compani should complet bank reconcili immedi after bank statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present to the
bank within 30 dai of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
13 ar bank statement and account reconcili independ audit to confirm accuraci
bank statement and account reconcili should be independ audit for accuraci
14 ar cancel check independ review for alter and forgeri
cancel check should be independ review for alter and forgeri
15 ar check for a materi amount match to the support document
check for materi amount should be match to the support document
16 ar void check examin for irregular and to ensur thei havent been process
the list of void check should be verifi against physic copi of the check bank
statement should be review to ensur that void check have not been process
17 ar miss check record and stop payment issu
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
18 do question paye or paye ad dress trigger review of the correspond check and support
document
question paye or paye address should trigger a review of the correspond check
and support document
19 with the except of payrol ar check issu to employe review for irregular
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be close
scrutin for scheme such as conflict of interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens
reimburs
20 ar two signatur requir for check issuanc
requir dual signatur on check can reduc the risk of check fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4849
21 ar all compani payment made by check or other record payment devic
make payment by check or other record payment devic can reduc the risk of
disburs fraud
22 ar handwritten check prohibit
handwritten check ar especi vulner to check fraud and should be prohibit
modul 7 cash regist scheme
fals refund scheme occur when an employe 1 issu a refund for fictiti
merchandis and keep the monei or 2 overst the amount of merchandis return
and skim the excess monei
fals void scheme occur when a regist worker retain a custom receipt process a
fictiti void sale and keep the monei
1 ar refund void and discount evalu on a routin basi to identifi pattern of activ among
employe depart shi ft merchandis etc
compani should routin evalu refund void and discount to search for pattern of
activ that might signal fraud
2 is there a sign post at the regist ask the custom to request and examin a sale receipt
sign ask custom to request and examin sale receipt should be post at regist
3 ar cash disburs record on a prenumb form and reconcil daili
cash disburs should be record on prenumb form and reconcil daili
4 do the cash disburs form have an explan section or code
an explan section or code should be includ on cash disburs form
5 ar custom that ar involv in void sale and refund randomli contact to verifi the accuraci of
the transact
custom involv in void sale and refund should be randomli contact to verifi the
accuraci of the transact
6 is access to the necessari control kei for refund and void rest rict to supervisor
access to the necessari control kei for refund and void should be restrict
to supervisor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4850 2011 fraud examin manual
7 do void or refund transact have to be approv by a supervisor and document
all void or refund transact should be approv by a supervisor and document
8 is document of void and ref und transact maintain on file
document of void and refund transact should be maintain on file
9 is miss or alter regist tape thoroughli investig
compani should thoroughli investig ani miss or alter regist tape
10 ar gap in the regist tape investig
compani should investig ani gap in the regist tape
11 ar multipl void or refund for amount just under ani review limit investig
multipl void or refund for amount just under review limit should be investig
12 is an employe other than the regist worker respons for prepar regist count sheet and compar
them to regist total
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and compar them to regist total
13 ar custom complaint regard pa yment error thoroughli investig
custom complaint regard payment error should be thoroughli investig
14 doe each cashier have a separ access code to the regist
each cashier should be assign a separ access code to the regist
15 doe each cashier have a separ cash drawer
each cashier should have a separ cash drawer
16 is an over and short log kept for each person andor regist
an over and short log should be kept for each person andor regist
17 ar over and short incid thoroughli investig and monitor
over and short incid should be thoroughli investig and monitor
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4851
18 ar all no sale receipt account for and attach to a daili cashier report
all no sale receipt should be account for and attach to a daili cashier report
19 is access to the regist area restrict to author employe and supervisor
compani should restrict access to regist area to author employe and supervisor
20 ar all cashier period integr shop
compani should period conduct integr shop on all cashier
modul 8 purchas and bill scheme
shell compani scheme occur when an employe submit invoic for payment from a
fictiti compani control by the employe
payandreturn scheme occur when an employe arrang for overpay of a vendor
invoic and pocket the overpay amount when it is return to the compani
person purchas scheme occur when an employe submit an invoic for person
purchas to the compani for payment or when an employe us a compani credit
card for person purchas
1 doe the organ have a purchas depart
the organ should have a purchas depart that is separ from the
payment function
2 is the purchas depart independ of the account receiv and ship depart
the purchas depart should be independ of the account receiv and
ship depart
3 do purchas requisit requir manag approv
manag should approv all purchas requisit
4 do purchas order specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
purchas order should specifi a descript of item quantiti price and date
5 ar purchas order form prenumb and account for
purchas order form should be prenumb and account for
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4852 2011 fraud examin manual
6 doe the compani maintain a master vendor file
the compani should maintain a master vendor file
7 ar competit bid requir for all purchas
compani should requir competit bid for all purchas
8 doe the receiv depart prepar receiv report for all item receiv
the receiv depart should prepar receiv report for all item receiv
9 doe the receiv depart main tain a log of all item receiv
the receiv depart should maintain a log of all item receiv
10 ar copi of receiv report furnish to the account and purchas depart
copi of receiv report should be furnish to the account and
purchas depart
11 ar purchas and receiv function separ from invoic process account payabl and gener
ledger function
purchas and receiv function should be segreg from invoic process account
payabl and gener ledger function
12 ar vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order match befor the relat liabil is record
compani should match vendor invoic receiv report and purchas order befor
record the relat liabil
13 ar purchas order record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be process through
cash disburs
purchas order should be record in a purchas regist or voucher regist befor be
process through cash disburs
14 ar procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas for direct deliveri to the custom is
promptli bill to the custom and record as both a receiv and a payabl
compani should implement procedur adequ to ensur that merchandis purchas
for direct deliveri to the custom is promptli bill to the custom and record as both a
receiv and a payabl
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4853
15 ar record of good return to ve ndor match to vendor credit memo
record of good return to vendor should be match to vendor credit memo
16 is the account payabl ledger or voucher regist re concil monthli to the gener ledger control account
the account payabl ledger or voucher regist should be reconcil monthli to the gener
ledger control account
17 do writeoff of account payabl debit bala nce requir approv of a design manag
writeoff of account payabl debit balanc should requir approv of a
design manag
18 is the master vendor file period review for unusu vendor and address
the master vendor file should be review period for unusu vendor and address
19 ar vendor purchas analyz for abnorm level
vendor purchas should be analyz for abnorm level
20 ar control method in place to check for duplic invoic and purchas order number
compani should implement control method to check for duplic invoic and purchas
order number
21 ar credit card statement re view monthli for irregular
credit card statement should be review monthli for irregular
22 ar vendor with post offic box address verifi
all vendor with post offic box address should be verifi
23 ar voucher payment review regularli for proper document
voucher payment should be review regularli for proper document
24 is access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger restrict doe access creat an
audit trail
access to the account payabl subledg and the gener ledger should be restrict and an
audit trail should be creat
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4854 2011 fraud examin manual
modul 9 payrol scheme
ghost employe scheme occur when a person not emploi by the compani is on
the payrol
overpay scheme occur when a compani pai an employe base on falsifi
hour or rate
commiss scheme occur when the amount of sale made or the rate of commiss is
fraudul inflat
1 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss social secur number
organ should check the employe payrol list period for duplic or miss
social secur number that mai indic a ghost employe or overlap payment to
current employe
2 ar personnel record maintain independ entli of payrol and timekeep function
personnel record should be maintain independ of payrol and timekeep function
3 ar refer check on all new hire
organ should perform refer check on all new hire
4 ar sick leav vacat and holidai re view for complianc with compani polici
sick leav vacat and holidai should be review for complianc with compani polici
5 ar appropri form complet and sign by the employe to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
employe should complet and sign appropri form to author payrol deduct and
withhold exempt
6 is payrol period compar with personnel record for termin
payrol should period be compar with personnel record for termin to ensur
that termin employe have been remov from the payrol
7 ar payrol check prenumb and issu in sequenti order
payrol check should be prenumb and issu in sequenti order
8 is the payrol bank account reconcil by an employe who is not involv in prepar payrol check doe
not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4855
the payrol bank account should be reconcil by an employe who is not involv in
prepar payrol check doe not sign the check and doe not handl payrol distribut
9 ar payrol regist reconcil to gener ledger control account
payrol regist should be reconcil to gener ledger control account
10 ar cancel payrol check examin for alter and endors
cancel payrol check should be examin for alter and endors
11 is access restrict to payrol check stock and signatur stamp
access to payrol check stock and signatur stamp should be restrict
12 ar payrol withhold for tax insur etc examin to determin if ani employe ar not have
these item deduct from their paycheck
payrol check that do not have withhold for tax insur etc should
be investig
13 is the employe payrol list review period for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
the employe payrol list should be review for duplic or miss home address and
telephon number
14 is the account inform for automat depo site payrol check review period for
duplic entri
account inform for automat deposit payrol check should be review
period for duplic entri
15 is an employe separ from the payrol depart assign to distribut payrol check
an employe separ from the payrol depart should be assign to distribut
payrol check
16 ar new employe requir to furnish proof of immigr statu
compani must requir new employe to furnish proof of immigr statu
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4856 2011 fraud examin manual
17 doe ani chang to an employe salari requir more than on level of manag approv
chang to an employe salari should requir more than on level of
manag approv
18 doe overtim have to be author by a supervisor
overtim should be author by a supervisor
19 do supervisor verifi and sign timecard for each pai period
supervisor should verifi and sign time timecard for each pai period
20 ar commiss expens compar to sale figur to verifi amount
compar commiss expens to sale figur to verifi amount is an import control
procedur that can help to detect payrol fraud
21 doe someon separ from the sale depart calcul sale commiss
someon separ from the sale depart should calcul sale commiss
modul 10 expens scheme
mischaracter expens scheme occur when an employe request reimburs for
a person expens claim the expens to be busi relat
overst expens scheme occur when an employe overst the cost of actual
expens and seek reimburs
fictiti expens scheme occur when an employe invent a purchas and seek
reimburs for it
multipl reimburs scheme occur when an employe submit a singl expens for
reimburs multipl time
1 ar the expens account review and analyz period us histor comparison or comparison
with budget amount
compani should period review and analyz expens account us histor
comparison or comparison with budget amount
2 do employe expens reimburs claim receiv a detail review befor payment is made
employe expens reimburs claim should receiv a detail review befor payment
is made
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4857
3 ar employe requir to submit detail expens report
employe should be requir to submit detail expens report contain receipt
explan amount etc
4 is a limit place on expens such as hotel meal and entertain
compani should place a spend limit on expens such as hotel meal
and entertain
5 ar receipt requir for all expens to be reimburs
compani should requir receipt for all expens to be reimburs
6 ar supervisor requir to review and approv all expens reimburs request
all expens reimburs request should be review and approv by supervisor
7 is there a random authent of expens receipt and expens claim
a polici requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the
appropri detail can help deter employe from submit person expens for
reimburs
modul 11 theft of inventori and equip
fake sale scheme occur when an accomplic of an employe bui merchandis but
the employe doe not ring up the sale and the accomplic take the merchandis
without make ani payment
purchas scheme occur when an employe with purchas author us that
author to purchas and misappropri merchandis
receiv scheme occur when an employe misappropri asset purchas by the
compani as thei ar receiv at the compani
fals shipment scheme occur when an employe creat fals sale document and fals
ship document to make it appear that miss inventori wa not actual stolen but
rather sold
misus of compani asset occur when an employe borrow compani asset for
person us without author
larceni scheme occur when an employe take inventori from the compani premis
without attempt to conceal the theft in the account record
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4858 2011 fraud examin manual
1 ha a recent inventori of compani equip list ing serial number and descript been complet
compani should inventori compani equip and maintain a list of the equip serial
number and descript
2 doe the compani assign an individu from outsid of the depart to conduct the
depart inventori
an employe who doesnt work in the depart should be assign to conduct the
depart inventori
3 ar unexplain entri to the inventori record examin for sourc document
unexplain entri to the inventori record should be examin for sourc document
4 is the compani experienc sizeabl invent ori increas without compar sale increas
sizeabl inventori increas without compar sale increas mai indic an inventori
overstat fraud scheme and should be investig
5 ar analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori conduct
period to look for unexplain differ
analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori
should be conduct period ani discrep should be investig
6 is there an unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos
ani unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos should
be investig
7 doe the organ have writt n inventori instruct and order
organ should document and impl ement inventori instruct and order
8 doe someon independ of the purchas receiv ing and wareh function physic count
the inventori
physic inventori count should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas
receiv and wareh function
9 ar prenumb inventori tag us
prenumb inventori tag should be us
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4859
10 ar the inventori tag control and account for
inventori tag should be control and account for
11 do the inventori procedur prevent doubl count
organ should implement inventori procedur that prevent doubl count
12 ar inventori count subject to independ recount
inventori count should be subject to independ recount
13 is the inventori reason identifi for prop er classif in the account system such as
descript condit or stage of complet
the inventori should be reason identifi for proper classif in the account
system such as descript condit or stage of complet
14 ar differ between physic count and invent ori record investig be fore inventori record
ar adjust
differ between physic count and inventori record should be investig befor
inventori record ar adjust
15 is scrap inventori and is scrap dispos account for
scrap should be inventori and scrap dispos should be account for
16 ar the follow duti segreg requisit of inventori receiv of in ventori disburs of
inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from the sale of scrap inventori
the follow duti should be segreg requisit of inventori receiv of inventori
disburs of inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from
the sale of scrap inventori
17 is a receiv report prepar for all purchas good
a receiv report should be prepar for all purchas good
18 ar copi of receiv report sent directli to the purchas and ac count depart
copi of receiv report should be sent directli to the purchas and
account depart
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4860 2011 fraud examin manual
19 is the receiv depart provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item to be receiv
the receiv depart should be provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item
to be receiv
20 ar partial shipment annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
partial shipment should be annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
21 ar overag shortag and damag report complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
overag shortag and damag report should be complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
22 ar quantiti of materi receiv count and compar to purchas order
quantiti of materi receiv should be count and compar to purchas order
23 is there a written polici allow manag to inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on
compani properti
compani should document and implement a written polici allow manag to
inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on compani properti
24 is there an equip remov au thoriz polici requir written manag approv to remov ani
compani equip from the compani premis
compani should document and implement an equip remov author polici
requir written manag approv to remov ani compani equip from the
compani premis
25 is there a polici requir the in spection of packag box and other contain befor thei leav the
compani premis
compani should document and implement a polici requir the inspect of packag
box and other contain befor thei leav the compani premis
26 is the remov of trash and trash receptacl period monitor
compani should period monitor the remov of trash and trash receptacl
27 ar the ship and receiv area adequ supervis to prevent theft
ship and receiv area should be adequ supervis to prevent theft
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4861
28 ar high valu item store in secur or continu monitor area
high valu item should be store in secur or continu monitor area
29 is the ship function separ from the purchas and inventori function
the ship function should be separ from the purchas and inventori function
30 ar ship document prenumb and account for
ship document should be prenumb and account for
31 ar ship order match with sale order and contract
ship order should be match with sale order and contract to prevent inventori and
vendor scheme
32 ar shipment of good requir to have author sale order and contract prior to ship
shipment of good should be requir to have author sale order and sale contract
prior to ship
33 ar ship document forward directli to the a ccount depart for record inventori reduct
and cost of sale
ship document should be forward directli to the account depart for
record inventori reduct and cost of sale
modul 12 theft of proprietari inform
theft of proprietari inform involv theft or disclosur of confidenti or trade
secret inform for financi gain
1 ar there polici and procedur address the identif classif and handl of
proprietari inform
the compani should implement polici and procedur address the identif
classif and handl of proprietari inform
2 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign nondisclosur agreement
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
nondisclosur agreement
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4862 2011 fraud examin manual
3 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign no ncompet agreement to
prevent them from work for competitor with in a state period of time and locat
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
noncompet agreement to prevent them from work for competitor within a state
period of time
4 ar employe provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform their respons
to protect the inform and the compani polici and procedur relat to proprietari inform
employe should be provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform
their respons to protect proprietari inform and compani polici and procedur
relat to proprietari inform
5 is there an establish procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi as sensit and for
how long
compani should implement a procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi
as sensit and for how long
6 ar sensit document properli cl assifi and mark as confidenti
sensit document should be properli classifi and mark as confidenti
7 is sensit inform properli secur when not be us
sensit inform should be properli secur when not be us
8 is access to sensit inform ph ysical control and account for
access to sensit inform should be physic control and account for
9 is sensit inform promptli destroi when it is no longer need
organ should promptli destroi sensit inform when it is no longer need
10 ar compromis to the secur of proprietari inform promptli investig to determin the sourc
compani should promptli investig ani compromis to the secur of proprietari
inform to determin the sourc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4863
11 ar employe requir to us screensav and or server password to protect unattend
comput system
employe should be requir to us screensav andor server password to protect
unattend comput system
12 ar confidenti document shred when discard
confidenti document should be shred when discard
modul 13 corrupt
briberi scheme involv the offer give receiv or solicit of a thing of valu to
influenc a busi decis
kickback scheme occur when vendor make undisclos payment to employe of
purchas compani in order to enlist the employe in overbil scheme
bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a vendor in win a
contract through the competit bid process
econom extort scheme occur when an employe demand payment from a vendor
for decis made in the vendor favor ref usal to pai the extort result in harm to
the vendor
illeg gratuiti scheme involv give or receiv someth of valu to reward a
busi decis
1 is there a compani polici that address the receipt of gift discount and servic offer by a supplier or
custom
organ should implement a polici that address the receipt of gift discount and
servic offer by a supplier or custom
2 is there an establish bid polici
organ should establish a bid polici
3 ar purchas review to detect out of line cost
organ should review purchas for cost that ar out of line
4 ar purchas review to identifi favor vendor
purchas should be review to identifi favor vendor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4864 2011 fraud examin manual
5 ar purchas review to identifi excess amount
purchas should be review and ani excess amount should be investig
6 ar prebid solicit document review for ani restrict on competit
prebid solicit document should be review for ani restrict on competit
7 ar bid solicit packag number and control
bid solicit packag should be number and control
8 is commun between bidder and purchas employe restrict
compani should restrict and monitor commun between bidder and
purchas employe
9 ar the bid receiv kept confidenti
all bid receiv should be kept confidenti
10 ar bidder qualif verifi
compani should verifi bidder qualif
11 ar contract award base on predetermin criteria
compani should establish predetermin criteria upon which to award contract
12 ar purchas account assign rotat
period rotat of purchas account assign can be an effect corrupt control
13 ar vendor survei period regard compani purchas practic
organ should period survei vendor regard compani purchas practic
modul 14 conflict of interest
purchas scheme involv the overbil of a compani for good or servic by a
vendor in which an employe ha an undisclos ownership or financi interest
sale scheme involv the undersel of compani good by an employe to a compani
in which the employe maintain a hidden interest
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4865
1 ar there period comparison of vendor inform with employe inform such as address and
telephon number
organ should conduct period comparison of vendor inform with employe
inform such as address and telephon number
2 ar vendor who emploi former compani employe under in creas scrutini
vendor who emploi former compani employe should be under increas scrutini for
potenti conflict of interest
3 doe the organ have a report procedur for personnel to report their concern about vendor
receiv favor treatment
organ should provid personnel with a confidenti system for report concern
about vendor receiv favor treatment
4 ar employe requir to complet an annual disclo sure document that includ busi ownership
incom and invest inform
employe should be requir to provid annual disclosur that list busi ownership
incom and invest inform
5 doe the organ requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
organ should requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
6 ar vendor audit conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill and
receiv depart
vendor audit should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill
and receiv depart
modul 15 fraudul financi report
fictiti revenu scheme involv record fictiti revenu from the sale of good
or servic
improp time scheme involv record revenu or expens in improp
account period
underst liabil scheme involv conceal or underst liabil and
expens capit expens or expens capit expens
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4866 2011 fraud examin manual
improp disclosur scheme involv the improp disclosur of materi inform
such as conting liabil signific event manag fraud relatedparti
transact or account chang
improp asset valuat scheme involv the improp valuat of inventori account
receiv fix asset intang or other asset
1 ar the organ account record in proper form
organ should maintain account record in proper form
2 doe the organ emploi an adequ number of account employe
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
3 doe the organ have an effect intern audit staff
an effect intern audit staff can focu on highrisk area for fraud and can identifi new
vulner measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud
prevent is a high prioriti for the compani
4 ar proper intern control establish and maintain
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
5 doe the organ embrac the concept of intern control
embrac the concept of intern control requir that senior manag and employe
understand why intern control ar import and what adopt such measur mean
to them
6 ar senior manag visibl in their support of intern control
senior manag should be visibl in their support of intern control
7 ar the organ financi goal and object realist
unrealist financi goal and object can result in manag and employe commit
fraudul act in order to meet them
8 doe the organ consist achiev it financi goal and object
ani failur to meet financi goal and object should be research
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4867
9 is the organ report financi perform stabl or increas
manag should investig ani unstabl or decreas financi perform
10 doe the compani have stabl relationship with it bank
the compani should strive to have stabl relationship with it bank
11 ar there unrealist chang or increas in financi statement account balanc
manag should determin the reason for ani unrealist chang or increas in
financi statement account balanc
12 ar the account balanc realist given the natur ag and size of the compani
manag should investig ani unrealist account balanc
13 do actual physic asset exist in the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
an inventori of physic asset should be conduct to verifi that the physic asset exist in
the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
14 have there been signific chang in the natur of the or ganiz revenu or expens
the organ should determin the reason for ani signific chang in the natur of
it revenu or expens
15 do on or a few larg transact account for a si gnific portion of ani a ccount balanc or amount
situat in which on or a few larg transact account for a signific portion of ani
account balanc or amount should be research
16 ar there signific transact that occur near the end of a period that posit impact result of
oper especi transact that ar unusu or highli complex
ani signific transact that occur near the end of a period and posit impact result
of oper should be scrutin for legitimaci especi if the transact ar unusu
or highli complex
17 ar financi result fairli consist across period
the compani should be abl to explain ani varianc in financi result across period
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4868 2011 fraud examin manual
18 is there an inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
ani inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
should be investig
19 is there signific pressur to obtain addit capit necessari to stai competit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
20 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv unusu
subject judgment or uncertainti
signific estim especi those that involv unusu subject judgment or
uncertainti should be review for reason
21 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that ar subject to
potenti signific chang in the near term in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the
organ
signific estim that ar subject to potenti signific chang in the near term
in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the organ should
be scrutin
22 is the compani experienc unusu ly rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that
of other compani in the same industri
unusu rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that of other
compani in the same industri is a red flag of fraud and should be investig
23 is the organ highli vulner abl to chang in interest rate
the organ should increas review of it financi report dure period of
high vulner
24 ar there unrealist aggress sa le or profit incent program
unrealist aggress sale or profit incent program can place undu pressur
on employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
25 is there a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov
a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov place a compani at
increas risk for fraudul activ to occur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4869
26 is there a high possibl of ad vers consequ on signific pend ing transact such as busi
combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report
a high possibl of advers consequ on signific pend transact such as
busi combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report can place
extrem pressur on manag to manipul result
27 is there a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person guarante signific
debt of the entiti
the exist of a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person
guarante signific debt of the entiti can result in manag commit fraudul
act in order to protect itself from financi harm
28 doe the firm continu oper on a crisi basi or without a care budget ing and plan process
a care budget and plan process can help a firm to monitor progress toward it
goal control spend and predict cash flow and profit
29 doe the organ have difficulti collect receiv or have other cash flow problem
manag should determin the reason for ani collect or cash flow problem
30 is the organ depend on on or two kei product or servic especi product or servic that
can becom quickli obsolet
depend on on or two kei product can place tremend pressur on a compani
expos it to increas risk of fraud
31 do the footnot contain inform about complex issu
ani complex issu should be explain in the footnot
32 ar there adequ disclosur in the financi and footnot
gener accept account principl concern disclosur requir that financi
statement 1 includ all relev and materi inform in the financi or footnot and
2 not be mislead
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4901
