2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 1 — Employee Assessment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 1 — Employee Assessment  
The employee assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a fraudulent 
event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Internal controls.  
• Internal control environment.  
• Resources available to prevent, detect, and deter fraud. 
 
1. Are employees provided formal written job descriptions? 
In addition to clarifying what employees are responsible for, job descriptions signify what 
employees are not responsible for. Employees who perform duties outside of their job 
descriptions represent a significant red flag. 
 
2. Are employees provided with an organizational chart that shows lines of responsibility? 
Organizational charts provide employees with a snapshot of an organization’s division of 
work, levels of management, and reporting relationships. 
 
3. Does the company have written accounting policies and procedures?  
Accounting policies and procedures, including those related to fraud, should be documented, 
implemented, and communicated to employees. 
 
4. Is there a formal policy covering approval authority for financial transactions, such  as purchasing or travel?  
In order to safeguard assets and financial reporting, companies should develop and 
implement policies for determining how financial transactions are initiated, authorized, 
recorded, and reviewed. 
 
5. Does the company have an ethics statement?  
The company should implement a formal ethics statement that (1) defines conduct that is 
unethical, (2) states that unethical acts will be punished, and (3) provides information on 
reporting unethical conduct. 
 
6. Does senior management exhibit and encourage ethical behavior?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
7. Does the company have written fraud policies and procedures?  
The company should document and implement fraud policies and procedures that describe 
(1) fraudulent conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in fraudulent conduct, and (3) how to 
report fraudulent conduct. 
 
8. Is a senior member of management responsible for compliance with fraud policies?  
The responsibility for compliance with fraud and ethics policies should be assigned to a 
senior member of management. 
 
9. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
10. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to report suspected violations of the ethics and anti-
 fraud programs? 
Organizations should provide employees, vendors,  and customers with a confidential system 
for reporting suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
11. Are fraud incidents promptly  and thoroughly investigated? 
Promptly and thoroughly investigating all reported incidents of fraud can minimize losses. 
 
12. Does the company maintain a record of fraud incidents? 
A formal record of all reported incidents of fraud, including documentation of investigative 
activities and final disposition of each incident, should be maintained. 
 
13. Does  the company conduct pre-employment background checks?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
14. Does the company have a loss prevention function?  
Responsible personnel should be trained to perform loss prevention functions. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.831 
15. Does the company have an internal audit function?  
Internal audits that focus on high-risk areas for fraud can identify new vulnerabilities, 
measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud prevention is a high 
priority for the company. 
 
16. Are the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and recording or reporting of transactions 
segregated? 
The company should segregate the duties related to authorization, custody of assets, and 
recording or reporting of transactions. 
 
17. Is compliance with internal controls audited periodically?  
Periodic audits of compliance with internal controls send the message to employees that the 
company is proactive in its anti-fraud efforts. 
 
18. Do employees feel they are tr eated and compensated fairly? 
Management should establish appropriate lines  of communication with employees (such as 
surveys, exit interviews, and open-door policies) to assess their attitudes toward the 
organization. 
 
19. Do any employees have large personal debts or credit problems?  
Employees with large personal debts or credit problems are a red flag of potential fraud and 
should be monitored by management. 
 
20. Do any employees appear to be spending  far more than they are earning? 
Management should be observant of signs of employees spending far more than they are 
earning. It is common for employees who steal to use the proceeds for lifestyle 
improvements, including expensive cars and extravagant vacations. 
 
21. Do any employees gamble excessively?  
Employees who gamble excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company and should 
be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made available to help 
employees with gambling addictions. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
22. Do any employees use alcohol or drugs excessively? 
Employees who use alcohol or drugs excessively pose a potential fraud risk to the company 
and should be monitored by management. Employee assistance programs can be made 
available to help employees with alcohol or drug addictions. 
 
23. Do any employees resent their superiors? 
Employees who resent their superiors should be monitored by management, as they pose a 
potential fraud risk to the company. 
 
24. Do any employees have a close association with vendors or competitors? 
Employees with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitored for 
potential conflict of interest. 
 
25. Do any employees have outside business interests that might conflict with their duties at the company? 
Employees should be required to provide annual financial disclosures that list outside 
business interests. Outside interests that conflict with the organization’s interests should  
be prohibited. 
 
26. Is the company experiencing high employee turnover? 
High employee turnover, especially in areas particularly vulnerable to fraud, is a warning sign 
of fraud that should be investigated. 
 
27. Are employees required to take annual vacations?  
Requiring employees to take annual vacations can aid an employer in detecting an ongoing 
fraud scheme because the employer is more likely to discover a perpetrator running such a 
scheme when the perpetrator is removed from the scene. 
 
28. Is the company dominated by a small group of individuals? 
If control is centered in the hands of a few key employees, those individuals should be under 
heightened security for compliance with internal controls and other policies and procedures. 
 
29. Does the company have unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations?  
Unrealistic productivity measurements and expectations can place undue pressure on 
employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.833 
30. Does management fail to give employees positi ve feedback and recognition for job performance?  
Providing positive feedback and recognition to employees helps to reduce the likelihood of 
internal fraud and theft through boosting morale. Employees with positive feelings about an 
organization are less likely to commit fraud against the organization. 
 
31. Are employees afraid to deliver bad news to supervisors or management? 
Management should promote a culture in which employees aren’t afraid to deliver bad news. 
After all, the sooner management receives the bad news, the sooner it can respond. 
 
32. Is there a lack of communication between employees and management? 
Management can improve communication with em ployees by creating an atmosphere that 
encourages open communication. Employees should feel safe in sharing any thoughts, 
comments, complaints, or suggestions. 
 
33. Is there a lack of clear organizational responsibilities in the company? 
A lack of clear organizational responsibilities can lead to confusion and frustration for 
employees. Organizational charts and job descriptions can be used to clarify organizational 
responsibilities. 
 
34. Does management not seem to care about  or reward appropriate employee behavior? 
Management that does not seem to care a bout or reward appropriate employee behavior  
can contribute to low employee morale and increased risk of fraud against the company  
by employees. 
 



:


modul 1 employe assess
the employe assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a fraudul
event occur within the organ base on
intern control
intern control environ
resourc avail to prevent detect and deter fraud
1 ar employe provid formal written job descript
in addit to clarifi what employe ar respons for job descript signifi what
employe ar not respons for employe who perform duti outsid of their job
descript repres a signific red flag
2 ar employe provid with an organiz chart that show line of respons
organiz chart provid employe with a snapshot of an organ divis of
work level of manag and report relationship
3 doe the compani have written account polici and procedur
account polici and procedur includ those relat to fraud should be document
implement and commun to employe
4 is there a formal polici cover approv author for financi transact such as purchas or travel
in order to safeguard asset and financi report compani should develop and
implement polici for determin how financi transact ar initi author
record and review
5 doe the compani have an ethic statement
the compani should implement a formal ethic statement that 1 defin conduct that is
uneth 2 state that uneth act will be punish and 3 provid inform on
report uneth conduct
6 doe senior manag exhibit and encourag ethic behavior
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4830 2011 fraud examin manual
7 doe the compani have written fraud polici and procedur
the compani should document and implement fraud polici and procedur that describ
1 fraudul conduct 2 punish for engag in fraudul conduct and 3 how to
report fraudul conduct
8 is a senior member of manag respons for complianc with fraud polici
the respons for complianc with fraud and ethic polici should be assign to a
senior member of manag
9 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
10 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to report suspect violat of the ethic and anti
fraud program
organ should provid employe vendor and custom with a confidenti system
for report suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud polici
11 ar fraud incid promptli and thoroughli investig
promptli and thoroughli investig all report incid of fraud can minim loss
12 doe the compani maintain a record of fraud incid
a formal record of all report incid of fraud includ document of investig
activ and final disposit of each incid should be maintain
13 doe the compani conduct preemploy background check
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
14 doe the compani have a loss prevent function
respons personnel should be train to perform loss prevent function
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4831
15 doe the compani have an intern audit function
intern audit that focu on highrisk area for fraud can identifi new vulner
measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud prevent is a high
prioriti for the compani
16 ar the duti relat to author custodi of asset and record or report of transact
segreg
the compani should segreg the duti relat to author custodi of asset and
record or report of transact
17 is complianc with intern control audit period
period audit of complianc with intern control send the messag to employe that the
compani is proactiv in it antifraud effort
18 do employe feel thei ar tr eat and compens fairli
manag should establish appropri line of commun with employe such as
survei exit interview and opendoor polici to assess their attitud toward the
organ
19 do ani employe have larg person debt or credit problem
employe with larg person debt or credit problem ar a red flag of potenti fraud and
should be monitor by manag
20 do ani employe appear to be spend far more than thei ar earn
manag should be observ of sign of employe spend far more than thei ar
earn it is common for employe who steal to us the proce for lifestyl
improv includ expens car and extravag vacat
21 do ani employe gambl excess
employe who gambl excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani and should
be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made avail to help
employe with gambl addict
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4832 2011 fraud examin manual
22 do ani employe us alcohol or drug excess
employe who us alcohol or drug excess pose a potenti fraud risk to the compani
and should be monitor by manag employe assist program can be made
avail to help employe with alcohol or drug addict
23 do ani employe resent their superior
employe who resent their superior should be monitor by manag as thei pose a
potenti fraud risk to the compani
24 do ani employe have a close associ with vendor or competitor
employe with a close relationship to a vendor or competitor should be monitor for
potenti conflict of interest
25 do ani employe have outsid busi interest that might conflict with their duti at the compani
employe should be requir to provid annual financi disclosur that list outsid
busi interest outsid interest that conflict with the organ interest should
be prohibit
26 is the compani experienc high employe turnov
high employe turnov especi in area particularli vulner to fraud is a warn sign
of fraud that should be investig
27 ar employe requir to take annual vacat
requir employe to take annual vacat can aid an employ in detect an ongo
fraud scheme becaus the employ is more like to discov a perpetr run such a
scheme when the perpetr is remov from the scene
28 is the compani domin by a small group of individu
if control is center in the hand of a few kei employe those individu should be under
heighten secur for complianc with intern control and other polici and procedur
29 doe the compani have unrealist product measur and expect
unrealist product measur and expect can place undu pressur on
employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4833
30 doe manag fail to give employe positi ve feedback and recognit for job perform
provid posit feedback and recognit to employe help to reduc the likelihood of
intern fraud and theft through boost moral employe with posit feel about an
organ ar less like to commit fraud against the organ
31 ar employe afraid to deliv bad new to supervisor or manag
manag should promot a cultur in which employe arent afraid to deliv bad new
after all the sooner manag receiv the bad new the sooner it can respond
32 is there a lack of commun between employe and manag
manag can improv commun with em ploye by creat an atmospher that
encourag open commun employe should feel safe in share ani thought
comment complaint or suggest
33 is there a lack of clear organiz respons in the compani
a lack of clear organiz respons can lead to confus and frustrat for
employe organiz chart and job descript can be us to clarifi organiz
respons
34 doe manag not seem to care about or reward appropri employe behavior
manag that doe not seem to care a bout or reward appropri employe behavior
can contribut to low employe moral and increas risk of fraud against the compani
by employe
