2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 4 — Skimming Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 4 — Skimming Schemes  
Skimming schemes include: 
• Collecting cash, but not recording the sale 
• Collecting cash, keeping a portion of the cash, and underreporting the sale amount 
• Collecting a customer’s payment, but not cred iting the amount to the customer’s account 
• Collecting cash and holding it in a personal interest-bearing account before depositing it 
into the company account 
 
1. Is there periodic analytical review of sales a ccounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis?  
Periodic analytical review of sales accounts using vertical, horizontal, and ratio analysis can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
2. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling?   
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using statistical sampling can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
3. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using trend analysis can highlight 
discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.841 
4. Is there periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using ph ysical inventory counts? 
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using physical inventory counts can 
highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
5. Is there periodic review of the inventory and re ceiving records using verifi cation of shipping and  
requisition documents?  
Periodic review of the inventory and receiving records using verification of shipping and 
requisition documents can highlight discrepancies that point to skimming. 
 
6. Is there periodic review of inventory accounts for write-offs?  
Inventory accounts should be reviewed periodically for write-offs. 
 
7. Is there periodic review of accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts to look for write-offs 
of accounts receivable?  
Accounts receivable and allowance for uncollectible accounts should be reviewed 
periodically for write-offs of accounts receivable. 
 
8. Is there periodic review of cash accounts for irregular entries?  
Cash accounts should be reviewed periodically for irregular entries. 
 
9. Is the company mail opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other accounting employees 
who make journal entries? 
Company mail should be opened by someone other than bookkeepers, cashiers, or other 
accounting employees who make journal entries. 
 
10. Do vouchers for credit and sales receipts contain serial numbers? 
Vouchers for credit and sales receipts should contain serial numbers. 
 
11. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from preparing the bank deposit?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from preparing the bank deposit. 
 
12. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper rest ricted from collecting cash from customers? 
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from collecting cash  
from customers. 
 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
13. Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper re stricted from access to the cash receipts?  
The accounts receivable bookkeeper should be restricted from access to the cash receipts. 
 
14. Is the cashier restricted from accessing accounts receivable records?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing accounts receivable records. 
 
15. Is the cashier restricted from accessing bank and customer statements?  
The cashier should be restricted from accessing bank and customer statements. 
 
16. Is each of the following responsibilities assigned to a separate employee: general ledger entries, cash receipt 
entries, and accounts receivable billing?  
Having different employees perform these tasks helps minimize the potential for the 
concealment of theft. 
 
17. Does the employee who opens incoming checks place restrictive endorsements on all checks received?  
The employee who opens incoming checks should immediately stamp all incoming checks 
with the company’s restrictive endorsement to protect against unintended parties cashing  
the checks. 
 
18. Does the person who opens the mail prepare a list of all checks and cash received?  
A list of all checks and cash received should be prepared and reconciled daily against the 
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipts report. 
 
19. Does the person who opens the mail deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible for the daily 
bank deposit? 
The person who opens the mail should deliver all checks and cash to the person responsible 
for the daily bank deposit. 
 
20. Does an employee perform an independent verification  of the bank deposit ticket to the remittance list 
generated by the employee who opened the mail? 
An employee should perform an independent verification of the bank deposit ticket to the 
remittance list generated by the employee who opened the mail. 
 
21. Does the company use a lockbox service for cash receipts? 
Lockboxes decrease the potential for fraud and error by reducing employee handling of 
each transaction. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.843 
22. Does the company have a safe with restricted access? 
A safe can be used to physically secure excess cash on hand. Access to the safe should be 
restricted and an access log should be maintained. 
 
23. Is cash deposited daily? 
Daily bank deposits should be made so that excess cash does not remain on the premises.  
 
24. Are there pre-numbered cash receipts for cash sales?  
Pre-numbered cash receipts should be used for cash sales. 
 
25. Are employees who handle cash bonded? 
Employees who handle cash should be bonded in order to protect against theft. 
 
26. Is there a written policy and procedure for turning over delinquent accounts for collection?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures for turning over 
delinquent accounts for collection. 
 
27. Is the person who handles custom er complaints independent of the ca shier or accounts receivable function? 
The person who handles customer complaints should be independent of the cashier or 
accounts receivable function. 
 
28. Is physical access to the accounting syst em restricted to only authorized persons? 
Physical access to the accounting system should be restricted to those who require it to 
perform their job functions. 
 



:


modul 4 skim scheme
skim scheme includ
collect cash but not record the sale
collect cash keep a portion of the cash and underreport the sale amount
collect a custom payment but not cred it the amount to the custom account
collect cash and hold it in a person interestbear account befor deposit it
into the compani account
1 is there period analyt review of sale a ccount us vertic horizont and ratio analysi
period analyt review of sale account us vertic horizont and ratio analysi can
highlight discrep that point to skim
2 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl
period review of the inventori and receiv record us statist sampl can highlight
discrep that point to skim
3 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi
period review of the inventori and receiv record us trend analysi can highlight
discrep that point to skim
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4841
4 is there period review of the inventori and receiv record us ph ysical inventori count
period review of the inventori and receiv record us physic inventori count can
highlight discrep that point to skim
5 is there period review of the inventori and re ceiv record us verifi cation of ship and
requisit document
period review of the inventori and receiv record us verif of ship and
requisit document can highlight discrep that point to skim
6 is there period review of inventori account for writeoff
inventori account should be review period for writeoff
7 is there period review of account receiv and allow for uncollect account to look for writeoff
of account receiv
account receiv and allow for uncollect account should be review
period for writeoff of account receiv
8 is there period review of cash account for irregular entri
cash account should be review period for irregular entri
9 is the compani mail open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other account employe
who make journal entri
compani mail should be open by someon other than bookkeep cashier or other
account employe who make journal entri
10 do voucher for credit and sale receipt contain serial number
voucher for credit and sale receipt should contain serial number
11 is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from prepar the bank deposit
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from prepar the bank deposit
12 is the account receiv bookkeep rest rict from collect cash from custom
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from collect cash
from custom
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4842 2011 fraud examin manual
13 is the account receiv bookkeep re strict from access to the cash receipt
the account receiv bookkeep should be restrict from access to the cash receipt
14 is the cashier restrict from access account receiv record
the cashier should be restrict from access account receiv record
15 is the cashier restrict from access bank and custom statement
the cashier should be restrict from access bank and custom statement
16 is each of the follow respons assign to a separ employe gener ledger entri cash receipt
entri and account receiv bill
have differ employe perform these task help minim the potenti for the
conceal of theft
17 doe the employe who open incom check place restrict endors on all check receiv
the employe who open incom check should immedi stamp all incom check
with the compani restrict endors to protect against unintend parti cash
the check
18 doe the person who open the mail prepar a list of all check and cash receiv
a list of all check and cash receiv should be prepar and reconcil daili against the
bank deposit receipt and the cash receipt report
19 doe the person who open the mail deliv all check and cash to the person respons for the daili
bank deposit
the person who open the mail should deliv all check and cash to the person respons
for the daili bank deposit
20 doe an employe perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the remitt list
gener by the employe who open the mail
an employe should perform an independ verif of the bank deposit ticket to the
remitt list gener by the employe who open the mail
21 doe the compani us a lockbox servic for cash receipt
lockbox decreas the potenti for fraud and error by reduc employe handl of
each transact
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4843
22 doe the compani have a safe with restrict access
a safe can be us to physic secur excess cash on hand access to the safe should be
restrict and an access log should be maintain
23 is cash deposit daili
daili bank deposit should be made so that excess cash doe not remain on the premis
24 ar there prenumb cash receipt for cash sale
prenumb cash receipt should be us for cash sale
25 ar employe who handl cash bond
employe who handl cash should be bond in order to protect against theft
26 is there a written polici and procedur for turn over delinqu account for collect
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur for turn over
delinqu account for collect
27 is the person who handl custom er complaint independ of the ca shier or account receiv function
the person who handl custom complaint should be independ of the cashier or
account receiv function
28 is physic access to the account syst em restrict to onli author person
physic access to the account system should be restrict to those who requir it to
perform their job function
