2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 10 — Expense Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 10 — Expense Schemes  
• Mischaracterized expense schemes occur when an employee requests reimbursement for 
a personal expense, claiming the expense to be business related. 
• Overstated expense schemes occur when an employee overstates the cost of actual 
expenses and seeks reimbursement. 
• Fictitious expense schemes occur when an employee invents a purchase and seeks 
reimbursement for it. 
• Multiple reimbursement schemes occur when an employee submits a single expense for 
reimbursement multiple times. 
 
1. Are the expense accounts reviewed and analyzed periodically using historical comparisons or comparisons 
with budgeted amounts? 
Companies should periodically review and analyze expense accounts using historical 
comparisons or comparisons with budgeted amounts. 
 
2. Do employee expense reimbursement claims receive a detailed review before payment is made?  
Employee expense reimbursement claims should receive a detailed review before payment  
is made. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.857 
3. Are employees required to submit detailed expense reports?  
Employees should be required to submit detailed expense reports containing receipts, 
explanations, amounts, etc. 
 
4. Is a limit placed on expenses such  as hotels, meals, and entertainment?  
Companies should place a spending limit on expenses such as hotels, meals,  
and entertainment. 
 
5. Are receipts required for all expenses to be reimbursed? 
Companies should require receipts for all expenses to be reimbursed. 
 
6. Are supervisors required to review and approve all expense reimbursement requests?  
All expense reimbursement requests should be reviewed and approved by supervisors. 
 
7. Is there a random authentication of expense receipts and expenses claimed?  
A policy requiring the periodic review of expense reports, coupled with examining the 
appropriate detail, can help deter employees from submitting personal expenses for 
reimbursement. 
 



:


modul 10 expens scheme
mischaracter expens scheme occur when an employe request reimburs for
a person expens claim the expens to be busi relat
overst expens scheme occur when an employe overst the cost of actual
expens and seek reimburs
fictiti expens scheme occur when an employe invent a purchas and seek
reimburs for it
multipl reimburs scheme occur when an employe submit a singl expens for
reimburs multipl time
1 ar the expens account review and analyz period us histor comparison or comparison
with budget amount
compani should period review and analyz expens account us histor
comparison or comparison with budget amount
2 do employe expens reimburs claim receiv a detail review befor payment is made
employe expens reimburs claim should receiv a detail review befor payment
is made
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4857
3 ar employe requir to submit detail expens report
employe should be requir to submit detail expens report contain receipt
explan amount etc
4 is a limit place on expens such as hotel meal and entertain
compani should place a spend limit on expens such as hotel meal
and entertain
5 ar receipt requir for all expens to be reimburs
compani should requir receipt for all expens to be reimburs
6 ar supervisor requir to review and approv all expens reimburs request
all expens reimburs request should be review and approv by supervisor
7 is there a random authent of expens receipt and expens claim
a polici requir the period review of expens report coupl with examin the
appropri detail can help deter employe from submit person expens for
reimburs
