2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 13 — Corruption


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 13 — Corruption  
• Bribery schemes involve the offering, giving, receiving, or soliciting of a thing of value to 
influence a business decision. 
• Kickback schemes occur when vendors make undisclosed payments to employees of 
purchasing companies in order to enlist the employees in overbilling schemes. 
• Bid-rigging schemes occur when an employee fraudulently assists a vendor in winning a 
contract through the competitive bidding process. 
• Economic extortion schemes occur when an employee demands payment from a vendor 
for decisions made in the vendor’s favor. Ref usal to pay the extorter results in harm to 
the vendor. 
• Illegal gratuities schemes involve giving or receiving something of value to reward a 
business decision. 
 
1. Is there a company policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and services offered by a supplier or 
customer?  
Organizations should implement a policy that addresses the receipt of gifts, discounts, and 
services offered by a supplier or customer. 
 
2. Is there an established bidding policy? 
Organizations should establish a bidding policy. 
 
3. Are purchases reviewed to detect out of line costs?  
Organizations should review purchases for costs that are out of line. 
 
4. Are purchases reviewed to identify favored vendors?  
Purchases should be reviewed to identify favored vendors. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.864   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
5. Are purchases reviewed to identify excessive amounts? 
Purchases should be reviewed and any excessive amounts should be investigated. 
 
6. Are pre-bid solicitation documents reviewed for any restrictions on competition?  
Pre-bid solicitation documents should be reviewed for any restrictions on competition. 
 
7. Are bid solicitation packages numbered and controlled? 
Bid solicitation packages should be numbered and controlled. 
 
8. Is communication between bidders and purchasing employees restricted? 
Companies should restrict and monitor communication between bidders and  
purchasing employees. 
 
9. Are the bids received kept confidential? 
All bids received should be kept confidential. 
 
10. Are bidders’ qualifications verified? 
Companies should verify bidders’ qualifications. 
 
11. Are contracts awarded based on predetermined criteria? 
Companies should establish predetermined criteria upon which to award contracts. 
 
12. Are purchasing account assignments rotated? 
Periodic rotation of purchasing account assignments can be an effective corruption control. 
 
13. Are vendors surveyed periodically regarding company purchasing practices?  
Organizations should periodically survey vendors regarding company purchasing practices. 
 



:


modul 13 corrupt
briberi scheme involv the offer give receiv or solicit of a thing of valu to
influenc a busi decis
kickback scheme occur when vendor make undisclos payment to employe of
purchas compani in order to enlist the employe in overbil scheme
bidrig scheme occur when an employe fraudul assist a vendor in win a
contract through the competit bid process
econom extort scheme occur when an employe demand payment from a vendor
for decis made in the vendor favor ref usal to pai the extort result in harm to
the vendor
illeg gratuiti scheme involv give or receiv someth of valu to reward a
busi decis
1 is there a compani polici that address the receipt of gift discount and servic offer by a supplier or
custom
organ should implement a polici that address the receipt of gift discount and
servic offer by a supplier or custom
2 is there an establish bid polici
organ should establish a bid polici
3 ar purchas review to detect out of line cost
organ should review purchas for cost that ar out of line
4 ar purchas review to identifi favor vendor
purchas should be review to identifi favor vendor
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4864 2011 fraud examin manual
5 ar purchas review to identifi excess amount
purchas should be review and ani excess amount should be investig
6 ar prebid solicit document review for ani restrict on competit
prebid solicit document should be review for ani restrict on competit
7 ar bid solicit packag number and control
bid solicit packag should be number and control
8 is commun between bidder and purchas employe restrict
compani should restrict and monitor commun between bidder and
purchas employe
9 ar the bid receiv kept confidenti
all bid receiv should be kept confidenti
10 ar bidder qualif verifi
compani should verifi bidder qualif
11 ar contract award base on predetermin criteria
compani should establish predetermin criteria upon which to award contract
12 ar purchas account assign rotat
period rotat of purchas account assign can be an effect corrupt control
13 ar vendor survei period regard compani purchas practic
organ should period survei vendor regard compani purchas practic
