2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS  
 
Asset misappropriations are by far the most common of all occupational frauds. There are 
three major categories of asset misappropriation schemes. Cash receipts schemes will be 
discussed in this section, fraudulent disbursements of cash will be addressed in the next 
section, and the following section will cover schemes involving the theft of inventory and 
other non-cash assets.  
 
Cash is the focal point of most accounting entries. Cash, both on deposit in banks and on 
hand as petty cash, can be misappropriated through many different schemes. These schemes 
can be either on-book or off-book, depending on where they occur.  
 
Cash receipts schemes fall into two categories, skimming  and larceny. The difference in the two 
types of fraud depends completely on when the cash is stolen. Cash larceny is the theft of 
money that has already appeared  on a victim organization’s books, while skimming is the theft 
of cash that has not yet been recorded  in the accounting system. The way in which an employee 
extracts the cash may be exactly the same for a cash larceny or skimming scheme.  
 
 
Skimming 
Skimming is the removal of cash from a victim entity prior to its entry in an accounting 
system. Employees who skim from their companies steal sales or receivables before they are 
recorded in the company books. Skimming schemes are known as “off-book” frauds, 
meaning money is stolen before it is recorded in the victim organization’s accounts. This 
aspect of skimming schemes means they leave no direct audit trail. Because the stolen funds 
are never recorded, the victim organization may not be aware that the cash was ever 
received. Consequently, it may be very difficult to detect that the money has been stolen. 
This is the prime advantage of a skimming scheme to the fraudster.  
 
Skimming is one of the most common forms of occupational fraud. It can occur at any point 
where cash enters a business, so almost anyone who deals with the process of receiving cash 
may be in a position to skim money. This includes salespeople, tellers, waitpersons, and 
others who receive cash directly from customers.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.402                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, many skimming schemes are perpetrated by employees whose duties include 
receiving and logging payments made by customers through the mail. These employees slip 
checks out of the incoming mail instead of posting those checks to the proper revenue or 
receivables accounts. Those who deal directly with customers or who handle customer 
payments are obviously the most likely candidates to skim funds.  
 
Sales Skimming 
The most basic skimming scheme occurs when an employee sells goods or services to a 
customer, collects the customer’s payment, but makes no record of the sale. The employee 
simply pockets the money received from the customer instead of turning it over to his 
employer. (See “Unrecorded Sales” flowchart.)   
 
Consider one of the simplest and most common sales transactions, a sale of goods at the 
cash register. In a normal transaction, a customer purchases an item and an employee enters 
the sale on the register. The register tape reflects that the sale has been made and shows that 
a certain amount of cash (the purchase price of the item) should have been placed in the 
register. By comparing the register tape to the amount of money on hand, it may be possible 
to detect thefts. For instance, if there were $500 worth of sales recorded on a particular 
register on a given day, but only $400 cash in the register, it would be obvious that someone 
had stolen $100 (assuming no beginning cash balance).  
 
If the employee is skimming money, however, it will be impossible to detect theft simply by 
comparing the register tape to the cash drawer. Returning to the example in the paragraph 
above, assume that an employee wants to make off with $100. Through the course of the 
day, there are $500 worth of sales at his register ; one sale is for $100. When the $100 sale is 
made, the employee does not record the transaction on his register. The customer pays $100 
and takes the merchandise home, but instead of placing the money in the cash drawer, the 
employee pockets it. In order to create the appearance that the sale is being entered in the 
register, the employee might ring a “no sale” or some other non-cash transaction. Since the 
employee did not record the sale, at the end of the day the register tape will only reflect $400 
in sales. There will be $400 on hand in the re gister ($500 in total sales minus the $100 that 
the employee stole) so the register will balance. Thus by not recording the sale the employee 
is able to steal money without the missing funds appearing on the books. Of course, the 
theft will show up indirectly in the company’s records as inventory shrinkage. But the books 
will provide no direct evidence of the theft. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.403 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.404                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 The most difficult part in skimming at the register is that the employee must commit the 
overt act of taking money. If the employee takes the customer’s money and shoves it into his 
pocket without entering the transaction on the register, the customer will probably suspect 
that something is wrong and might report the conduct to another employee or a manager. It 
is also possible that a manager, a fellow employee, or a surveillance camera will spot the 
illegal conduct. Therefore, it is often desirable for a perpetrator to act as though he is 
properly recording a transaction while he skims sales.  
 
Register Manipulation 
Some employees might ring a “no sale” or ot her non-cash transaction to mask the theft of 
sales. The false transaction is entered on the register so that it appears a sale is being rung up. 
The perpetrator opens the register drawer and pretends to place the cash he has just received 
in the drawer, but in reality he pockets the cash. To the casual observer it looks as though 
the sale is being properly recorded.  
 
Some employees may also rig their registers so that a sale can be entered on the register keys, 
but will not appear on the register tapes. The employee can then safely skim the sale. Anyone 
observing the employee will see the sale entered, see the cash drawer open, etc., yet the 
register tape will not reflect the transaction.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A service station employee hid stolen gasoline sales by simply  lifting the ribbon from the 
printer on his register. He collected and pocketed the sales, which were not recorded on the 
register tape. The fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next 
transaction should appear and replace the ribb on. The next transaction would be printed 
without leaving any blank space on the tape, apparently leaving no trace of the fraud.   
 
When the ribbon is removed from the register, the result is a blank space on the register tape 
where the skimmed sale should have been printed. Unusual gaps between transactions on a 
register tape may mean that someone is skimming sales.  
 
Fraudsters will often manually roll back the tape when they replace the ribbon on their 
registers so that there is no gap between transactions. Most register transactions, however, 
are sequentially numbered. If a transaction has been omitted from the register tape, the result 
is a break in the sequence. For instance, if an employee skimmed sale #155, then the register 
tape would only show transactions #153, #154, #156, #157 and so on. The missing 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.405 
transaction numbers, omitted because the ribbon was lifted when they took place, would 
indicate fraud.  
 
Skimming During Nonbusiness Hours 
Another way to skim unrecorded sales is to conduct sales during nonbusiness hours. For 
instance, some employees will open stores on weekends or after hours without the 
knowledge of the owners. They can pocket the proceeds of all sales made during these times 
because the owners have no idea that their stores are even open for business.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a retail facility went to work two hours early every day, opening his store at 
8:00 a.m. instead of 10:00 a.m., and pocketed all the sales made during these two hours. 
He rang up sales on the register as if it was business as usual, but then removed the register 
tape and all the cash he had accumulated. The manager then started from scratch at 10:00 
as if the store was just opening. The tape was destroyed so there was no record of the before-
 hours revenue. 
 
To this point skimming has been discussed in the context of cash register transactions, but 
skimming does not have to occur at a register. Some of the most costly skimming schemes 
are perpetrated by employees who work at remote locations or without close supervision. 
This can include on-site sales persons who do not deal with registers, independent salesmen 
who operate off-site, and employees who work at branches or satellite offices. These 
employees have a high level of autonomy in their jobs, which often translates into poor 
supervision and, in turn, to fraud.  
 
Skimming of Off-Site Sales 
Several industries rely on remote salespersons to generate revenue. The fact that these 
employees are largely unsupervised puts them in a good position to skim revenues. For 
example, consider the apartment rental industry, where apartment managers handle the 
day-to-day operations without much oversight. A common scheme is for an on-site employee to 
identify the tenants who pay in currency and remove them from the books. This causes a 
particular apartment to appear as vacant on the records when, in fact, it is occupied. The 
manager can skim the rental payments from the “vacant” unit, and the revenue will never be 
missed. As long as no one physically checks the apartment, the perpetrator can continue 
skimming indefinitely.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.406                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another rental-skimming scheme occurs when apartments are rented out but no lease is 
signed. On the books, the apartment will still a ppear to be vacant, even though there are 
tenants on the premises. The perpetrator can skim the rental payments from these tenants 
without fear that they will show up as past due in the company records. Sometimes the 
employees in these schemes work in conjunction with the renters and give a “special rate” to 
these people. In return, the renter’s payments are made directly to the employee and any 
complaints or maintenance requests are directed only to that employee so the tenant’s 
presence in the apartment remains hidden.  
 
Instead of skimming rent, some property managers focus on less predictable forms of 
revenue like application fees and late fees. Ownership may know when rent is due and how 
many apartments are occupied, but often there is no control in place to track the number of 
people who fill out rental applications or how many tenants pay their rent a day or two late. 
Property managers can make thousands of dollars by skimming these “nickel and dime” 
payments.  
 
Off-site skimming is by no means limited to the apartment rental industry. The schemes 
described above can easily translate into any arena where those who generate or collect 
revenues operate in an independent fashion. A prime example is the insurance agent who 
sells policies to customers, then neglects to file the policies with the carrier. Most customers 
do not want to file claims on a policy, especially early in the term, for fear that their 
premiums will rise. Knowing this, the agent k eeps all documentation on the policies instead 
of turning it over to the carrier. The agent is able to skim the customer’s payments because 
the carrier does not know the policy exists. The customer continues to make his payments, 
thinking that he is insured, when in fact the policy is a ruse.  
 
Poor Collection Procedures 
Poor collection and recording procedures can make it easy for an employee to skim sales or 
receivables.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A governmental authority that dealt with public housing was victimized because it failed to 
itemize daily receipts. This agency received pa yments from several public housing tenants, 
but at the end of the day, “money” received from tenants was listed as a whole. Receipt 
numbers were not used to item ize the payments made by tenants, so there was no way to 
pinpoint which tenant had paid how much. Consequently, the employee in charge of 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.407 
collecting money from tenants was able to skim a portion of their payments. She simply did 
not record the receipt of over $10,000. Her actions caused certain accounts receivable to be 
overstated where tenant payments were not properly recorded.  
 
Understated Sales  
The discussion above focused on purely off-book sales, those which are never recorded. 
Understated sales work differently because the transaction in question is posted to the 
books, but for a lower amount than what the perpetrator actually collected. (See 
“Understated Sales” flowchart.) One way employees commit understated sales schemes is by 
altering receipts or preparing false receipts that misstate the amount of sales. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee wrote receipts to customers for their purchases, but she removed the carbon 
paper backing on the receipts so that they did not produce a company copy. The employee 
then used a pencil to prepare company copies that showed lower purchase prices. For 
example, if the customer had paid $100, the company copy might reflect a payment of $80. 
The employee skimmed the difference between the actual amount  of revenue and the amount 
reflected on the fraudulent receipt. 
 
Understated sales schemes are commonly undertaken by employees who work at the cash 
register. In a typical scheme an employee enters a sales total that is lower than the amount 
actually paid by the customer. The employee skims the difference between the actual 
purchase price of the item and the sales figure recorded on the register. For instance, if an 
item is sold for $100, the employee could ring up  the sale of an $80 item and skim the excess 
$20.  
 
Rather than reduce the price of an item, an employee might record the sale of fewer items. If 
100 units are sold, for instance, an employee might only record the sale of 50 units and skim 
the excess receipts.  
 
A similar method is used when sales are made on account. The bill to the customer reflects 
the true amount of the sale, but the receivable is understated in the company books. For 
instance, a company might be owed $1,000, but the receivable is recorded as $800. (Sales are 
correspondingly understated by $200.) When the customer makes payment on the account, 
the employee can skim $200 and post the $800 to the account. The account will appear to 
have been paid in full.  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.408                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.409 
FALSE DISCOUNTS 
Those employees with the authority to grant discounts may utilize this authority to skim 
sales and receivables. In a false discount skimming scheme, an employee accepts full 
payment for an item, but records the transaction as if the customer had been given a 
discount. The employee skims the amount of the discount. For example, on a $100 
purchase, if an employee granted a false discount of 20 percent, he could skim $20 and leave 
the company’s books in balance.  
 
Theft of Checks Received Through the Mail 
Checks received through the mail are a frequent target of employees seeking illicit gains. 
Theft of incoming checks usually occurs when a single employee is in charge of opening the 
mail and recording the receipt of payments. This employee simply steals one or more 
incoming checks instead of posting them to customer accounts. (See “Theft of Incoming 
Checks” flowchart.) When the task of receiving and recording incoming payments is left to a 
single person, it is all too easy for that employee to make off with an occasional check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A mailroom employee stole over $2 million in government checks arriving through the mail. 
This employee simply identified and removed envelopes delivered from a government agency 
known to send checks to the company. Using a group of accomplices acting under the names 
of fictitious persons and companies, this indi vidual was able to launder the checks and 
divide the proceeds with his cronies. 
 
The theft of checks is not usually complicated, but it is sometimes more difficult to conceal a 
check theft scheme than other forms of skimming. If the stolen checks were payments on 
the victim company’s receivables, then these payments were expected. As receivables become 
past due, the victim company will send notices of nonpayment to its customers. A customer 
is likely to complain when he receives a second bill for a payment he has already made. In 
addition, the cashed check will serve as evidence that the customer made his payment. The 
methods used to conceal check theft schemes will be discussed later in this section. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.410                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.411 
Check for Currency Substitutions 
The intelligent criminal will generally prefer to steal currency rather than checks if given the 
opportunity. The reasons why are obvious. First, currency is harder to trace than a check. A 
cashed check eventually returns to the person who wrote it and may provide evidence of 
who cashed it or where it was spent. Endorsements, bank stamps, and so forth may indicate 
the identity of the thief. Currency, on the other hand, disappears into the economy once it is 
stolen.  
 
The second reason that currency is preferable to a check is the difficulty in converting the 
check. When currency is stolen it can be spent immediately. A check, on the other hand, 
must be endorsed and cashed or deposited before the thief can put his hands on the money 
it represents. To avoid this problem, employees who steal unrecorded checks will frequently 
substitute them for receipted currency. If, for example, an employee skims an incoming 
check worth $500, he can add the check to the day’s receipts and remove $500 in currency. 
The total receipts will match the amount of cash on hand, but payments in currency are 
replaced by the check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee responsible for receipting ticket and fine payments on behalf of a municipality 
abused her position and stole incoming revenu es for nearly two years. When payments in 
currency were received by this individual, she issued receipts, but when checks were received 
she did not. The check payments were theref ore unrecorded revenues—ripe for skimming. 
These unrecorded checks were placed in the days’ receipts  and an equal amount of cash was 
removed. The receipts matched the amount of  money on hand except that payments in 
currency had been replaced with checks.  
 
The check for currency substitution is very common. While these substitutions make it easier 
for a crook to convert stolen payments, the problem of concealing the theft still remains. 
The fact that the stolen checks are not posted means that some customers’ accounts are in 
danger of becoming past due. If this happens, the perpetrator’s scheme is in danger because 
these customers will almost surely complain about the misapplication of their payments. 
However, the misapplied payments can be concealed on the books by forcing account totals, 
stealing customers’ account statements, lapping, and making other fraudulent accounting 
entries. These concealment techniques will be discussed in more detail in the Skimming 
Receivables section.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.412                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Check for currency substitutions are especially common when an employee has access to 
some unexpected source of funds such as a manufacturer’s refund that arrives outside the 
regular stream of sales and receivables payments. In these cases the check can be swapped 
for cash and there is usually no additional step required to conceal the crime. The refund 
check, an unexpected source of funds, will not be missed by the victim organization, and the 
party who issued the check expects no goods or services in return.  
 
Skimming Receivables
It is generally more difficult to conceal the skimming of receivables than the skimming of 
sales because receivables payments are expected. The victim organization knows the customer 
owes money and it is waiting for the payment to arrive. When unrecorded sales are skimmed, 
it is as though the sale never existed. But when receivables are skimmed, the absence of the 
payment appears on the books as a delinquent account. In order to conceal a skimmed 
receivable, a perpetrator must somehow account for the payment that was due to the 
company but never received. There are a number of common techniques fraudsters use to 
conceal the skimming of receivables.  
 
Forcing Account Balances or Destroying Transaction Records 
Among the most dangerous receivables skimming schemes are those in which the 
perpetrator is in charge of collecting and posting payments. If a fraudster has a hand in both 
ends of the receipting process, he can falsify records to conceal the theft of receivables 
payments. For example, the fraudster might post the customer’s payments to their 
receivables accounts, even though the payments will never be deposited. This keeps the 
receivable from aging, but it creates an imbalance in the cash account. The perpetrator hides 
the imbalance by forcing the total on the cash account, overstating it to match the total 
postings to accounts receivable. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The chief financial officer of a small corporation stole approximately $100,000 from his 
company by diverting customer checks. This in dividual controlled all the books and records 
for the victim company. He stole checks from customers and deposited them in his personal 
bank account. The customers’ payments were still posted to keep the receivables from aging.  
 
The perpetrator stole checks in an amount equal to the victim company’s tax liability. To 
keep the books in balance, he would prepare checks payable to the IRS, but he never 
mailed them. The checks were recorded in the victim’s records and the false disbursements 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.413 
offset the amount of false postings to acco unts receivable. The scheme was uncovered when 
the IRS notified the victim company that its taxes were delinquent.  
 
Some fraudsters simply destroy all records that might prove that they have been stealing. 
Destroying records en masse does not prevent the victim organization from realizing that it 
is being robbed, but it may help conceal the identity of the thief.  
 
Lapping 
Lapping customer payments is one of the most common methods of concealing receivables 
skimming. Lapping is the crediting of one a ccount through the abstraction of money from 
another account. It is the fraudster’s version of “robbing Peter to pay Paul.”   
 
Suppose a company has three customers, A, B, and C. When A’s payment is received, the 
fraudster steals it instead of posting it to A’s account. Customer A expects that his account 
will be credited with the payment he has made. If the payment has not been posted by the 
time A’s next statement is mailed, he will see that the payment was not applied to his 
account and will almost certainly complain. To avoid this, the thief must take some action to 
make it appear that the payment was posted.  
 
When B’s check arrives, the thief posts this money to A’s account. Payments now appear to 
be up-to-date on A’s account, but B’s account is behind. When C’s payment is received, the 
perpetrator applies it to B’s account. This process continues indefinitely until one of three 
things happens: (1) someone discovers the scheme, (2) restitution is made to the accounts, or 
(3) some concealing entry is made to adjust the accounts receivable balances.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk working for a government agency committed a lapping scheme that involved the 
theft of more than 150 customer payments, causing a total misappropriation of more than 
$30,000 in government funds. This individual stole taxes, fees, and other incoming 
payments from customers to cover his personal expenses. When a customer’s payment was 
stolen, the documentation on that payment would be hidden until a later payment was 
received. The later payment would be applied to the earlier customer’s records.  
 
As the rotating schedule of applying and misapplying payments became more and more 
complicated, the perpetrator insisted on exerting more and more control over the receipting 
process. He insisted on handling all incoming mail, preparing the deposit and delivering the 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.414                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
deposit to the bank so that he could continue to delay the posting of payments. The fraud 
was detected in large part because several consumers complained that they had not received 
confirmation of their payments, even though their checks had cleared months earlier. 
 
Because lapping schemes can become very intricate, fraudsters sometimes keep a second set 
of books on hand detailing the true nature of the payments received. In many skimming 
cases, a search of the fraudster’s work area will reveal a set of records tracking the actual 
payments and how they have been misapplied to conceal the theft. It may seem odd that 
people would keep records of their illegal activity on hand, but many lapping schemes 
become extremely complicated as more and more payments are misapplied. The second set 
of records helps the perpetrator keep track of the funds that were stolen and which accounts 
need to be credited to conceal the fraud. Uncovering these records, if they exist, will greatly 
facilitate the investigation of a lapping scheme.  
 
While lapping is more commonly used to conceal receivables skimming, it can also be used 
to disguise the skimming of sales. Employees sometimes steal all or part of one day’s receipts 
and replace them with the receipts from the following day. This type of concealment 
requires the employee to delay making the company deposit until enough money can be 
collected to recoup the stolen funds. If an organization rigidly adheres to a deposit schedule, 
it is unlikely that lapping will be effective in concealing this type of fraud.  
 
Stolen Statements  
When employees skim receivables, they may let the targeted accounts age instead of 
attempting to force the balances. In other words, they steal an incoming check intended as 
payment on a receivable, and they simply act as if the check never arrived. This method 
keeps the victim organization’s cash account in balance, because the stolen payment is never 
posted.  
 
Of course, if the customer’s payment is not posted, the receivable will eventually become 
past due. The customer will have proof in the form of a canceled check that a payment was 
made on the account. The question will arise: where did the payment go? The answer, of 
course, is that it went into the fraudster’s pocket. So the goal of the fraudster must be to 
keep the customer from realizing that his account was not credited with the payment. If this 
can be accomplished, the customer will not complain about the missing payment, and the 
victim organization will not realize that skimming has occurred.  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.415 
One way fraudsters attempt to conceal the fact that they have skimmed a payment from a 
customer is to intercept the customer’s account statement and/or late notices. In some 
cases, the perpetrator intercepts the account statement by changing the customer’s address in 
the billing system so that statements are sent directly to the perpetrator’s home or to an 
address where he can retrieve them. In other instances, the perpetrator physically intercepts 
the statements before they are mailed.  
 
Once the real statement indicating that the payment was not received has been intercepted, 
the fraudster usually alters the statement or produces a counterfeit. The false statements 
indicate that the customer’s payment was properly posted. This leads the customer to believe 
that his account is up-to-date and keeps the customer from complaining about stolen 
payments.  
 
False Account Entries 
Intercepting the customer’s statements will keep him in the dark as to the status of his 
account, but as long as the customer’s payments are being skimmed, his account is slipping 
further and further past due. The perpetrator must bring the account back up to date in 
order to conceal his crime. Lapping is one way to keep accounts current as the employee 
skims from them. Another way is to make false entries in the victim organization’s 
accounting system.  
 
DEBITS TO EXPENSE ACCOUNTS 
An employee might conceal the skimming of funds by making unsupported entries in the 
victim company’s books. If a payment is made on a receivable, for instance, the proper entry 
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receivable. Instead of debiting cash, the employee might 
choose to debit an expense account. This transaction still keeps the company’s books in 
balance, but the incoming cash is never recorded. In addition, the customer’s receivable 
account is credited, so it will not become delinquent.  
 
DEBITS TO AGING OR FICTITIOUS RECEIVABLES 
The same method discussed above is used when employees debit existing or fictitious 
accounts receivable in order to conceal skimmed cash. For example, an employee who has 
skimmed one customer’s payments might add the stolen amounts to aging accounts that are 
soon to be written off as uncollectible, or to very large accounts where a small debit might 
go unnoticed.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.416                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some perpetrators also set up completely fictitious accounts and debit them for the cost of 
skimmed receivables. The employees then simply wait for the fictitious receivables to age 
and be written off as uncollectable. In the meantime, the fictitious receivables carry the cost 
of a skimming scheme where it will not be detected.  
 
WRITING OFF ACCOUNT BALANCES 
Some employees cover their skimming by posting entries to contra revenue accounts such as 
“discounts and allowances.” If, for instance, an employee intercepts a $1,000 payment, he 
would create a $1,000 “discount” on the acco unt to compensate for the missing money. 
Another account that might be used in this type of concealment is the bad debts expense 
account.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A billing manager was author ized to write off certain patient balances as hardship 
allowances. This employee accepted payments from  patients, then instructed billing personnel 
to write off the balance in question. The payments were never posted; they were intercepted 
by the billing manager. She covered approximately $30,000 in stolen funds by using her 
authority to write off patients’ balances.  
 
Inventory Padding 
A problem for fraudsters in some skimming schemes is the victim organization’s inventory. 
Off-book sales of goods will always leave an in ventory shortage and a corresponding rise in 
the cost of goods sold.  
 
When a sale of goods is made, the physical inventory is reduced by the amount of 
merchandise sold. For instance, when a retailer sells a pair of shoes there is one less pair of 
shoes in the stock room If this sale is not recorded, however, the shoes are not removed 
from the perpetual inventory records. Thus, there is one less pair of shoes on hand than in 
the perpetual inventory. A reduction in the physical inventory without a corresponding 
reduction in the perpetual inventory is known as “shrinkage.”  
 
When an employee skims sales of services there is no shrinkage (because there is no 
inventory for services), but when sales of goods are skimmed, shrinkage always occurs. Some 
amounts of shrinkage are expected due to customer theft, faulty products, and spoilage, but 
high levels of shrinkage serve as a warning that a company could be a victim of occupational 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.417 
fraud. The general methods used to conceal inventory shrinkage are discussed in detail in the 
Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 
Detection of Skimming Schemes 
The following are some detection methods that may be effective in detecting skimming 
schemes. 
 
Receipt or Sales Level Detection 
Key analytical procedures, such as vertical and horizontal analysis of sales accounts, can be 
used for skimming detection on a grand scale. These procedures analyze changes in the 
accounts and can possibly point to skimming problems including understated sales.  
Ratio analysis can also provide keys to the detection of skimming schemes. These 
procedures are discussed in detail in the Fraudulent Financial Statement section.  
 
Detailed inventory control procedures can also be utilized to detect inventory shrinkage due 
to unrecorded sales. Inventory detection methods include statistical sampling, trend analysis, 
reviews of receiving reports and inventory records, verification of material requisition and 
shipping documentation, as well as actual physical inventory counts. These procedures are 
reviewed in the section on Inventory and Other Assets. 
 
Journal Entry Review 
Skimming can sometimes be detected by reviewing and analyzing all journal entries made to 
the cash and inventory accounts. Journal entries involving the following topics should be 
examined: 
• False credits to inventory to conceal unrecorded or understated sales. 
• Write-offs of lost, stolen, or obsolete inventory. 
• Write-offs of accounts receivable accounts. 
• Irregular entries to cash accounts. 
 
Detecting Lapping of Sales or Receivables   
Lapping can usually be detected by comparing the dates of the customer’s payments with the 
dates the customer’s accounts are posted. This will require an examination of the source 
documents, such as the composition of bank deposits. Discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.418                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Confirmation of customers’ accounts is another method that might detect lapping. 
Confirmations are especially effective on large accounts where the time value of money is an 
issue. However, customers who pay on invoice rather than on balance might not know the 
exact balance of their account. If this is the case, it might be more effective to confirm by 
invoice and reconstruct the account balance using the source documents in the files and the 
results of the confirmation. If fraud is suspected, ask the customer or the bank to return a 
copy of both the front and the back of the check(s) used to pay specific invoices. Match the 
data on the check copies with the posting dates in the customer’s account. 
 
Prevention of Skimming Schemes 
Receipt or Sales Level Control  
As with most fraud schemes, internal control procedures are a key to prevention of 
skimming schemes. An essential part of developing control procedures is management’s 
communication to employees. Controlling whether or not an employee will not record a sale, 
understate a sale, or steal incoming payments is extremely difficult.  
 
General Controls 
Sales entries and general ledger access controls should include documented policies and 
procedures, which are communicated directly from management. The control procedures 
will generally cover the following subjects: 
• Appropriate segregation of duties and access control procedures regarding who makes 
ledger transactions will be followed. 
• Transactions must be properly recorded as to amount, date of occurrence, and ledger 
account.  
• Proper safeguard measures will be adopted to ensure physical access to the account 
systems. Additional measures should ensure the security of company assets.  
• Independent reconciliations as well as internal verification of accounts will be performed 
on ledger accounts.1 
 
Skimming Controls 
The discovery of thefts of checks and cash involves proper controls on the receipt process. 
Deficiencies in the answers to these typical audit-program questions may be red flags.  
• Is mail opened by someone independent of cashier, accounts receivable bookkeeper, or 
other accounting employees who may initiate or post journal entries? 
                                                          
1 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.419 
• Is the delivery of unopened business mail prohibited to employees having access to the 
accounting records? 
• Does the employee who opens the mail: 
? Place restrictive endorsements (“For Deposit Only”) on all checks received? 
? Prepare a list of the money, checks, and other receipts? 
? Forward all remittances to the person responsible for preparing and making the daily 
bank deposit? 
? Forward the total of all remittances to the person responsible for comparing it to the 
authenticated deposit ticket and amount recorded? 
• Is a lock box used? 
• Do cash sales occur? If yes: 
? Are cash receipts prenumbered? 
? Is an independent check of prenumbered receipts done daily and reconciled to cash 
collections? 
• Do cash refunds require approval? 
• Are cash receipts deposited intact daily? 
• Are employees who handle receipts bonded? 
• Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from: 
? Preparing the bank deposit? 
? Obtaining access to the cash receipts book? 
? Having access to collections from customers? 
? Are banks instructed not to cash checks drawn to the order of the company? 
• Is the cashier restricted from gaining access to the accounts receivable records and bank 
and customer statements? 
• Are areas where physical handling of cash takes place reasonably safeguarded? 
• Is the person who makes postings to the general ledger independent of the cash receipts 
and accounts receivable functions?  
• Does a person independent of the cashier or accounts receivable functions handle 
customer complaints? 
 
 
Cash Larceny 
In the occupational fraud setting, a cash larceny may be defined as the intentional taking of 
an employer’s cash (the term cash includes both currency and checks) without the consent 
and against the will of the employer.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.420                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A cash larceny scheme can take place in any circumstance in which an employee has access 
to cash. Every company must deal with the receipt, deposit, and distribution of cash, so 
every company is potentially vulnerable to a cash larceny scheme. While the circumstances in 
which an employee might steal cash are nearly limitless, most larceny schemes involve the 
theft of incoming cash, currency on hand (in a cash register, cash box, etc.), or theft of cash 
from the victim organization’s bank deposits.  
 
Incoming Cash 
Theft of Cash from the Register 
A large percentage of cash larceny schemes occur at the cash register, and for good reason—
 the register is usually where the cash is. The register (or similar cash collection points like 
cash drawers or cash boxes) is usually the most common point of access to cash for 
employees, so it is understandable that this is where larceny schemes frequently occur. 
Furthermore, there is often a great deal of activity at the register, numerous transactions that 
require employees to handle cash. This can serve as a cover for the theft of cash. In a flurry 
of activity, with money being passed back and forth between customer and employee, an 
employee can often slip cash out of the register and into his pocket undetected.  
 
The most straightforward cash larceny scheme is to simply open the register and remove 
currency or checks. (See “Cash Larceny from the Register” flowchart.) The theft is often 
committed as a sale is being conducted so that it appears to be part of the transaction. In 
other circumstances, the perpetrator waits for a slow moment when no one is around to 
notice him digging into the cash drawer.  
 
Recall that the difficulty in detecting skimming schemes comes from the fact that the stolen 
funds are never entered on the victim organization’s accounts. In a larceny scheme, on the 
other hand, the funds that the perpetrator steals have already been reflected on the register 
tape. As a result, an imbalance will result between the register tape and the cash drawer.  
 
A register is balanced by comparing the transactions on the register tape to the amount of 
cash on hand. Sales, returns, and other register transactions that are recorded on the register 
tape are added to or subtracted from a known balance to arrive at a total for the period in 
question. The actual cash is then counted and the two totals are compared. If the register 
tape shows that there should be more cash in the register than what is present, the 
discrepancy may be due to larceny. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.421 
 
 
The actual method for taking money at the register — opening the register and removing 
currency — rarely varies. It is the methods used by perpetrators to avoid getting caught that 
distinguish larceny schemes. Oddly, in many instances the perpetrator has no plan for 
avoiding detection. A large part of fraud is rationalizing; the employee convinces himself that 
he is somehow entitled to what he is taking, or that what he is doing is not actually a crime. 
Register larceny schemes frequently begin when the perpetrator convinces himself that he is 
only “borrowing” the funds to cover a temporary monetary need. These people might carry 
the missing currency in their registers for several days, deluding themselves in the belief that 
they will one day repay the funds they have stolen.  
 
The employee who does nothing to camouflage his crimes is easily caught. More dangerous 
is the person taking active steps to hide his crimes. One basic way for an employee to 
disguise the fact that he is stealing currency is to take money from someone else’s register.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.422                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In some retail organizations, employees are assigned to certain registers. Alternatively, one 
register is used and each employee has an access code. When cash is missing from a certain 
cashier’s register, that cashier is obviously the most likely suspect for the theft. Therefore, by 
stealing from a coworker’s register, or by using someone else’s access code to enter the 
register, the perpetrator makes sure that another employee will be the prime suspect in the 
theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A teller for a retail sales company simply signed onto a register, rang a “no sale” and took 
currency from the drawer. Over  a period of time, the teller took approximately $6,000 
through this simple method. In order to get away with the theft, the teller waited until a 
coworker was on break, then logged onto that person’s register, rang a “no sale” and took 
the cash. The resulting cash shortage therefore appeared in the register of an honest 
employee, deflecting attention from the true thief.  
 
A very unsophisticated way to avoid detection is to steal currency in very small amounts over 
an extended period of time. Because the missing amounts are small, the shortages may be 
dismissed as accounting errors rather than theft. Typically, the employee becomes dependent 
on the extra money he is pilfering and his thefts increase in scale or become more frequent, 
which causes the scheme to be uncovered. Most retail organizations track overages or 
shortages by employee, making this method largely ineffective. 
 
REVERSING TRANSACTIONS 
Some employees conceal cash larceny by processing reversing transactions, which cause the 
register tape to reconcile to the amount of cash on hand after the theft. By processing false 
voids or refunds, an employee can reduce the cash balance reflected on the register tape.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier received payments from a customer and recorded the transactions on her system. 
She stole the payments from the customers, then destroyed the company’s receipts that 
reflected the transactions. To complete the cover-up, the cashier went back and voided the 
transactions that she had entered at the time the payments were received. The reversing 
entries brought the receipt totals in to balance with the cash on hand.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.423 
REGISTER MANIPULATION 
Instead of using reversing entries, an employee might manually alter the register tape. Again, 
the purpose of this activity is to force a balance between the cash on hand and the actual 
cash received. An employee might use white-out to cover up a sale whose proceeds were 
stolen, or he might simply cross out or alter the numbers on the tape so that the register 
total and the cash drawer balance. This type of concealment is not common because, in 
general, the alterations will be noticeable. 
 
ALTERING CASH COUNTS 
Another method for concealing cash larceny is to alter the cash counts on registers. When 
cash from a register is totaled and prepared for deposit, an employee simply records the 
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appears to balance with the total on the register 
tape. Obviously, employees who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charged with 
verifying the amount of cash on hand in their own register, but this control is often 
overlooked.  
 
DESTROYING REGISTER TAPES   
If the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balance, the next best thing is to prevent 
others from computing the totals and discovering the imbalance. Employees who are 
stealing from the register sometimes destroy detail tapes that would implicate them in a 
crime. When detail tapes are missing or defaced, it may be because someone is trying to 
conceal a fraud.  
 
Other Larceny of Sales and Receivables 
Not all receipts arrive via the cash register. Employees can just as easily steal money received 
at other points. One of the more common methods is to take checks received through the 
mail, post the payments to the accounting system, but steal the checks. (See “Other Cash 
Larceny” flowchart.) Obviously, this type of scheme leaves the cash account out of balance. 
From a perpetrator’s perspective, it would make  much more sense to take checks that have 
not yet been posted to customer accounts. Often, this type of cash larceny scheme is 
committed by an employee who claims to only be “borrowing” the funds for a short while—
 one of the classic rationalizations in occupational fraud schemes.  
 
Those employees who have total control of a company’s accounting system can overcome 
the problem of out-of-balance accounts. It is common, especially in small businesses, for a 
single person to control all of a company’s deposits and ledgers. These employees can steal 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.424                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
incoming cash that has already been posted, then conceal the crime by making unsupported 
entries in the victim organization’s books. Poor separation of duties is very often the 
weakness that allows cash larceny schemes to go undetected.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee posted customer payments to the accounts receivable journal but stole the cash 
received. This resulted in an imbalance in the victim company’s cash account. But the 
perpetrator had control over the company’s deposits and all its ledgers. This allowed her to 
conceal her crime by making unsupported entr ies in the company’s books that produced a 
fictitious balance between receipts and ledgers.  
 
In circumstances in which payments are stolen but nonetheless posted to the cash receipts 
journal, reversing entries are sometimes used to balance the victim company’s accounts. The 
incoming payment is initially credited to the customer’s account, but the entry is later 
reversed with an unauthorized adjustment such as a “courtesy discount.” 
 
A less elegant way to hide a crime is to simply destroy all records that might prove that the 
perpetrator has been stealing. This “slash and burn” concealment technique does not 
prevent the victim company from realizing that it has been robbed, but it may help conceal 
the identity of the thief.  
 
Cash Larceny from the Deposit 
At some point in every revenue-generating business, someone must physically take the 
company’s currency and checks to the bank. This person or persons, left alone literally 
holding the bag, will have an opportunity to take a portion of the money prior to depositing 
it into the company’s accounts.  
 
Typically, when a company receives cash, someone is assigned to tabulate the receipts, list 
the form of payment (currency or check), and prepare a deposit slip for the bank. Then 
another employee takes the cash and deposits it in the bank. The person who made out the 
deposit generally retains one copy of the slip. This copy is matched to a receipted copy of 
the slip, which is stamped by the bank when the deposit is made.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.425 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.426                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
This procedure is designed to prevent the theft of funds from the deposit, but thefts still 
occur, often because the process is not adhered to. (See “Cash Larceny from the Deposit” 
flowchart.) For example, when one person is in charge of preparing the deposit slips, making 
the deposit, and reconciling the bank statement, that person can pilfer money from the day’s 
receipts and conceal it by falsifying the deposit slips. If the day’s receipts are $1,000, the 
perpetrator might fill out a deposit slip for $5 00 and steal the other $500. The employee then 
makes correspondingly false entries in the books, understating the day’s receipts. This 
process creates a false balance in the victim organization’s records.  
 
A failure to reconcile the bank copy of the deposit slip with the office copy can result in 
fraud. When the person making the deposit knows his company does not reconcile the two 
copies, he can steal cash from the deposit on the way to the bank and alter the deposit slip 
so that it reflects a lesser amount. In some cases sales records will also be altered to match 
the diminished deposit.  
 
When cash is stolen from the deposit, the receipted deposit slip will of course be out of 
balance with the company’s copy of the deposit slip (unless the perpetrator also prepared the 
deposit). To correct this problem, some perpetrators alter the bank copy of the deposit slip 
after it has been validated. This brings the two copies back into balance.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee altered 24 deposit slips and validated bank receipts in the course of a year to 
conceal the theft of over $15, 000. These documents were altered with white-out or a ball 
point pen to match the company’s cash reports.  
 
One common-sense issue that is sometimes over looked by organizations is the handling of 
the deposit on the way to the bank. Once prepared, the deposit should immediately be put in 
a safe place until it is taken to the bank. Unfortunately, some organizations leave their 
deposits carelessly unattended. For example, some companies prepare the daily deposit, then 
leave it in the office overnight to be taken to the bank the next morning. Employees familiar 
with this routine have little trouble pilfering checks and currency from the deposit after 
hours.  
 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.427 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.428                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
As with all cash larceny schemes, stealing from the company deposit can be rather difficult 
to conceal. In most cases these schemes are only successful in the long term when the 
person who counts the cash also makes the deposit. In any other circumstance the success of 
the scheme depends primarily on the inattentiveness of those charged with preparing and 
reconciling the deposit. 
 
Deposit Lapping   
One method that fraudsters sometimes use to conceal cash larceny from the deposit is 
lapping. Lapping occurs when an employee steals the deposit from day one, then replaces it 
with day two’s deposit. Day two is replaced with day three, and so on. The perpetrator is 
always one day behind, but as long as no one demands an up-to-the minute reconciliation of 
the deposits to the bank statement—and if daily receipts do not drop precipitously — he may 
be able to avoid detection for a period of time. Lapping is discussed in more detail in the 
Skimming section.  
 
Deposits in Transit 
A final strategy used to conceal stolen deposits is to carry the missing money as deposits in 
transit, which are a way of accounting for discrepancies between the company’s records and 
the bank statement.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee was responsible for receiving collections, issuing receipts, posting transactions, 
reconciling accounts, and making deposits. This employee took over $20,000 in collections 
from her employer over a five-month period. To hide her theft, the perpetrator carried the 
missing money as deposits in transit, meaning that the missing money would appear on the 
next month’s bank statement. Of course, it never did. The balance was carried for several 
months as “d.i.t.” until an auditor recognized the discrepancy and put a halt to the fraud.  
 
Detection of Cash Larceny 
Receipt Recording  
In-depth analysis of the cash receipts and recording process is the key to detecting a cash 
larceny scheme. Areas of analysis may include: 
• Mail and register receipt points. 
• Journalizing and recording of the receipts. 
• Security of the cash from receipt to deposit. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.429 
Control Objectives 
In analyzing the cash receipt process, it is important to meet the following control 
objectives: 
• Cash receipts must be complete. Each day’s receipts must be promptly collected and 
deposited in full. 
• Each receivable transaction recorded must be legitimate and have supporting 
documentation.  
• All information included in the transaction must be correctly verified as to amount, date, 
account coding, and descriptions. 
• The cash must be safeguarded while in the physical possession of the company. 
• There must be appropriate personnel responsible for overseeing cash control processes.  
• Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount of cash in drawer. 
• An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are 
submitted to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
• An independent person should verify the listing against the deposit slips. 
• Authenticated deposit slips should be retained and reconciled to the corresponding 
amounts in the cash receipts records. 
• The bank deposit should be made by someone other than the cashier or the accounts 
receivable bookkeeper. A person independent of the cash receipts and accounts 
receivable functions should compare entries to the cash receipts journal with: 
? Authenticated bank deposit slips 
? Deposit per the bank statements 
• Areas where physical handling of cash takes place should be reasonably safeguarded. 
 
Analytical Review 
Analyzing the relationship between sales, cost of sales, and the returns and allowances can 
detect inappropriate refunds and discounts.  
• If a large cash fraud is suspected, a thorough review of these accounts may enlighten the 
examiner as to the magnitude of the suspected fraud.  
• An analysis of refunds and returns and allowances with the actual flow of inventory may 
reveal some fraud schemes. The refund should cause an entry to inventory, even if it is 
damaged inventory. Likewise, a return will cause a corresponding entry to an inventory 
account.  
  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.430                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• There should be a linear relationship between sales and returns and allowances over a 
relevant range. Any change in this relationship may point to a fraud scheme unless there 
is another valid explanation such as a change in the manufacturing process, change in 
product line, or change in price. 
 
Detection at the Register 
• As cash is received, whether at a register or through the mail, it is important to ensure 
that the employees responsible for completing these important tasks are informed of 
their responsibility and properly supervised.  
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Popular concealment methods must be watched for. These methods, discussed earlier, 
include checks for cash, reversing transactions, register tape destruction or alteration, 
and sales cash counts. 
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have either paid money on an 
account and have not received credit, or in some cases, when they notice that the credit 
they have been given does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and 
inquiries are also received frequently from banks. 
 
Cash Account Analysis 
Cash larceny can be detected by reviewing and analyzing all journal entries made to the cash 
accounts. This review and analysis should be performed on a regular basis. If an employee is 
unable to conceal the fraud through altering the source documents, such as the cash register 
tape, then he may resort to making a journal entry directly to cash. In general (and except in 
financial institutions), there are very few instances in everyday business activity where an 
independent journal entry is necessary for cash. One of these exceptions is the recording of 
the bank service charge. However, this is an easy journal entry to trace to its source 
documentation, namely the bank statement. Therefore, all other entries directly to cash are 
suspect and should be traced to their source documentation or explanation. Suspect entries 
will generally credit the cash account and correspondingly debit various other accounts such 
as a sales contra account or bad debt expenses. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.431 
Prevention of Cash Larceny 
Segregation of Duties 
The primary prevention of cash larceny is segregation of duties. Whenever one individual 
has control over the entire accounting transaction (e.g., authorization, recording, and 
custody), the opportunity is present for cash fraud. Each of the following duties and 
responsibilities should ideally be segregated:  
• Cash receipts 
• Cash counts 
• Bank deposits 
• Deposit receipt reconciliation 
• Bank reconciliations 
• Posting of deposits 
• Cash disbursements 
 
If any one person has the authority to collect the cash, deposit the receipts, record that 
collection, and disburse company funds, the risk that fraud can occur is high. 
 
Assignment Rotation and Mandatory Vacations 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. Mandatory job rotation is an excellent method of 
detecting cash fraud. By establishing a mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. If mandatory vacations are within the company’s 
policies, it is important that during the employee’s absence, the normal workload of that 
employee be performed by another individual. The purpose of mandatory vacations is lost if 
the work is allowed to remain undone during the employee’s time off.  
 
Surprise Cash Counts and Procedure Supervision 
Surprise cash counts and supervisory observations are a useful fraud prevention method if 
properly used. It is important that employees know that cash will be counted on a sporadic 
and unscheduled basis. These surprise counts must be made at all steps of the process from 
receiving the check to deposit. 
 
Physical Security of Cash 
• Ensure proper segregation of duties of key personnel. 
• Review the check and cash composition of the daily bank deposit during unannounced 
cash counts and during substantive audit tests of cash receipts. 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.432                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review the entity’s records of the numerical series of printed prenumbered receipts, and 
verify that these receipts are used sequentially (including voided documents). 
• Review the timeliness of deposits from locations to the central treasurer function. 
• Observe cash receipting operations of locations. 
• Prepare and review a schedule of all cash receipting functions from a review of revenue 
reports, from cash receipt forms at the central treasurer function, and from discussion 
with knowledgeable employees. 
• Prepare and analyze an inventory of all imprest and change funds by purpose, amount, 
custodian, date, and location. 
• Audit all revenue sources on a cycle. 
• Periodically use comparative analytical reviews to determine which functions have 
unfavorable trends. 
• Determine reason(s) why revenue has changed from previous reporting periods. 
• Confirm responses obtained from managers by using alternative records or through 
substantive audit tests. 
• Adhere to a communicated policy of unannounced cash counts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.501 



:


asset misappropri cash receipt
asset misappropri ar by far the most common of all occup fraud there ar
three major categori of asset misappropri scheme cash receipt scheme will be
discuss in thi section fraudul disburs of cash will be address in the next
section and the follow section will cover scheme involv the theft of inventori and
other noncash asset
cash is the focal point of most account entri cash both on deposit in bank and on
hand as petti cash can be misappropri through mani differ scheme these scheme
can be either onbook or offbook depend on where thei occur
cash receipt scheme fall into two categori skim and larceni the differ in the two
type of fraud depend complet on when the cash is stolen cash larceni is the theft of
monei that ha alreadi appear on a victim organ book while skim is the theft
of cash that ha not yet been record in the account system the wai in which an employe
extract the cash mai be exactli the same for a cash larceni or skim scheme
skim
skim is the remov of cash from a victim entiti prior to it entri in an account
system employe who skim from their compani steal sale or receiv befor thei ar
record in the compani book skim scheme ar known as offbook fraud
mean monei is stolen befor it is record in the victim organ account thi
aspect of skim scheme mean thei leav no direct audit trail becaus the stolen fund
ar never record the victim organ mai not be awar that the cash wa ever
receiv consequ it mai be veri difficult to detect that the monei ha been stolen
thi is the prime advantag of a skim scheme to the fraudster
skim is on of the most common form of occup fraud it can occur at ani point
where cash enter a busi so almost anyon who deal with the process of receiv cash
mai be in a posit to skim monei thi includ salespeopl teller waitperson and
other who receiv cash directli from custom
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1402 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit mani skim scheme ar perpetr by employe whose duti includ
receiv and log payment made by custom through the mail these employe slip
check out of the incom mail instead of post those check to the proper revenu or
receiv account those who deal directli with custom or who handl custom
payment ar obvious the most like candid to skim fund
sale skim
the most basic skim scheme occur when an employe sell good or servic to a
custom collect the custom payment but make no record of the sale the employe
simpli pocket the monei receiv from the custom instead of turn it over to hi
employ see unrecord sale flowchart
consid on of the simplest and most common sale transact a sale of good at the
cash regist in a normal transact a custom purchas an item and an employe enter
the sale on the regist the regist tape reflect that the sale ha been made and show that
a certain amount of cash the purchas price of the item should have been place in the
regist by compar the regist tape to the amount of monei on hand it mai be possibl
to detect theft for instanc if there were 500 worth of sale record on a particular
regist on a given dai but onli 400 cash in the regist it would be obviou that someon
had stolen 100 assum no begin cash balanc
if the employe is skim monei howev it will be imposs to detect theft simpli by
compar the regist tape to the cash drawer return to the exampl in the paragraph
abov assum that an employe want to make off with 100 through the cours of the
dai there ar 500 worth of sale at hi regist on sale is for 100 when the 100 sale is
made the employe doe not record the transact on hi regist the custom pai 100
and take the merchandis home but instead of place the monei in the cash drawer the
employe pocket it in order to creat the appear that the sale is be enter in the
regist the employe might ring a no sale or some other noncash transact sinc the
employe did not record the sale at the end of the dai the regist tape will onli reflect 400
in sale there will be 400 on hand in the re gister 500 in total sale minu the 100 that
the employe stole so the regist will balanc thu by not record the sale the employe
is abl to steal monei without the miss fund appear on the book of cours the
theft will show up indirectli in the compani record as inventori shrinkag but the book
will provid no direct evid of the theft
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1403
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1404 2011 fraud examin manual
the most difficult part in skim at the regist is that the employe must commit the
overt act of take monei if the employe take the custom monei and shove it into hi
pocket without enter the transact on the regist the custom will probabl suspect
that someth is wrong and might report the conduct to anoth employe or a manag it
is also possibl that a manag a fellow employe or a surveil camera will spot the
illeg conduct therefor it is often desir for a perpetr to act as though he is
properli record a transact while he skim sale
regist manipul
some employe might ring a no sale or ot her noncash transact to mask the theft of
sale the fals transact is enter on the regist so that it appear a sale is be rung up
the perpetr open the regist drawer and pretend to place the cash he ha just receiv
in the drawer but in realiti he pocket the cash to the casual observ it look as though
the sale is be properli record
some employe mai also rig their regist so that a sale can be enter on the regist kei
but will not appear on the regist tape the employe can then safe skim the sale anyon
observ the employe will see the sale enter see the cash drawer open etc yet the
regist tape will not reflect the transact
exampl
a servic station employe hid stolen gasolin sale by simpli lift the ribbon from the
printer on hi regist he collect and pocket the sale which were not record on the
regist tape the fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next
transact should appear and replac the ribb on the next transact would be print
without leav ani blank space on the tape appar leav no trace of the fraud
when the ribbon is remov from the regist the result is a blank space on the regist tape
where the skim sale should have been print unusu gap between transact on a
regist tape mai mean that someon is skim sale
fraudster will often manual roll back the tape when thei replac the ribbon on their
regist so that there is no gap between transact most regist transact howev
ar sequenti number if a transact ha been omit from the regist tape the result
is a break in the sequenc for instanc if an employe skim sale 155 then the regist
tape would onli show transact 153 154 156 157 and so on the miss
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1405
transact number omit becaus the ribbon wa lift when thei took place would
indic fraud
skim dure nonbusi hour
anoth wai to skim unrecord sale is to conduct sale dure nonbusi hour for
instanc some employe will open store on weekend or after hour without the
knowledg of the owner thei can pocket the proce of all sale made dure these time
becaus the owner have no idea that their store ar even open for busi
exampl
a manag of a retail facil went to work two hour earli everi dai open hi store at
800 am instead of 1000 am and pocket all the sale made dure these two hour
he rang up sale on the regist as if it wa busi as usual but then remov the regist
tape and all the cash he had accumul the manag then start from scratch at 1000
as if the store wa just open the tape wa destroi so there wa no record of the befor
hour revenu
to thi point skim ha been discuss in the context of cash regist transact but
skim doe not have to occur at a regist some of the most costli skim scheme
ar perpetr by employe who work at remot locat or without close supervis
thi can includ onsit sale person who do not deal with regist independ salesmen
who oper offsit and employe who work at branch or satellit offic these
employe have a high level of autonomi in their job which often translat into poor
supervis and in turn to fraud
skim of offsit sale
sever industri reli on remot salesperson to gener revenu the fact that these
employe ar larg unsupervis put them in a good posit to skim revenu for
exampl consid the apart rental industri where apart manag handl the
daytodai oper without much oversight a common scheme is for an onsit employe to
identifi the tenant who pai in currenc and remov them from the book thi caus a
particular apart to appear as vacant on the record when in fact it is occupi the
manag can skim the rental payment from the vacant unit and the revenu will never be
miss as long as no on physic check the apart the perpetr can continu
skim indefinit
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1406 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth rentalskim scheme occur when apart ar rent out but no leas is
sign on the book the apart will still a ppear to be vacant even though there ar
tenant on the premis the perpetr can skim the rental payment from these tenant
without fear that thei will show up as past due in the compani record sometim the
employe in these scheme work in conjunct with the renter and give a special rate to
these peopl in return the renter payment ar made directli to the employe and ani
complaint or mainten request ar direct onli to that employe so the tenant
presenc in the apart remain hidden
instead of skim rent some properti manag focu on less predict form of
revenu like applic fee and late fee ownership mai know when rent is due and how
mani apart ar occupi but often there is no control in place to track the number of
peopl who fill out rental applic or how mani tenant pai their rent a dai or two late
properti manag can make thousand of dollar by skim these nickel and dime
payment
offsit skim is by no mean limit to the apart rental industri the scheme
describ abov can easili translat into ani arena where those who gener or collect
revenu oper in an independ fashion a prime exampl is the insur agent who
sell polici to custom then neglect to file the polici with the carrier most custom
do not want to file claim on a polici especi earli in the term for fear that their
premium will rise know thi the agent k eep all document on the polici instead
of turn it over to the carrier the agent is abl to skim the custom payment becaus
the carrier doe not know the polici exist the custom continu to make hi payment
think that he is insur when in fact the polici is a ruse
poor collect procedur
poor collect and record procedur can make it easi for an employe to skim sale or
receiv
exampl
a government author that dealt with public hous wa victim becaus it fail to
item daili receipt thi agenc receiv pa yment from sever public hous tenant
but at the end of the dai monei receiv from tenant wa list as a whole receipt
number were not us to item iz the payment made by tenant so there wa no wai to
pinpoint which tenant had paid how much consequ the employe in charg of
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1407
collect monei from tenant wa abl to skim a portion of their payment she simpli did
not record the receipt of over 10000 her action caus certain account receiv to be
overst where tenant payment were not properli record
underst sale
the discuss abov focus on pure offbook sale those which ar never record
underst sale work differ becaus the transact in question is post to the
book but for a lower amount than what the perpetr actual collect see
underst sale flowchart on wai employe commit underst sale scheme is by
alter receipt or prepar fals receipt that misstat the amount of sale
exampl
an employe wrote receipt to custom for their purchas but she remov the carbon
paper back on the receipt so that thei did not produc a compani copi the employe
then us a pencil to prepar compani copi that show lower purchas price for
exampl if the custom had paid 100 the compani copi might reflect a payment of 80
the employe skim the differ between the actual amount of revenu and the amount
reflect on the fraudul receipt
underst sale scheme ar commonli undertaken by employe who work at the cash
regist in a typic scheme an employe enter a sale total that is lower than the amount
actual paid by the custom the employe skim the differ between the actual
purchas price of the item and the sale figur record on the regist for instanc if an
item is sold for 100 the employe could ring up the sale of an 80 item and skim the excess
20
rather than reduc the price of an item an employe might record the sale of fewer item if
100 unit ar sold for instanc an employe might onli record the sale of 50 unit and skim
the excess receipt
a similar method is us when sale ar made on account the bill to the custom reflect
the true amount of the sale but the receiv is underst in the compani book for
instanc a compani might be ow 1000 but the receiv is record as 800 sale ar
correspondingli underst by 200 when the custom make payment on the account
the employe can skim 200 and post the 800 to the account the account will appear to
have been paid in full
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1408 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1409
fals discount
those employe with the author to grant discount mai util thi author to skim
sale and receiv in a fals discount skim scheme an employe accept full
payment for an item but record the transact as if the custom had been given a
discount the employe skim the amount of the discount for exampl on a 100
purchas if an employe grant a fals discount of 20 percent he could skim 20 and leav
the compani book in balanc
theft of check receiv through the mail
check receiv through the mail ar a frequent target of employe seek illicit gain
theft of incom check usual occur when a singl employe is in charg of open the
mail and record the receipt of payment thi employe simpli steal on or more
incom check instead of post them to custom account see theft of incom
check flowchart when the task of receiv and record incom payment is left to a
singl person it is all too easi for that employe to make off with an occasion check
exampl
a mailroom employe stole over 2 million in govern check arriv through the mail
thi employe simpli identifi and remov envelop deliv from a govern agenc
known to send check to the compani us a group of accomplic act under the name
of fictiti person and compani thi indi vidual wa abl to launder the check and
divid the proce with hi croni
the theft of check is not usual complic but it is sometim more difficult to conceal a
check theft scheme than other form of skim if the stolen check were payment on
the victim compani receiv then these payment were expect as receiv becom
past due the victim compani will send notic of nonpay to it custom a custom
is like to complain when he receiv a second bill for a payment he ha alreadi made in
addit the cash check will serv as evid that the custom made hi payment the
method us to conceal check theft scheme will be discuss later in thi section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1410 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1411
check for currenc substitut
the intellig crimin will gener prefer to steal currenc rather than check if given the
opportun the reason why ar obviou first currenc is harder to trace than a check a
cash check eventu return to the person who wrote it and mai provid evid of
who cash it or where it wa spent endors bank stamp and so forth mai indic
the ident of the thief currenc on the other hand disappear into the economi onc it is
stolen
the second reason that currenc is prefer to a check is the difficulti in convert the
check when currenc is stolen it can be spent immedi a check on the other hand
must be endors and cash or deposit befor the thief can put hi hand on the monei
it repres to avoid thi problem employe who steal unrecord check will frequent
substitut them for receipt currenc if for exampl an employe skim an incom
check worth 500 he can add the check to the dai receipt and remov 500 in currenc
the total receipt will match the amount of cash on hand but payment in currenc ar
replac by the check
exampl
an employe respons for receipt ticket and fine payment on behalf of a municip
abus her posit and stole incom revenu es for nearli two year when payment in
currenc were receiv by thi individu she issu receipt but when check were receiv
she did not the check payment were theref or unrecord revenuesrip for skim
these unrecord check were place in the dai receipt and an equal amount of cash wa
remov the receipt match the amount of monei on hand except that payment in
currenc had been replac with check
the check for currenc substitut is veri common while these substitut make it easier
for a crook to convert stolen payment the problem of conceal the theft still remain
the fact that the stolen check ar not post mean that some custom account ar in
danger of becom past due if thi happen the perpetr scheme is in danger becaus
these custom will almost sure complain about the misappl of their payment
howev the misappli payment can be conceal on the book by forc account total
steal custom account statement lap and make other fraudul account
entri these conceal techniqu will be discuss in more detail in the skim
receiv section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1412 2011 fraud examin manual
check for currenc substitut ar especi common when an employe ha access to
some unexpect sourc of fund such as a manufactur refund that arriv outsid the
regular stream of sale and receiv payment in these case the check can be swap
for cash and there is usual no addit step requir to conceal the crime the refund
check an unexpect sourc of fund will not be miss by the victim organ and the
parti who issu the check expect no good or servic in return
skim receiv
it is gener more difficult to conceal the skim of receiv than the skim of
sale becaus receiv payment ar expect the victim organ know the custom
ow monei and it is wait for the payment to arriv when unrecord sale ar skim
it is as though the sale never exist but when receiv ar skim the absenc of the
payment appear on the book as a delinqu account in order to conceal a skim
receiv a perpetr must somehow account for the payment that wa due to the
compani but never receiv there ar a number of common techniqu fraudster us to
conceal the skim of receiv
forc account balanc or destroi transact record
among the most danger receiv skim scheme ar those in which the
perpetr is in charg of collect and post payment if a fraudster ha a hand in both
end of the receipt process he can falsifi record to conceal the theft of receiv
payment for exampl the fraudster might post the custom payment to their
receiv account even though the payment will never be deposit thi keep the
receiv from ag but it creat an imbal in the cash account the perpetr hide
the imbal by forc the total on the cash account overst it to match the total
post to account receiv
exampl
the chief financi offic of a small corpor stole approxim 100000 from hi
compani by divert custom check thi in dividu control all the book and record
for the victim compani he stole check from custom and deposit them in hi person
bank account the custom payment were still post to keep the receiv from ag
the perpetr stole check in an amount equal to the victim compani tax liabil to
keep the book in balanc he would prepar check payabl to the ir but he never
mail them the check were record in the victim record and the fals disburs
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1413
offset the amount of fals post to acco unt receiv the scheme wa uncov when
the ir notifi the victim compani that it tax were delinqu
some fraudster simpli destroi all record that might prove that thei have been steal
destroi record en mass doe not prevent the victim organ from realiz that it
is be rob but it mai help conceal the ident of the thief
lap
lap custom payment is on of the most common method of conceal receiv
skim lap is the credit of on a ccount through the abstract of monei from
anoth account it is the fraudster version of rob peter to pai paul
suppos a compani ha three custom a b and c when as payment is receiv the
fraudster steal it instead of post it to as account custom a expect that hi account
will be credit with the payment he ha made if the payment ha not been post by the
time as next statement is mail he will see that the payment wa not appli to hi
account and will almost certainli complain to avoid thi the thief must take some action to
make it appear that the payment wa post
when bs check arriv the thief post thi monei to as account payment now appear to
be uptod on as account but bs account is behind when cs payment is receiv the
perpetr appli it to bs account thi process continu indefinit until on of three
thing happen 1 someon discov the scheme 2 restitut is made to the account or
3 some conceal entri is made to adjust the account receiv balanc
exampl
a clerk work for a govern agenc commit a lap scheme that involv the
theft of more than 150 custom payment caus a total misappropri of more than
30000 in govern fund thi individu stole tax fee and other incom
payment from custom to cover hi person expens when a custom payment wa
stolen the document on that payment would be hidden until a later payment wa
receiv the later payment would be appli to the earlier custom record
as the rotat schedul of appli and misappli payment becam more and more
complic the perpetr insist on exert more and more control over the receipt
process he insist on handl all incom mail prepar the deposit and deliv the
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1414 2011 fraud examin manual
deposit to the bank so that he could continu to delai the post of payment the fraud
wa detect in larg part becaus sever consum complain that thei had not receiv
confirm of their payment even though their check had clear month earlier
becaus lap scheme can becom veri intric fraudster sometim keep a second set
of book on hand detail the true natur of the payment receiv in mani skim
case a search of the fraudster work area will reveal a set of record track the actual
payment and how thei have been misappli to conceal the theft it mai seem odd that
peopl would keep record of their illeg activ on hand but mani lap scheme
becom extrem complic as more and more payment ar misappli the second set
of record help the perpetr keep track of the fund that were stolen and which account
need to be credit to conceal the fraud uncov these record if thei exist will greatli
facilit the investig of a lap scheme
while lap is more commonli us to conceal receiv skim it can also be us
to disguis the skim of sale employe sometim steal all or part of on dai receipt
and replac them with the receipt from the follow dai thi type of conceal
requir the employe to delai make the compani deposit until enough monei can be
collect to recoup the stolen fund if an organ rigidli adher to a deposit schedul
it is unlik that lap will be effect in conceal thi type of fraud
stolen statement
when employe skim receiv thei mai let the target account ag instead of
attempt to forc the balanc in other word thei steal an incom check intend as
payment on a receiv and thei simpli act as if the check never arriv thi method
keep the victim organ cash account in balanc becaus the stolen payment is never
post
of cours if the custom payment is not post the receiv will eventu becom
past due the custom will have proof in the form of a cancel check that a payment wa
made on the account the question will aris where did the payment go the answer of
cours is that it went into the fraudster pocket so the goal of the fraudster must be to
keep the custom from realiz that hi account wa not credit with the payment if thi
can be accomplish the custom will not complain about the miss payment and the
victim organ will not realiz that skim ha occur
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1415
on wai fraudster attempt to conceal the fact that thei have skim a payment from a
custom is to intercept the custom account statement andor late notic in some
case the perpetr intercept the account statement by chang the custom address in
the bill system so that statement ar sent directli to the perpetr home or to an
address where he can retriev them in other instanc the perpetr physic intercept
the statement befor thei ar mail
onc the real statement indic that the payment wa not receiv ha been intercept
the fraudster usual alter the statement or produc a counterfeit the fals statement
indic that the custom payment wa properli post thi lead the custom to believ
that hi account is uptod and keep the custom from complain about stolen
payment
fals account entri
intercept the custom statement will keep him in the dark as to the statu of hi
account but as long as the custom payment ar be skim hi account is slip
further and further past due the perpetr must bring the account back up to date in
order to conceal hi crime lap is on wai to keep account current as the employe
skim from them anoth wai is to make fals entri in the victim organ
account system
debit to expens account
an employe might conceal the skim of fund by make unsupport entri in the
victim compani book if a payment is made on a receiv for instanc the proper entri
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receiv instead of debit cash the employe might
choos to debit an expens account thi transact still keep the compani book in
balanc but the incom cash is never record in addit the custom receiv
account is credit so it will not becom delinqu
debit to ag or fictiti receiv
the same method discuss abov is us when employe debit exist or fictiti
account receiv in order to conceal skim cash for exampl an employe who ha
skim on custom payment might add the stolen amount to ag account that ar
soon to be written off as uncollect or to veri larg account where a small debit might
go unnot
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1416 2011 fraud examin manual
some perpetr also set up complet fictiti account and debit them for the cost of
skim receiv the employe then simpli wait for the fictiti receiv to ag
and be written off as uncollect in the meantim the fictiti receiv carri the cost
of a skim scheme where it will not be detect
write off account balanc
some employe cover their skim by post entri to contra revenu account such as
discount and allow if for instanc an employe intercept a 1000 payment he
would creat a 1000 discount on the acco unt to compens for the miss monei
anoth account that might be us in thi type of conceal is the bad debt expens
account
exampl
a bill manag wa author iz to write off certain patient balanc as hardship
allow thi employe accept payment from patient then instruct bill personnel
to write off the balanc in question the payment were never post thei were intercept
by the bill manag she cover approxim 30000 in stolen fund by us her
author to write off patient balanc
inventori pad
a problem for fraudster in some skim scheme is the victim organ inventori
offbook sale of good will alwai leav an in ventori shortag and a correspond rise in
the cost of good sold
when a sale of good is made the physic inventori is reduc by the amount of
merchandis sold for instanc when a retail sell a pair of shoe there is on less pair of
shoe in the stock room if thi sale is not record howev the shoe ar not remov
from the perpetu inventori record thu there is on less pair of shoe on hand than in
the perpetu inventori a reduct in the physic inventori without a correspond
reduct in the perpetu inventori is known as shrinkag
when an employe skim sale of servic there is no shrinkag becaus there is no
inventori for servic but when sale of good ar skim shrinkag alwai occur some
amount of shrinkag ar expect due to custom theft faulti product and spoilag but
high level of shrinkag serv as a warn that a compani could be a victim of occup
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1417
fraud the gener method us to conceal inventori shrinkag ar discuss in detail in the
inventori and other asset section
detect of skim scheme
the follow ar some detect method that mai be effect in detect skim
scheme
receipt or sale level detect
kei analyt procedur such as vertic and horizont analysi of sale account can be
us for skim detect on a grand scale these procedur analyz chang in the
account and can possibl point to skim problem includ underst sale
ratio analysi can also provid kei to the detect of skim scheme these
procedur ar discuss in detail in the fraudul financi statement section
detail inventori control procedur can also be util to detect inventori shrinkag due
to unrecord sale inventori detect method includ statist sampl trend analysi
review of receiv report and inventori record verif of materi requisit and
ship document as well as actual physic inventori count these procedur ar
review in the section on inventori and other asset
journal entri review
skim can sometim be detect by review and analyz all journal entri made to
the cash and inventori account journal entri involv the follow topic should be
examin
fals credit to inventori to conceal unrecord or underst sale
writeoff of lost stolen or obsolet inventori
writeoff of account receiv account
irregular entri to cash account
detect lap of sale or receiv
lap can usual be detect by compar the date of the custom payment with the
date the custom account ar post thi will requir an examin of the sourc
document such as the composit of bank deposit discrep should be investig
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1418 2011 fraud examin manual
confirm of custom account is anoth method that might detect lap
confirm ar especi effect on larg account where the time valu of monei is an
issu howev custom who pai on invoic rather than on balanc might not know the
exact balanc of their account if thi is the case it might be more effect to confirm by
invoic and reconstruct the account balanc us the sourc document in the file and the
result of the confirm if fraud is suspect ask the custom or the bank to return a
copi of both the front and the back of the check us to pai specif invoic match the
data on the check copi with the post date in the custom account
prevent of skim scheme
receipt or sale level control
as with most fraud scheme intern control procedur ar a kei to prevent of
skim scheme an essenti part of develop control procedur is manag
commun to employe control whether or not an employe will not record a sale
underst a sale or steal incom payment is extrem difficult
gener control
sale entri and gener ledger access control should includ document polici and
procedur which ar commun directli from manag the control procedur
will gener cover the follow subject
appropri segreg of duti and access control procedur regard who make
ledger transact will be follow
transact must be properli record as to amount date of occurr and ledger
account
proper safeguard measur will be adopt to ensur physic access to the account
system addit measur should ensur the secur of compani asset
independ reconcili as well as intern verif of account will be perform
on ledger accounts1
skim control
the discoveri of theft of check and cash involv proper control on the receipt process
defici in the answer to these typic auditprogram question mai be red flag
is mail open by someon independ of cashier account receiv bookkeep or
other account employe who mai initi or post journal entri
1 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1419
is the deliveri of unopen busi mail prohibit to employe have access to the
account record
doe the employe who open the mail
place restrict endors for deposit onli on all check receiv
prepar a list of the monei check and other receipt
forward all remitt to the person respons for prepar and make the daili
bank deposit
forward the total of all remitt to the person respons for compar it to the
authent deposit ticket and amount record
is a lock box us
do cash sale occur if ye
ar cash receipt prenumb
is an independ check of prenumb receipt done daili and reconcil to cash
collect
do cash refund requir approv
ar cash receipt deposit intact daili
ar employe who handl receipt bond
is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from
prepar the bank deposit
obtain access to the cash receipt book
have access to collect from custom
ar bank instruct not to cash check drawn to the order of the compani
is the cashier restrict from gain access to the account receiv record and bank
and custom statement
ar area where physic handl of cash take place reason safeguard
is the person who make post to the gener ledger independ of the cash receipt
and account receiv function
doe a person independ of the cashier or account receiv function handl
custom complaint
cash larceni
in the occup fraud set a cash larceni mai be defin as the intent take of
an employ cash the term cash includ both currenc and check without the consent
and against the will of the employ
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1420 2011 fraud examin manual
a cash larceni scheme can take place in ani circumst in which an employe ha access
to cash everi compani must deal with the receipt deposit and distribut of cash so
everi compani is potenti vulner to a cash larceni scheme while the circumst in
which an employe might steal cash ar nearli limitless most larceni scheme involv the
theft of incom cash currenc on hand in a cash regist cash box etc or theft of cash
from the victim organ bank deposit
incom cash
theft of cash from the regist
a larg percentag of cash larceni scheme occur at the cash regist and for good reason
the regist is usual where the cash is the regist or similar cash collect point like
cash drawer or cash box is usual the most common point of access to cash for
employe so it is understand that thi is where larceni scheme frequent occur
furthermor there is often a great deal of activ at the regist numer transact that
requir employe to handl cash thi can serv as a cover for the theft of cash in a flurri
of activ with monei be pass back and forth between custom and employe an
employe can often slip cash out of the regist and into hi pocket undetect
the most straightforward cash larceni scheme is to simpli open the regist and remov
currenc or check see cash larceni from the regist flowchart the theft is often
commit as a sale is be conduct so that it appear to be part of the transact in
other circumst the perpetr wait for a slow moment when no on is around to
notic him dig into the cash drawer
recal that the difficulti in detect skim scheme come from the fact that the stolen
fund ar never enter on the victim organ account in a larceni scheme on the
other hand the fund that the perpetr steal have alreadi been reflect on the regist
tape as a result an imbal will result between the regist tape and the cash drawer
a regist is balanc by compar the transact on the regist tape to the amount of
cash on hand sale return and other regist transact that ar record on the regist
tape ar ad to or subtract from a known balanc to arriv at a total for the period in
question the actual cash is then count and the two total ar compar if the regist
tape show that there should be more cash in the regist than what is present the
discrep mai be due to larceni
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1421
the actual method for take monei at the regist open the regist and remov
currenc rare vari it is the method us by perpetr to avoid get caught that
distinguish larceni scheme oddli in mani instanc the perpetr ha no plan for
avoid detect a larg part of fraud is ration the employe convinc himself that
he is somehow entitl to what he is take or that what he is do is not actual a crime
regist larceni scheme frequent begin when the perpetr convinc himself that he is
onli borrow the fund to cover a temporari monetari need these peopl might carri
the miss currenc in their regist for sever dai delud themselv in the belief that
thei will on dai repai the fund thei have stolen
the employe who doe noth to camouflag hi crime is easili caught more danger
is the person take activ step to hide hi crime on basic wai for an employe to
disguis the fact that he is steal currenc is to take monei from someon els regist
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1422 2011 fraud examin manual
in some retail organ employe ar assign to certain regist altern on
regist is us and each employe ha an access code when cash is miss from a certain
cashier regist that cashier is obvious the most like suspect for the theft therefor by
steal from a cowork regist or by us someon els access code to enter the
regist the perpetr make sure that anoth employe will be the prime suspect in the
theft
exampl
a teller for a retail sale compani simpli sign onto a regist rang a no sale and took
currenc from the drawer over a period of time the teller took approxim 6000
through thi simpl method in order to get awai with the theft the teller wait until a
cowork wa on break then log onto that person regist rang a no sale and took
the cash the result cash shortag therefor appear in the regist of an honest
employe deflect attent from the true thief
a veri unsophist wai to avoid detect is to steal currenc in veri small amount over
an extend period of time becaus the miss amount ar small the shortag mai be
dismiss as account error rather than theft typic the employe becom depend
on the extra monei he is pilfer and hi theft increas in scale or becom more frequent
which caus the scheme to be uncov most retail organ track overag or
shortag by employe make thi method larg ineffect
revers transact
some employe conceal cash larceni by process revers transact which caus the
regist tape to reconcil to the amount of cash on hand after the theft by process fals
void or refund an employe can reduc the cash balanc reflect on the regist tape
exampl
a cashier receiv payment from a custom and record the transact on her system
she stole the payment from the custom then destroi the compani receipt that
reflect the transact to complet the coverup the cashier went back and void the
transact that she had enter at the time the payment were receiv the revers
entri brought the receipt total in to balanc with the cash on hand
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1423
regist manipul
instead of us revers entri an employe might manual alter the regist tape again
the purpos of thi activ is to forc a balanc between the cash on hand and the actual
cash receiv an employe might us whiteout to cover up a sale whose proce were
stolen or he might simpli cross out or alter the number on the tape so that the regist
total and the cash drawer balanc thi type of conceal is not common becaus in
gener the alter will be notic
alter cash count
anoth method for conceal cash larceni is to alter the cash count on regist when
cash from a regist is total and prepar for deposit an employe simpli record the
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appear to balanc with the total on the regist
tape obvious employe who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charg with
verifi the amount of cash on hand in their own regist but thi control is often
overlook
destroi regist tape
if the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balanc the next best thing is to prevent
other from comput the total and discov the imbal employe who ar
steal from the regist sometim destroi detail tape that would implic them in a
crime when detail tape ar miss or defac it mai be becaus someon is try to
conceal a fraud
other larceni of sale and receiv
not all receipt arriv via the cash regist employe can just as easili steal monei receiv
at other point on of the more common method is to take check receiv through the
mail post the payment to the account system but steal the check see other cash
larceni flowchart obvious thi type of scheme leav the cash account out of balanc
from a perpetr perspect it would make much more sens to take check that have
not yet been post to custom account often thi type of cash larceni scheme is
commit by an employe who claim to onli be borrow the fund for a short while
on of the classic ration in occup fraud scheme
those employe who have total control of a compani account system can overcom
the problem of outofbal account it is common especi in small busi for a
singl person to control all of a compani deposit and ledger these employe can steal
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1424 2011 fraud examin manual
incom cash that ha alreadi been post then conceal the crime by make unsupport
entri in the victim organ book poor separ of duti is veri often the
weak that allow cash larceni scheme to go undetect
exampl
an employe post custom payment to the account receiv journal but stole the cash
receiv thi result in an imbal in the victim compani cash account but the
perpetr had control over the compani deposit and all it ledger thi allow her to
conceal her crime by make unsupport entr i in the compani book that produc a
fictiti balanc between receipt and ledger
in circumst in which payment ar stolen but nonetheless post to the cash receipt
journal revers entri ar sometim us to balanc the victim compani account the
incom payment is initi credit to the custom account but the entri is later
revers with an unauthor adjust such as a courtesi discount
a less eleg wai to hide a crime is to simpli destroi all record that might prove that the
perpetr ha been steal thi slash and burn conceal techniqu doe not
prevent the victim compani from realiz that it ha been rob but it mai help conceal
the ident of the thief
cash larceni from the deposit
at some point in everi revenuegener busi someon must physic take the
compani currenc and check to the bank thi person or person left alon liter
hold the bag will have an opportun to take a portion of the monei prior to deposit
it into the compani account
typic when a compani receiv cash someon is assign to tabul the receipt list
the form of payment currenc or check and prepar a deposit slip for the bank then
anoth employe take the cash and deposit it in the bank the person who made out the
deposit gener retain on copi of the slip thi copi is match to a receipt copi of
the slip which is stamp by the bank when the deposit is made
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1425
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1426 2011 fraud examin manual
thi procedur is design to prevent the theft of fund from the deposit but theft still
occur often becaus the process is not adher to see cash larceni from the deposit
flowchart for exampl when on person is in charg of prepar the deposit slip make
the deposit and reconcil the bank statement that person can pilfer monei from the dai
receipt and conceal it by falsifi the deposit slip if the dai receipt ar 1000 the
perpetr might fill out a deposit slip for 5 00 and steal the other 500 the employe then
make correspondingli fals entri in the book underst the dai receipt thi
process creat a fals balanc in the victim organ record
a failur to reconcil the bank copi of the deposit slip with the offic copi can result in
fraud when the person make the deposit know hi compani doe not reconcil the two
copi he can steal cash from the deposit on the wai to the bank and alter the deposit slip
so that it reflect a lesser amount in some case sale record will also be alter to match
the diminish deposit
when cash is stolen from the deposit the receipt deposit slip will of cours be out of
balanc with the compani copi of the deposit slip unless the perpetr also prepar the
deposit to correct thi problem some perpetr alter the bank copi of the deposit slip
after it ha been valid thi bring the two copi back into balanc
exampl
an employe alter 24 deposit slip and valid bank receipt in the cours of a year to
conceal the theft of over 15 000 these document were alter with whiteout or a ball
point pen to match the compani cash report
on commonsens issu that is sometim over look by organ is the handl of
the deposit on the wai to the bank onc prepar the deposit should immedi be put in
a safe place until it is taken to the bank unfortun some organ leav their
deposit carelessli unattend for exampl some compani prepar the daili deposit then
leav it in the offic overnight to be taken to the bank the next morn employe familiar
with thi routin have littl troubl pilfer check and currenc from the deposit after
hour
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1427
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1428 2011 fraud examin manual
as with all cash larceni scheme steal from the compani deposit can be rather difficult
to conceal in most case these scheme ar onli success in the long term when the
person who count the cash also make the deposit in ani other circumst the success of
the scheme depend primarili on the inattent of those charg with prepar and
reconcil the deposit
deposit lap
on method that fraudster sometim us to conceal cash larceni from the deposit is
lap lap occur when an employe steal the deposit from dai on then replac it
with dai two deposit dai two is replac with dai three and so on the perpetr is
alwai on dai behind but as long as no on demand an uptoth minut reconcili of
the deposit to the bank statementand if daili receipt do not drop precipit he mai
be abl to avoid detect for a period of time lap is discuss in more detail in the
skim section
deposit in transit
a final strategi us to conceal stolen deposit is to carri the miss monei as deposit in
transit which ar a wai of account for discrep between the compani record and
the bank statement
exampl
an employe wa respons for receiv collect issu receipt post transact
reconcil account and make deposit thi employe took over 20000 in collect
from her employ over a fivemonth period to hide her theft the perpetr carri the
miss monei as deposit in transit mean that the miss monei would appear on the
next month bank statement of cours it never did the balanc wa carri for sever
month as dit until an auditor recogn the discrep and put a halt to the fraud
detect of cash larceni
receipt record
indepth analysi of the cash receipt and record process is the kei to detect a cash
larceni scheme area of analysi mai includ
mail and regist receipt point
journal and record of the receipt
secur of the cash from receipt to deposit
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1429
control object
in analyz the cash receipt process it is import to meet the follow control
object
cash receipt must be complet each dai receipt must be promptli collect and
deposit in full
each receiv transact record must be legitim and have support
document
all inform includ in the transact must be correctli verifi as to amount date
account code and descript
the cash must be safeguard while in the physic possess of the compani
there must be appropri personnel respons for overse cash control process
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount of cash in drawer
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar
submit to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
an independ person should verifi the list against the deposit slip
authent deposit slip should be retain and reconcil to the correspond
amount in the cash receipt record
the bank deposit should be made by someon other than the cashier or the account
receiv bookkeep a person independ of the cash receipt and account
receiv function should compar entri to the cash receipt journal with
authent bank deposit slip
deposit per the bank statement
area where physic handl of cash take place should be reason safeguard
analyt review
analyz the relationship between sale cost of sale and the return and allow can
detect inappropri refund and discount
if a larg cash fraud is suspect a thorough review of these account mai enlighten the
examin as to the magnitud of the suspect fraud
an analysi of refund and return and allow with the actual flow of inventori mai
reveal some fraud scheme the refund should caus an entri to inventori even if it is
damag inventori likewis a return will caus a correspond entri to an inventori
account
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1430 2011 fraud examin manual
there should be a linear relationship between sale and return and allow over a
relev rang ani chang in thi relationship mai point to a fraud scheme unless there
is anoth valid explan such as a chang in the manufactur process chang in
product line or chang in price
detect at the regist
as cash is receiv whether at a regist or through the mail it is import to ensur
that the employe respons for complet these import task ar inform of
their respons and properli supervis
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
popular conceal method must be watch for these method discuss earlier
includ check for cash revers transact regist tape destruct or alter
and sale cash count
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have either paid monei on an
account and have not receiv credit or in some case when thei notic that the credit
thei have been given doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and
inquiri ar also receiv frequent from bank
cash account analysi
cash larceni can be detect by review and analyz all journal entri made to the cash
account thi review and analysi should be perform on a regular basi if an employe is
unabl to conceal the fraud through alter the sourc document such as the cash regist
tape then he mai resort to make a journal entri directli to cash in gener and except in
financi institut there ar veri few instanc in everydai busi activ where an
independ journal entri is necessari for cash on of these except is the record of
the bank servic charg howev thi is an easi journal entri to trace to it sourc
document name the bank statement therefor all other entri directli to cash ar
suspect and should be trace to their sourc document or explan suspect entri
will gener credit the cash account and correspondingli debit variou other account such
as a sale contra account or bad debt expens
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1431
prevent of cash larceni
segreg of duti
the primari prevent of cash larceni is segreg of duti whenev on individu
ha control over the entir account transact eg author record and
custodi the opportun is present for cash fraud each of the follow duti and
respons should ideal be segreg
cash receipt
cash count
bank deposit
deposit receipt reconcili
bank reconcili
post of deposit
cash disburs
if ani on person ha the author to collect the cash deposit the receipt record that
collect and disburs compani fund the risk that fraud can occur is high
assign rotat and mandatori vacat
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc mandatori job rotat is an excel method of
detect cash fraud by establish a mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt if mandatori vacat ar within the compani
polici it is import that dure the employe absenc the normal workload of that
employe be perform by anoth individu the purpos of mandatori vacat is lost if
the work is allow to remain undon dure the employe time off
surpris cash count and procedur supervis
surpris cash count and supervisori observ ar a us fraud prevent method if
properli us it is import that employe know that cash will be count on a sporad
and unschedul basi these surpris count must be made at all step of the process from
receiv the check to deposit
physic secur of cash
ensur proper segreg of duti of kei personnel
review the check and cash composit of the daili bank deposit dure unannounc
cash count and dure substant audit test of cash receipt
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1432 2011 fraud examin manual
review the entiti record of the numer seri of print prenumb receipt and
verifi that these receipt ar us sequenti includ void document
review the timeli of deposit from locat to the central treasur function
observ cash receipt oper of locat
prepar and review a schedul of all cash receipt function from a review of revenu
report from cash receipt form at the central treasur function and from discuss
with knowledg employe
prepar and analyz an inventori of all imprest and chang fund by purpos amount
custodian date and locat
audit all revenu sourc on a cycl
period us compar analyt review to determin which function have
unfavor trend
determin reason why revenu ha chang from previou report period
confirm respons obtain from manag by us altern record or through
substant audit test
adher to a commun polici of unannounc cash count
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1501
