2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Skimming 
Skimming is the removal of cash from a victim entity prior to its entry in an accounting 
system. Employees who skim from their companies steal sales or receivables before they are 
recorded in the company books. Skimming schemes are known as “off-book” frauds, 
meaning money is stolen before it is recorded in the victim organization’s accounts. This 
aspect of skimming schemes means they leave no direct audit trail. Because the stolen funds 
are never recorded, the victim organization may not be aware that the cash was ever 
received. Consequently, it may be very difficult to detect that the money has been stolen. 
This is the prime advantage of a skimming scheme to the fraudster.  
 
Skimming is one of the most common forms of occupational fraud. It can occur at any point 
where cash enters a business, so almost anyone who deals with the process of receiving cash 
may be in a position to skim money. This includes salespeople, tellers, waitpersons, and 
others who receive cash directly from customers.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.402                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, many skimming schemes are perpetrated by employees whose duties include 
receiving and logging payments made by customers through the mail. These employees slip 
checks out of the incoming mail instead of posting those checks to the proper revenue or 
receivables accounts. Those who deal directly with customers or who handle customer 
payments are obviously the most likely candidates to skim funds.  
 
Sales Skimming 
The most basic skimming scheme occurs when an employee sells goods or services to a 
customer, collects the customer’s payment, but makes no record of the sale. The employee 
simply pockets the money received from the customer instead of turning it over to his 
employer. (See “Unrecorded Sales” flowchart.)   
 
Consider one of the simplest and most common sales transactions, a sale of goods at the 
cash register. In a normal transaction, a customer purchases an item and an employee enters 
the sale on the register. The register tape reflects that the sale has been made and shows that 
a certain amount of cash (the purchase price of the item) should have been placed in the 
register. By comparing the register tape to the amount of money on hand, it may be possible 
to detect thefts. For instance, if there were $500 worth of sales recorded on a particular 
register on a given day, but only $400 cash in the register, it would be obvious that someone 
had stolen $100 (assuming no beginning cash balance).  
 
If the employee is skimming money, however, it will be impossible to detect theft simply by 
comparing the register tape to the cash drawer. Returning to the example in the paragraph 
above, assume that an employee wants to make off with $100. Through the course of the 
day, there are $500 worth of sales at his register ; one sale is for $100. When the $100 sale is 
made, the employee does not record the transaction on his register. The customer pays $100 
and takes the merchandise home, but instead of placing the money in the cash drawer, the 
employee pockets it. In order to create the appearance that the sale is being entered in the 
register, the employee might ring a “no sale” or some other non-cash transaction. Since the 
employee did not record the sale, at the end of the day the register tape will only reflect $400 
in sales. There will be $400 on hand in the re gister ($500 in total sales minus the $100 that 
the employee stole) so the register will balance. Thus by not recording the sale the employee 
is able to steal money without the missing funds appearing on the books. Of course, the 
theft will show up indirectly in the company’s records as inventory shrinkage. But the books 
will provide no direct evidence of the theft. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.403 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.404                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 The most difficult part in skimming at the register is that the employee must commit the 
overt act of taking money. If the employee takes the customer’s money and shoves it into his 
pocket without entering the transaction on the register, the customer will probably suspect 
that something is wrong and might report the conduct to another employee or a manager. It 
is also possible that a manager, a fellow employee, or a surveillance camera will spot the 
illegal conduct. Therefore, it is often desirable for a perpetrator to act as though he is 
properly recording a transaction while he skims sales.  
 
Register Manipulation 
Some employees might ring a “no sale” or ot her non-cash transaction to mask the theft of 
sales. The false transaction is entered on the register so that it appears a sale is being rung up. 
The perpetrator opens the register drawer and pretends to place the cash he has just received 
in the drawer, but in reality he pockets the cash. To the casual observer it looks as though 
the sale is being properly recorded.  
 
Some employees may also rig their registers so that a sale can be entered on the register keys, 
but will not appear on the register tapes. The employee can then safely skim the sale. Anyone 
observing the employee will see the sale entered, see the cash drawer open, etc., yet the 
register tape will not reflect the transaction.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A service station employee hid stolen gasoline sales by simply  lifting the ribbon from the 
printer on his register. He collected and pocketed the sales, which were not recorded on the 
register tape. The fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next 
transaction should appear and replace the ribb on. The next transaction would be printed 
without leaving any blank space on the tape, apparently leaving no trace of the fraud.   
 
When the ribbon is removed from the register, the result is a blank space on the register tape 
where the skimmed sale should have been printed. Unusual gaps between transactions on a 
register tape may mean that someone is skimming sales.  
 
Fraudsters will often manually roll back the tape when they replace the ribbon on their 
registers so that there is no gap between transactions. Most register transactions, however, 
are sequentially numbered. If a transaction has been omitted from the register tape, the result 
is a break in the sequence. For instance, if an employee skimmed sale #155, then the register 
tape would only show transactions #153, #154, #156, #157 and so on. The missing 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.405 
transaction numbers, omitted because the ribbon was lifted when they took place, would 
indicate fraud.  
 
Skimming During Nonbusiness Hours 
Another way to skim unrecorded sales is to conduct sales during nonbusiness hours. For 
instance, some employees will open stores on weekends or after hours without the 
knowledge of the owners. They can pocket the proceeds of all sales made during these times 
because the owners have no idea that their stores are even open for business.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A manager of a retail facility went to work two hours early every day, opening his store at 
8:00 a.m. instead of 10:00 a.m., and pocketed all the sales made during these two hours. 
He rang up sales on the register as if it was business as usual, but then removed the register 
tape and all the cash he had accumulated. The manager then started from scratch at 10:00 
as if the store was just opening. The tape was destroyed so there was no record of the before-
 hours revenue. 
 
To this point skimming has been discussed in the context of cash register transactions, but 
skimming does not have to occur at a register. Some of the most costly skimming schemes 
are perpetrated by employees who work at remote locations or without close supervision. 
This can include on-site sales persons who do not deal with registers, independent salesmen 
who operate off-site, and employees who work at branches or satellite offices. These 
employees have a high level of autonomy in their jobs, which often translates into poor 
supervision and, in turn, to fraud.  
 
Skimming of Off-Site Sales 
Several industries rely on remote salespersons to generate revenue. The fact that these 
employees are largely unsupervised puts them in a good position to skim revenues. For 
example, consider the apartment rental industry, where apartment managers handle the 
day-to-day operations without much oversight. A common scheme is for an on-site employee to 
identify the tenants who pay in currency and remove them from the books. This causes a 
particular apartment to appear as vacant on the records when, in fact, it is occupied. The 
manager can skim the rental payments from the “vacant” unit, and the revenue will never be 
missed. As long as no one physically checks the apartment, the perpetrator can continue 
skimming indefinitely.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.406                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another rental-skimming scheme occurs when apartments are rented out but no lease is 
signed. On the books, the apartment will still a ppear to be vacant, even though there are 
tenants on the premises. The perpetrator can skim the rental payments from these tenants 
without fear that they will show up as past due in the company records. Sometimes the 
employees in these schemes work in conjunction with the renters and give a “special rate” to 
these people. In return, the renter’s payments are made directly to the employee and any 
complaints or maintenance requests are directed only to that employee so the tenant’s 
presence in the apartment remains hidden.  
 
Instead of skimming rent, some property managers focus on less predictable forms of 
revenue like application fees and late fees. Ownership may know when rent is due and how 
many apartments are occupied, but often there is no control in place to track the number of 
people who fill out rental applications or how many tenants pay their rent a day or two late. 
Property managers can make thousands of dollars by skimming these “nickel and dime” 
payments.  
 
Off-site skimming is by no means limited to the apartment rental industry. The schemes 
described above can easily translate into any arena where those who generate or collect 
revenues operate in an independent fashion. A prime example is the insurance agent who 
sells policies to customers, then neglects to file the policies with the carrier. Most customers 
do not want to file claims on a policy, especially early in the term, for fear that their 
premiums will rise. Knowing this, the agent k eeps all documentation on the policies instead 
of turning it over to the carrier. The agent is able to skim the customer’s payments because 
the carrier does not know the policy exists. The customer continues to make his payments, 
thinking that he is insured, when in fact the policy is a ruse.  
 
Poor Collection Procedures 
Poor collection and recording procedures can make it easy for an employee to skim sales or 
receivables.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A governmental authority that dealt with public housing was victimized because it failed to 
itemize daily receipts. This agency received pa yments from several public housing tenants, 
but at the end of the day, “money” received from tenants was listed as a whole. Receipt 
numbers were not used to item ize the payments made by tenants, so there was no way to 
pinpoint which tenant had paid how much. Consequently, the employee in charge of 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.407 
collecting money from tenants was able to skim a portion of their payments. She simply did 
not record the receipt of over $10,000. Her actions caused certain accounts receivable to be 
overstated where tenant payments were not properly recorded.  
 
Understated Sales  
The discussion above focused on purely off-book sales, those which are never recorded. 
Understated sales work differently because the transaction in question is posted to the 
books, but for a lower amount than what the perpetrator actually collected. (See 
“Understated Sales” flowchart.) One way employees commit understated sales schemes is by 
altering receipts or preparing false receipts that misstate the amount of sales. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee wrote receipts to customers for their purchases, but she removed the carbon 
paper backing on the receipts so that they did not produce a company copy. The employee 
then used a pencil to prepare company copies that showed lower purchase prices. For 
example, if the customer had paid $100, the company copy might reflect a payment of $80. 
The employee skimmed the difference between the actual amount  of revenue and the amount 
reflected on the fraudulent receipt. 
 
Understated sales schemes are commonly undertaken by employees who work at the cash 
register. In a typical scheme an employee enters a sales total that is lower than the amount 
actually paid by the customer. The employee skims the difference between the actual 
purchase price of the item and the sales figure recorded on the register. For instance, if an 
item is sold for $100, the employee could ring up  the sale of an $80 item and skim the excess 
$20.  
 
Rather than reduce the price of an item, an employee might record the sale of fewer items. If 
100 units are sold, for instance, an employee might only record the sale of 50 units and skim 
the excess receipts.  
 
A similar method is used when sales are made on account. The bill to the customer reflects 
the true amount of the sale, but the receivable is understated in the company books. For 
instance, a company might be owed $1,000, but the receivable is recorded as $800. (Sales are 
correspondingly understated by $200.) When the customer makes payment on the account, 
the employee can skim $200 and post the $800 to the account. The account will appear to 
have been paid in full.  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.408                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.409 
FALSE DISCOUNTS 
Those employees with the authority to grant discounts may utilize this authority to skim 
sales and receivables. In a false discount skimming scheme, an employee accepts full 
payment for an item, but records the transaction as if the customer had been given a 
discount. The employee skims the amount of the discount. For example, on a $100 
purchase, if an employee granted a false discount of 20 percent, he could skim $20 and leave 
the company’s books in balance.  
 
Theft of Checks Received Through the Mail 
Checks received through the mail are a frequent target of employees seeking illicit gains. 
Theft of incoming checks usually occurs when a single employee is in charge of opening the 
mail and recording the receipt of payments. This employee simply steals one or more 
incoming checks instead of posting them to customer accounts. (See “Theft of Incoming 
Checks” flowchart.) When the task of receiving and recording incoming payments is left to a 
single person, it is all too easy for that employee to make off with an occasional check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A mailroom employee stole over $2 million in government checks arriving through the mail. 
This employee simply identified and removed envelopes delivered from a government agency 
known to send checks to the company. Using a group of accomplices acting under the names 
of fictitious persons and companies, this indi vidual was able to launder the checks and 
divide the proceeds with his cronies. 
 
The theft of checks is not usually complicated, but it is sometimes more difficult to conceal a 
check theft scheme than other forms of skimming. If the stolen checks were payments on 
the victim company’s receivables, then these payments were expected. As receivables become 
past due, the victim company will send notices of nonpayment to its customers. A customer 
is likely to complain when he receives a second bill for a payment he has already made. In 
addition, the cashed check will serve as evidence that the customer made his payment. The 
methods used to conceal check theft schemes will be discussed later in this section. 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.410                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.411 
Check for Currency Substitutions 
The intelligent criminal will generally prefer to steal currency rather than checks if given the 
opportunity. The reasons why are obvious. First, currency is harder to trace than a check. A 
cashed check eventually returns to the person who wrote it and may provide evidence of 
who cashed it or where it was spent. Endorsements, bank stamps, and so forth may indicate 
the identity of the thief. Currency, on the other hand, disappears into the economy once it is 
stolen.  
 
The second reason that currency is preferable to a check is the difficulty in converting the 
check. When currency is stolen it can be spent immediately. A check, on the other hand, 
must be endorsed and cashed or deposited before the thief can put his hands on the money 
it represents. To avoid this problem, employees who steal unrecorded checks will frequently 
substitute them for receipted currency. If, for example, an employee skims an incoming 
check worth $500, he can add the check to the day’s receipts and remove $500 in currency. 
The total receipts will match the amount of cash on hand, but payments in currency are 
replaced by the check.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee responsible for receipting ticket and fine payments on behalf of a municipality 
abused her position and stole incoming revenu es for nearly two years. When payments in 
currency were received by this individual, she issued receipts, but when checks were received 
she did not. The check payments were theref ore unrecorded revenues—ripe for skimming. 
These unrecorded checks were placed in the days’ receipts  and an equal amount of cash was 
removed. The receipts matched the amount of  money on hand except that payments in 
currency had been replaced with checks.  
 
The check for currency substitution is very common. While these substitutions make it easier 
for a crook to convert stolen payments, the problem of concealing the theft still remains. 
The fact that the stolen checks are not posted means that some customers’ accounts are in 
danger of becoming past due. If this happens, the perpetrator’s scheme is in danger because 
these customers will almost surely complain about the misapplication of their payments. 
However, the misapplied payments can be concealed on the books by forcing account totals, 
stealing customers’ account statements, lapping, and making other fraudulent accounting 
entries. These concealment techniques will be discussed in more detail in the Skimming 
Receivables section.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.412                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Check for currency substitutions are especially common when an employee has access to 
some unexpected source of funds such as a manufacturer’s refund that arrives outside the 
regular stream of sales and receivables payments. In these cases the check can be swapped 
for cash and there is usually no additional step required to conceal the crime. The refund 
check, an unexpected source of funds, will not be missed by the victim organization, and the 
party who issued the check expects no goods or services in return.  
 
Skimming Receivables
It is generally more difficult to conceal the skimming of receivables than the skimming of 
sales because receivables payments are expected. The victim organization knows the customer 
owes money and it is waiting for the payment to arrive. When unrecorded sales are skimmed, 
it is as though the sale never existed. But when receivables are skimmed, the absence of the 
payment appears on the books as a delinquent account. In order to conceal a skimmed 
receivable, a perpetrator must somehow account for the payment that was due to the 
company but never received. There are a number of common techniques fraudsters use to 
conceal the skimming of receivables.  
 
Forcing Account Balances or Destroying Transaction Records 
Among the most dangerous receivables skimming schemes are those in which the 
perpetrator is in charge of collecting and posting payments. If a fraudster has a hand in both 
ends of the receipting process, he can falsify records to conceal the theft of receivables 
payments. For example, the fraudster might post the customer’s payments to their 
receivables accounts, even though the payments will never be deposited. This keeps the 
receivable from aging, but it creates an imbalance in the cash account. The perpetrator hides 
the imbalance by forcing the total on the cash account, overstating it to match the total 
postings to accounts receivable. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The chief financial officer of a small corporation stole approximately $100,000 from his 
company by diverting customer checks. This in dividual controlled all the books and records 
for the victim company. He stole checks from customers and deposited them in his personal 
bank account. The customers’ payments were still posted to keep the receivables from aging.  
 
The perpetrator stole checks in an amount equal to the victim company’s tax liability. To 
keep the books in balance, he would prepare checks payable to the IRS, but he never 
mailed them. The checks were recorded in the victim’s records and the false disbursements 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.413 
offset the amount of false postings to acco unts receivable. The scheme was uncovered when 
the IRS notified the victim company that its taxes were delinquent.  
 
Some fraudsters simply destroy all records that might prove that they have been stealing. 
Destroying records en masse does not prevent the victim organization from realizing that it 
is being robbed, but it may help conceal the identity of the thief.  
 
Lapping 
Lapping customer payments is one of the most common methods of concealing receivables 
skimming. Lapping is the crediting of one a ccount through the abstraction of money from 
another account. It is the fraudster’s version of “robbing Peter to pay Paul.”   
 
Suppose a company has three customers, A, B, and C. When A’s payment is received, the 
fraudster steals it instead of posting it to A’s account. Customer A expects that his account 
will be credited with the payment he has made. If the payment has not been posted by the 
time A’s next statement is mailed, he will see that the payment was not applied to his 
account and will almost certainly complain. To avoid this, the thief must take some action to 
make it appear that the payment was posted.  
 
When B’s check arrives, the thief posts this money to A’s account. Payments now appear to 
be up-to-date on A’s account, but B’s account is behind. When C’s payment is received, the 
perpetrator applies it to B’s account. This process continues indefinitely until one of three 
things happens: (1) someone discovers the scheme, (2) restitution is made to the accounts, or 
(3) some concealing entry is made to adjust the accounts receivable balances.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A clerk working for a government agency committed a lapping scheme that involved the 
theft of more than 150 customer payments, causing a total misappropriation of more than 
$30,000 in government funds. This individual stole taxes, fees, and other incoming 
payments from customers to cover his personal expenses. When a customer’s payment was 
stolen, the documentation on that payment would be hidden until a later payment was 
received. The later payment would be applied to the earlier customer’s records.  
 
As the rotating schedule of applying and misapplying payments became more and more 
complicated, the perpetrator insisted on exerting more and more control over the receipting 
process. He insisted on handling all incoming mail, preparing the deposit and delivering the 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.414                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
deposit to the bank so that he could continue to delay the posting of payments. The fraud 
was detected in large part because several consumers complained that they had not received 
confirmation of their payments, even though their checks had cleared months earlier. 
 
Because lapping schemes can become very intricate, fraudsters sometimes keep a second set 
of books on hand detailing the true nature of the payments received. In many skimming 
cases, a search of the fraudster’s work area will reveal a set of records tracking the actual 
payments and how they have been misapplied to conceal the theft. It may seem odd that 
people would keep records of their illegal activity on hand, but many lapping schemes 
become extremely complicated as more and more payments are misapplied. The second set 
of records helps the perpetrator keep track of the funds that were stolen and which accounts 
need to be credited to conceal the fraud. Uncovering these records, if they exist, will greatly 
facilitate the investigation of a lapping scheme.  
 
While lapping is more commonly used to conceal receivables skimming, it can also be used 
to disguise the skimming of sales. Employees sometimes steal all or part of one day’s receipts 
and replace them with the receipts from the following day. This type of concealment 
requires the employee to delay making the company deposit until enough money can be 
collected to recoup the stolen funds. If an organization rigidly adheres to a deposit schedule, 
it is unlikely that lapping will be effective in concealing this type of fraud.  
 
Stolen Statements  
When employees skim receivables, they may let the targeted accounts age instead of 
attempting to force the balances. In other words, they steal an incoming check intended as 
payment on a receivable, and they simply act as if the check never arrived. This method 
keeps the victim organization’s cash account in balance, because the stolen payment is never 
posted.  
 
Of course, if the customer’s payment is not posted, the receivable will eventually become 
past due. The customer will have proof in the form of a canceled check that a payment was 
made on the account. The question will arise: where did the payment go? The answer, of 
course, is that it went into the fraudster’s pocket. So the goal of the fraudster must be to 
keep the customer from realizing that his account was not credited with the payment. If this 
can be accomplished, the customer will not complain about the missing payment, and the 
victim organization will not realize that skimming has occurred.  
 
Financial Transactions Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.415 
One way fraudsters attempt to conceal the fact that they have skimmed a payment from a 
customer is to intercept the customer’s account statement and/or late notices. In some 
cases, the perpetrator intercepts the account statement by changing the customer’s address in 
the billing system so that statements are sent directly to the perpetrator’s home or to an 
address where he can retrieve them. In other instances, the perpetrator physically intercepts 
the statements before they are mailed.  
 
Once the real statement indicating that the payment was not received has been intercepted, 
the fraudster usually alters the statement or produces a counterfeit. The false statements 
indicate that the customer’s payment was properly posted. This leads the customer to believe 
that his account is up-to-date and keeps the customer from complaining about stolen 
payments.  
 
False Account Entries 
Intercepting the customer’s statements will keep him in the dark as to the status of his 
account, but as long as the customer’s payments are being skimmed, his account is slipping 
further and further past due. The perpetrator must bring the account back up to date in 
order to conceal his crime. Lapping is one way to keep accounts current as the employee 
skims from them. Another way is to make false entries in the victim organization’s 
accounting system.  
 
DEBITS TO EXPENSE ACCOUNTS 
An employee might conceal the skimming of funds by making unsupported entries in the 
victim company’s books. If a payment is made on a receivable, for instance, the proper entry 
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receivable. Instead of debiting cash, the employee might 
choose to debit an expense account. This transaction still keeps the company’s books in 
balance, but the incoming cash is never recorded. In addition, the customer’s receivable 
account is credited, so it will not become delinquent.  
 
DEBITS TO AGING OR FICTITIOUS RECEIVABLES 
The same method discussed above is used when employees debit existing or fictitious 
accounts receivable in order to conceal skimmed cash. For example, an employee who has 
skimmed one customer’s payments might add the stolen amounts to aging accounts that are 
soon to be written off as uncollectible, or to very large accounts where a small debit might 
go unnoticed.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.416                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some perpetrators also set up completely fictitious accounts and debit them for the cost of 
skimmed receivables. The employees then simply wait for the fictitious receivables to age 
and be written off as uncollectable. In the meantime, the fictitious receivables carry the cost 
of a skimming scheme where it will not be detected.  
 
WRITING OFF ACCOUNT BALANCES 
Some employees cover their skimming by posting entries to contra revenue accounts such as 
“discounts and allowances.” If, for instance, an employee intercepts a $1,000 payment, he 
would create a $1,000 “discount” on the acco unt to compensate for the missing money. 
Another account that might be used in this type of concealment is the bad debts expense 
account.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A billing manager was author ized to write off certain patient balances as hardship 
allowances. This employee accepted payments from  patients, then instructed billing personnel 
to write off the balance in question. The payments were never posted; they were intercepted 
by the billing manager. She covered approximately $30,000 in stolen funds by using her 
authority to write off patients’ balances.  
 
Inventory Padding 
A problem for fraudsters in some skimming schemes is the victim organization’s inventory. 
Off-book sales of goods will always leave an in ventory shortage and a corresponding rise in 
the cost of goods sold.  
 
When a sale of goods is made, the physical inventory is reduced by the amount of 
merchandise sold. For instance, when a retailer sells a pair of shoes there is one less pair of 
shoes in the stock room If this sale is not recorded, however, the shoes are not removed 
from the perpetual inventory records. Thus, there is one less pair of shoes on hand than in 
the perpetual inventory. A reduction in the physical inventory without a corresponding 
reduction in the perpetual inventory is known as “shrinkage.”  
 
When an employee skims sales of services there is no shrinkage (because there is no 
inventory for services), but when sales of goods are skimmed, shrinkage always occurs. Some 
amounts of shrinkage are expected due to customer theft, faulty products, and spoilage, but 
high levels of shrinkage serve as a warning that a company could be a victim of occupational 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.417 
fraud. The general methods used to conceal inventory shrinkage are discussed in detail in the 
Inventory and Other Assets section.  
 
Detection of Skimming Schemes 
The following are some detection methods that may be effective in detecting skimming 
schemes. 
 
Receipt or Sales Level Detection 
Key analytical procedures, such as vertical and horizontal analysis of sales accounts, can be 
used for skimming detection on a grand scale. These procedures analyze changes in the 
accounts and can possibly point to skimming problems including understated sales.  
Ratio analysis can also provide keys to the detection of skimming schemes. These 
procedures are discussed in detail in the Fraudulent Financial Statement section.  
 
Detailed inventory control procedures can also be utilized to detect inventory shrinkage due 
to unrecorded sales. Inventory detection methods include statistical sampling, trend analysis, 
reviews of receiving reports and inventory records, verification of material requisition and 
shipping documentation, as well as actual physical inventory counts. These procedures are 
reviewed in the section on Inventory and Other Assets. 
 
Journal Entry Review 
Skimming can sometimes be detected by reviewing and analyzing all journal entries made to 
the cash and inventory accounts. Journal entries involving the following topics should be 
examined: 
• False credits to inventory to conceal unrecorded or understated sales. 
• Write-offs of lost, stolen, or obsolete inventory. 
• Write-offs of accounts receivable accounts. 
• Irregular entries to cash accounts. 
 
Detecting Lapping of Sales or Receivables   
Lapping can usually be detected by comparing the dates of the customer’s payments with the 
dates the customer’s accounts are posted. This will require an examination of the source 
documents, such as the composition of bank deposits. Discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.418                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Confirmation of customers’ accounts is another method that might detect lapping. 
Confirmations are especially effective on large accounts where the time value of money is an 
issue. However, customers who pay on invoice rather than on balance might not know the 
exact balance of their account. If this is the case, it might be more effective to confirm by 
invoice and reconstruct the account balance using the source documents in the files and the 
results of the confirmation. If fraud is suspected, ask the customer or the bank to return a 
copy of both the front and the back of the check(s) used to pay specific invoices. Match the 
data on the check copies with the posting dates in the customer’s account. 
 
Prevention of Skimming Schemes 
Receipt or Sales Level Control  
As with most fraud schemes, internal control procedures are a key to prevention of 
skimming schemes. An essential part of developing control procedures is management’s 
communication to employees. Controlling whether or not an employee will not record a sale, 
understate a sale, or steal incoming payments is extremely difficult.  
 
General Controls 
Sales entries and general ledger access controls should include documented policies and 
procedures, which are communicated directly from management. The control procedures 
will generally cover the following subjects: 
• Appropriate segregation of duties and access control procedures regarding who makes 
ledger transactions will be followed. 
• Transactions must be properly recorded as to amount, date of occurrence, and ledger 
account.  
• Proper safeguard measures will be adopted to ensure physical access to the account 
systems. Additional measures should ensure the security of company assets.  
• Independent reconciliations as well as internal verification of accounts will be performed 
on ledger accounts.1 
 
Skimming Controls 
The discovery of thefts of checks and cash involves proper controls on the receipt process. 
Deficiencies in the answers to these typical audit-program questions may be red flags.  
• Is mail opened by someone independent of cashier, accounts receivable bookkeeper, or 
other accounting employees who may initiate or post journal entries? 
                                                          
1 George Georgiades, Audit Procedures  (New York: Harcourt Brace Professional Publishing, 1995). 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.419 
• Is the delivery of unopened business mail prohibited to employees having access to the 
accounting records? 
• Does the employee who opens the mail: 
? Place restrictive endorsements (“For Deposit Only”) on all checks received? 
? Prepare a list of the money, checks, and other receipts? 
? Forward all remittances to the person responsible for preparing and making the daily 
bank deposit? 
? Forward the total of all remittances to the person responsible for comparing it to the 
authenticated deposit ticket and amount recorded? 
• Is a lock box used? 
• Do cash sales occur? If yes: 
? Are cash receipts prenumbered? 
? Is an independent check of prenumbered receipts done daily and reconciled to cash 
collections? 
• Do cash refunds require approval? 
• Are cash receipts deposited intact daily? 
• Are employees who handle receipts bonded? 
• Is the accounts receivable bookkeeper restricted from: 
? Preparing the bank deposit? 
? Obtaining access to the cash receipts book? 
? Having access to collections from customers? 
? Are banks instructed not to cash checks drawn to the order of the company? 
• Is the cashier restricted from gaining access to the accounts receivable records and bank 
and customer statements? 
• Are areas where physical handling of cash takes place reasonably safeguarded? 
• Is the person who makes postings to the general ledger independent of the cash receipts 
and accounts receivable functions?  
• Does a person independent of the cashier or accounts receivable functions handle 
customer complaints? 
 
 



:


skim
skim is the remov of cash from a victim entiti prior to it entri in an account
system employe who skim from their compani steal sale or receiv befor thei ar
record in the compani book skim scheme ar known as offbook fraud
mean monei is stolen befor it is record in the victim organ account thi
aspect of skim scheme mean thei leav no direct audit trail becaus the stolen fund
ar never record the victim organ mai not be awar that the cash wa ever
receiv consequ it mai be veri difficult to detect that the monei ha been stolen
thi is the prime advantag of a skim scheme to the fraudster
skim is on of the most common form of occup fraud it can occur at ani point
where cash enter a busi so almost anyon who deal with the process of receiv cash
mai be in a posit to skim monei thi includ salespeopl teller waitperson and
other who receiv cash directli from custom
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1402 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit mani skim scheme ar perpetr by employe whose duti includ
receiv and log payment made by custom through the mail these employe slip
check out of the incom mail instead of post those check to the proper revenu or
receiv account those who deal directli with custom or who handl custom
payment ar obvious the most like candid to skim fund
sale skim
the most basic skim scheme occur when an employe sell good or servic to a
custom collect the custom payment but make no record of the sale the employe
simpli pocket the monei receiv from the custom instead of turn it over to hi
employ see unrecord sale flowchart
consid on of the simplest and most common sale transact a sale of good at the
cash regist in a normal transact a custom purchas an item and an employe enter
the sale on the regist the regist tape reflect that the sale ha been made and show that
a certain amount of cash the purchas price of the item should have been place in the
regist by compar the regist tape to the amount of monei on hand it mai be possibl
to detect theft for instanc if there were 500 worth of sale record on a particular
regist on a given dai but onli 400 cash in the regist it would be obviou that someon
had stolen 100 assum no begin cash balanc
if the employe is skim monei howev it will be imposs to detect theft simpli by
compar the regist tape to the cash drawer return to the exampl in the paragraph
abov assum that an employe want to make off with 100 through the cours of the
dai there ar 500 worth of sale at hi regist on sale is for 100 when the 100 sale is
made the employe doe not record the transact on hi regist the custom pai 100
and take the merchandis home but instead of place the monei in the cash drawer the
employe pocket it in order to creat the appear that the sale is be enter in the
regist the employe might ring a no sale or some other noncash transact sinc the
employe did not record the sale at the end of the dai the regist tape will onli reflect 400
in sale there will be 400 on hand in the re gister 500 in total sale minu the 100 that
the employe stole so the regist will balanc thu by not record the sale the employe
is abl to steal monei without the miss fund appear on the book of cours the
theft will show up indirectli in the compani record as inventori shrinkag but the book
will provid no direct evid of the theft
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1403
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1404 2011 fraud examin manual
the most difficult part in skim at the regist is that the employe must commit the
overt act of take monei if the employe take the custom monei and shove it into hi
pocket without enter the transact on the regist the custom will probabl suspect
that someth is wrong and might report the conduct to anoth employe or a manag it
is also possibl that a manag a fellow employe or a surveil camera will spot the
illeg conduct therefor it is often desir for a perpetr to act as though he is
properli record a transact while he skim sale
regist manipul
some employe might ring a no sale or ot her noncash transact to mask the theft of
sale the fals transact is enter on the regist so that it appear a sale is be rung up
the perpetr open the regist drawer and pretend to place the cash he ha just receiv
in the drawer but in realiti he pocket the cash to the casual observ it look as though
the sale is be properli record
some employe mai also rig their regist so that a sale can be enter on the regist kei
but will not appear on the regist tape the employe can then safe skim the sale anyon
observ the employe will see the sale enter see the cash drawer open etc yet the
regist tape will not reflect the transact
exampl
a servic station employe hid stolen gasolin sale by simpli lift the ribbon from the
printer on hi regist he collect and pocket the sale which were not record on the
regist tape the fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next
transact should appear and replac the ribb on the next transact would be print
without leav ani blank space on the tape appar leav no trace of the fraud
when the ribbon is remov from the regist the result is a blank space on the regist tape
where the skim sale should have been print unusu gap between transact on a
regist tape mai mean that someon is skim sale
fraudster will often manual roll back the tape when thei replac the ribbon on their
regist so that there is no gap between transact most regist transact howev
ar sequenti number if a transact ha been omit from the regist tape the result
is a break in the sequenc for instanc if an employe skim sale 155 then the regist
tape would onli show transact 153 154 156 157 and so on the miss
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1405
transact number omit becaus the ribbon wa lift when thei took place would
indic fraud
skim dure nonbusi hour
anoth wai to skim unrecord sale is to conduct sale dure nonbusi hour for
instanc some employe will open store on weekend or after hour without the
knowledg of the owner thei can pocket the proce of all sale made dure these time
becaus the owner have no idea that their store ar even open for busi
exampl
a manag of a retail facil went to work two hour earli everi dai open hi store at
800 am instead of 1000 am and pocket all the sale made dure these two hour
he rang up sale on the regist as if it wa busi as usual but then remov the regist
tape and all the cash he had accumul the manag then start from scratch at 1000
as if the store wa just open the tape wa destroi so there wa no record of the befor
hour revenu
to thi point skim ha been discuss in the context of cash regist transact but
skim doe not have to occur at a regist some of the most costli skim scheme
ar perpetr by employe who work at remot locat or without close supervis
thi can includ onsit sale person who do not deal with regist independ salesmen
who oper offsit and employe who work at branch or satellit offic these
employe have a high level of autonomi in their job which often translat into poor
supervis and in turn to fraud
skim of offsit sale
sever industri reli on remot salesperson to gener revenu the fact that these
employe ar larg unsupervis put them in a good posit to skim revenu for
exampl consid the apart rental industri where apart manag handl the
daytodai oper without much oversight a common scheme is for an onsit employe to
identifi the tenant who pai in currenc and remov them from the book thi caus a
particular apart to appear as vacant on the record when in fact it is occupi the
manag can skim the rental payment from the vacant unit and the revenu will never be
miss as long as no on physic check the apart the perpetr can continu
skim indefinit
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1406 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth rentalskim scheme occur when apart ar rent out but no leas is
sign on the book the apart will still a ppear to be vacant even though there ar
tenant on the premis the perpetr can skim the rental payment from these tenant
without fear that thei will show up as past due in the compani record sometim the
employe in these scheme work in conjunct with the renter and give a special rate to
these peopl in return the renter payment ar made directli to the employe and ani
complaint or mainten request ar direct onli to that employe so the tenant
presenc in the apart remain hidden
instead of skim rent some properti manag focu on less predict form of
revenu like applic fee and late fee ownership mai know when rent is due and how
mani apart ar occupi but often there is no control in place to track the number of
peopl who fill out rental applic or how mani tenant pai their rent a dai or two late
properti manag can make thousand of dollar by skim these nickel and dime
payment
offsit skim is by no mean limit to the apart rental industri the scheme
describ abov can easili translat into ani arena where those who gener or collect
revenu oper in an independ fashion a prime exampl is the insur agent who
sell polici to custom then neglect to file the polici with the carrier most custom
do not want to file claim on a polici especi earli in the term for fear that their
premium will rise know thi the agent k eep all document on the polici instead
of turn it over to the carrier the agent is abl to skim the custom payment becaus
the carrier doe not know the polici exist the custom continu to make hi payment
think that he is insur when in fact the polici is a ruse
poor collect procedur
poor collect and record procedur can make it easi for an employe to skim sale or
receiv
exampl
a government author that dealt with public hous wa victim becaus it fail to
item daili receipt thi agenc receiv pa yment from sever public hous tenant
but at the end of the dai monei receiv from tenant wa list as a whole receipt
number were not us to item iz the payment made by tenant so there wa no wai to
pinpoint which tenant had paid how much consequ the employe in charg of
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1407
collect monei from tenant wa abl to skim a portion of their payment she simpli did
not record the receipt of over 10000 her action caus certain account receiv to be
overst where tenant payment were not properli record
underst sale
the discuss abov focus on pure offbook sale those which ar never record
underst sale work differ becaus the transact in question is post to the
book but for a lower amount than what the perpetr actual collect see
underst sale flowchart on wai employe commit underst sale scheme is by
alter receipt or prepar fals receipt that misstat the amount of sale
exampl
an employe wrote receipt to custom for their purchas but she remov the carbon
paper back on the receipt so that thei did not produc a compani copi the employe
then us a pencil to prepar compani copi that show lower purchas price for
exampl if the custom had paid 100 the compani copi might reflect a payment of 80
the employe skim the differ between the actual amount of revenu and the amount
reflect on the fraudul receipt
underst sale scheme ar commonli undertaken by employe who work at the cash
regist in a typic scheme an employe enter a sale total that is lower than the amount
actual paid by the custom the employe skim the differ between the actual
purchas price of the item and the sale figur record on the regist for instanc if an
item is sold for 100 the employe could ring up the sale of an 80 item and skim the excess
20
rather than reduc the price of an item an employe might record the sale of fewer item if
100 unit ar sold for instanc an employe might onli record the sale of 50 unit and skim
the excess receipt
a similar method is us when sale ar made on account the bill to the custom reflect
the true amount of the sale but the receiv is underst in the compani book for
instanc a compani might be ow 1000 but the receiv is record as 800 sale ar
correspondingli underst by 200 when the custom make payment on the account
the employe can skim 200 and post the 800 to the account the account will appear to
have been paid in full
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1408 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1409
fals discount
those employe with the author to grant discount mai util thi author to skim
sale and receiv in a fals discount skim scheme an employe accept full
payment for an item but record the transact as if the custom had been given a
discount the employe skim the amount of the discount for exampl on a 100
purchas if an employe grant a fals discount of 20 percent he could skim 20 and leav
the compani book in balanc
theft of check receiv through the mail
check receiv through the mail ar a frequent target of employe seek illicit gain
theft of incom check usual occur when a singl employe is in charg of open the
mail and record the receipt of payment thi employe simpli steal on or more
incom check instead of post them to custom account see theft of incom
check flowchart when the task of receiv and record incom payment is left to a
singl person it is all too easi for that employe to make off with an occasion check
exampl
a mailroom employe stole over 2 million in govern check arriv through the mail
thi employe simpli identifi and remov envelop deliv from a govern agenc
known to send check to the compani us a group of accomplic act under the name
of fictiti person and compani thi indi vidual wa abl to launder the check and
divid the proce with hi croni
the theft of check is not usual complic but it is sometim more difficult to conceal a
check theft scheme than other form of skim if the stolen check were payment on
the victim compani receiv then these payment were expect as receiv becom
past due the victim compani will send notic of nonpay to it custom a custom
is like to complain when he receiv a second bill for a payment he ha alreadi made in
addit the cash check will serv as evid that the custom made hi payment the
method us to conceal check theft scheme will be discuss later in thi section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1410 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1411
check for currenc substitut
the intellig crimin will gener prefer to steal currenc rather than check if given the
opportun the reason why ar obviou first currenc is harder to trace than a check a
cash check eventu return to the person who wrote it and mai provid evid of
who cash it or where it wa spent endors bank stamp and so forth mai indic
the ident of the thief currenc on the other hand disappear into the economi onc it is
stolen
the second reason that currenc is prefer to a check is the difficulti in convert the
check when currenc is stolen it can be spent immedi a check on the other hand
must be endors and cash or deposit befor the thief can put hi hand on the monei
it repres to avoid thi problem employe who steal unrecord check will frequent
substitut them for receipt currenc if for exampl an employe skim an incom
check worth 500 he can add the check to the dai receipt and remov 500 in currenc
the total receipt will match the amount of cash on hand but payment in currenc ar
replac by the check
exampl
an employe respons for receipt ticket and fine payment on behalf of a municip
abus her posit and stole incom revenu es for nearli two year when payment in
currenc were receiv by thi individu she issu receipt but when check were receiv
she did not the check payment were theref or unrecord revenuesrip for skim
these unrecord check were place in the dai receipt and an equal amount of cash wa
remov the receipt match the amount of monei on hand except that payment in
currenc had been replac with check
the check for currenc substitut is veri common while these substitut make it easier
for a crook to convert stolen payment the problem of conceal the theft still remain
the fact that the stolen check ar not post mean that some custom account ar in
danger of becom past due if thi happen the perpetr scheme is in danger becaus
these custom will almost sure complain about the misappl of their payment
howev the misappli payment can be conceal on the book by forc account total
steal custom account statement lap and make other fraudul account
entri these conceal techniqu will be discuss in more detail in the skim
receiv section
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1412 2011 fraud examin manual
check for currenc substitut ar especi common when an employe ha access to
some unexpect sourc of fund such as a manufactur refund that arriv outsid the
regular stream of sale and receiv payment in these case the check can be swap
for cash and there is usual no addit step requir to conceal the crime the refund
check an unexpect sourc of fund will not be miss by the victim organ and the
parti who issu the check expect no good or servic in return
skim receiv
it is gener more difficult to conceal the skim of receiv than the skim of
sale becaus receiv payment ar expect the victim organ know the custom
ow monei and it is wait for the payment to arriv when unrecord sale ar skim
it is as though the sale never exist but when receiv ar skim the absenc of the
payment appear on the book as a delinqu account in order to conceal a skim
receiv a perpetr must somehow account for the payment that wa due to the
compani but never receiv there ar a number of common techniqu fraudster us to
conceal the skim of receiv
forc account balanc or destroi transact record
among the most danger receiv skim scheme ar those in which the
perpetr is in charg of collect and post payment if a fraudster ha a hand in both
end of the receipt process he can falsifi record to conceal the theft of receiv
payment for exampl the fraudster might post the custom payment to their
receiv account even though the payment will never be deposit thi keep the
receiv from ag but it creat an imbal in the cash account the perpetr hide
the imbal by forc the total on the cash account overst it to match the total
post to account receiv
exampl
the chief financi offic of a small corpor stole approxim 100000 from hi
compani by divert custom check thi in dividu control all the book and record
for the victim compani he stole check from custom and deposit them in hi person
bank account the custom payment were still post to keep the receiv from ag
the perpetr stole check in an amount equal to the victim compani tax liabil to
keep the book in balanc he would prepar check payabl to the ir but he never
mail them the check were record in the victim record and the fals disburs
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1413
offset the amount of fals post to acco unt receiv the scheme wa uncov when
the ir notifi the victim compani that it tax were delinqu
some fraudster simpli destroi all record that might prove that thei have been steal
destroi record en mass doe not prevent the victim organ from realiz that it
is be rob but it mai help conceal the ident of the thief
lap
lap custom payment is on of the most common method of conceal receiv
skim lap is the credit of on a ccount through the abstract of monei from
anoth account it is the fraudster version of rob peter to pai paul
suppos a compani ha three custom a b and c when as payment is receiv the
fraudster steal it instead of post it to as account custom a expect that hi account
will be credit with the payment he ha made if the payment ha not been post by the
time as next statement is mail he will see that the payment wa not appli to hi
account and will almost certainli complain to avoid thi the thief must take some action to
make it appear that the payment wa post
when bs check arriv the thief post thi monei to as account payment now appear to
be uptod on as account but bs account is behind when cs payment is receiv the
perpetr appli it to bs account thi process continu indefinit until on of three
thing happen 1 someon discov the scheme 2 restitut is made to the account or
3 some conceal entri is made to adjust the account receiv balanc
exampl
a clerk work for a govern agenc commit a lap scheme that involv the
theft of more than 150 custom payment caus a total misappropri of more than
30000 in govern fund thi individu stole tax fee and other incom
payment from custom to cover hi person expens when a custom payment wa
stolen the document on that payment would be hidden until a later payment wa
receiv the later payment would be appli to the earlier custom record
as the rotat schedul of appli and misappli payment becam more and more
complic the perpetr insist on exert more and more control over the receipt
process he insist on handl all incom mail prepar the deposit and deliv the
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1414 2011 fraud examin manual
deposit to the bank so that he could continu to delai the post of payment the fraud
wa detect in larg part becaus sever consum complain that thei had not receiv
confirm of their payment even though their check had clear month earlier
becaus lap scheme can becom veri intric fraudster sometim keep a second set
of book on hand detail the true natur of the payment receiv in mani skim
case a search of the fraudster work area will reveal a set of record track the actual
payment and how thei have been misappli to conceal the theft it mai seem odd that
peopl would keep record of their illeg activ on hand but mani lap scheme
becom extrem complic as more and more payment ar misappli the second set
of record help the perpetr keep track of the fund that were stolen and which account
need to be credit to conceal the fraud uncov these record if thei exist will greatli
facilit the investig of a lap scheme
while lap is more commonli us to conceal receiv skim it can also be us
to disguis the skim of sale employe sometim steal all or part of on dai receipt
and replac them with the receipt from the follow dai thi type of conceal
requir the employe to delai make the compani deposit until enough monei can be
collect to recoup the stolen fund if an organ rigidli adher to a deposit schedul
it is unlik that lap will be effect in conceal thi type of fraud
stolen statement
when employe skim receiv thei mai let the target account ag instead of
attempt to forc the balanc in other word thei steal an incom check intend as
payment on a receiv and thei simpli act as if the check never arriv thi method
keep the victim organ cash account in balanc becaus the stolen payment is never
post
of cours if the custom payment is not post the receiv will eventu becom
past due the custom will have proof in the form of a cancel check that a payment wa
made on the account the question will aris where did the payment go the answer of
cours is that it went into the fraudster pocket so the goal of the fraudster must be to
keep the custom from realiz that hi account wa not credit with the payment if thi
can be accomplish the custom will not complain about the miss payment and the
victim organ will not realiz that skim ha occur
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1415
on wai fraudster attempt to conceal the fact that thei have skim a payment from a
custom is to intercept the custom account statement andor late notic in some
case the perpetr intercept the account statement by chang the custom address in
the bill system so that statement ar sent directli to the perpetr home or to an
address where he can retriev them in other instanc the perpetr physic intercept
the statement befor thei ar mail
onc the real statement indic that the payment wa not receiv ha been intercept
the fraudster usual alter the statement or produc a counterfeit the fals statement
indic that the custom payment wa properli post thi lead the custom to believ
that hi account is uptod and keep the custom from complain about stolen
payment
fals account entri
intercept the custom statement will keep him in the dark as to the statu of hi
account but as long as the custom payment ar be skim hi account is slip
further and further past due the perpetr must bring the account back up to date in
order to conceal hi crime lap is on wai to keep account current as the employe
skim from them anoth wai is to make fals entri in the victim organ
account system
debit to expens account
an employe might conceal the skim of fund by make unsupport entri in the
victim compani book if a payment is made on a receiv for instanc the proper entri
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receiv instead of debit cash the employe might
choos to debit an expens account thi transact still keep the compani book in
balanc but the incom cash is never record in addit the custom receiv
account is credit so it will not becom delinqu
debit to ag or fictiti receiv
the same method discuss abov is us when employe debit exist or fictiti
account receiv in order to conceal skim cash for exampl an employe who ha
skim on custom payment might add the stolen amount to ag account that ar
soon to be written off as uncollect or to veri larg account where a small debit might
go unnot
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1416 2011 fraud examin manual
some perpetr also set up complet fictiti account and debit them for the cost of
skim receiv the employe then simpli wait for the fictiti receiv to ag
and be written off as uncollect in the meantim the fictiti receiv carri the cost
of a skim scheme where it will not be detect
write off account balanc
some employe cover their skim by post entri to contra revenu account such as
discount and allow if for instanc an employe intercept a 1000 payment he
would creat a 1000 discount on the acco unt to compens for the miss monei
anoth account that might be us in thi type of conceal is the bad debt expens
account
exampl
a bill manag wa author iz to write off certain patient balanc as hardship
allow thi employe accept payment from patient then instruct bill personnel
to write off the balanc in question the payment were never post thei were intercept
by the bill manag she cover approxim 30000 in stolen fund by us her
author to write off patient balanc
inventori pad
a problem for fraudster in some skim scheme is the victim organ inventori
offbook sale of good will alwai leav an in ventori shortag and a correspond rise in
the cost of good sold
when a sale of good is made the physic inventori is reduc by the amount of
merchandis sold for instanc when a retail sell a pair of shoe there is on less pair of
shoe in the stock room if thi sale is not record howev the shoe ar not remov
from the perpetu inventori record thu there is on less pair of shoe on hand than in
the perpetu inventori a reduct in the physic inventori without a correspond
reduct in the perpetu inventori is known as shrinkag
when an employe skim sale of servic there is no shrinkag becaus there is no
inventori for servic but when sale of good ar skim shrinkag alwai occur some
amount of shrinkag ar expect due to custom theft faulti product and spoilag but
high level of shrinkag serv as a warn that a compani could be a victim of occup
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1417
fraud the gener method us to conceal inventori shrinkag ar discuss in detail in the
inventori and other asset section
detect of skim scheme
the follow ar some detect method that mai be effect in detect skim
scheme
receipt or sale level detect
kei analyt procedur such as vertic and horizont analysi of sale account can be
us for skim detect on a grand scale these procedur analyz chang in the
account and can possibl point to skim problem includ underst sale
ratio analysi can also provid kei to the detect of skim scheme these
procedur ar discuss in detail in the fraudul financi statement section
detail inventori control procedur can also be util to detect inventori shrinkag due
to unrecord sale inventori detect method includ statist sampl trend analysi
review of receiv report and inventori record verif of materi requisit and
ship document as well as actual physic inventori count these procedur ar
review in the section on inventori and other asset
journal entri review
skim can sometim be detect by review and analyz all journal entri made to
the cash and inventori account journal entri involv the follow topic should be
examin
fals credit to inventori to conceal unrecord or underst sale
writeoff of lost stolen or obsolet inventori
writeoff of account receiv account
irregular entri to cash account
detect lap of sale or receiv
lap can usual be detect by compar the date of the custom payment with the
date the custom account ar post thi will requir an examin of the sourc
document such as the composit of bank deposit discrep should be investig
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1418 2011 fraud examin manual
confirm of custom account is anoth method that might detect lap
confirm ar especi effect on larg account where the time valu of monei is an
issu howev custom who pai on invoic rather than on balanc might not know the
exact balanc of their account if thi is the case it might be more effect to confirm by
invoic and reconstruct the account balanc us the sourc document in the file and the
result of the confirm if fraud is suspect ask the custom or the bank to return a
copi of both the front and the back of the check us to pai specif invoic match the
data on the check copi with the post date in the custom account
prevent of skim scheme
receipt or sale level control
as with most fraud scheme intern control procedur ar a kei to prevent of
skim scheme an essenti part of develop control procedur is manag
commun to employe control whether or not an employe will not record a sale
underst a sale or steal incom payment is extrem difficult
gener control
sale entri and gener ledger access control should includ document polici and
procedur which ar commun directli from manag the control procedur
will gener cover the follow subject
appropri segreg of duti and access control procedur regard who make
ledger transact will be follow
transact must be properli record as to amount date of occurr and ledger
account
proper safeguard measur will be adopt to ensur physic access to the account
system addit measur should ensur the secur of compani asset
independ reconcili as well as intern verif of account will be perform
on ledger accounts1
skim control
the discoveri of theft of check and cash involv proper control on the receipt process
defici in the answer to these typic auditprogram question mai be red flag
is mail open by someon independ of cashier account receiv bookkeep or
other account employe who mai initi or post journal entri
1 georg georgiad audit procedur new york harcourt brace profession publish 1995
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1419
is the deliveri of unopen busi mail prohibit to employe have access to the
account record
doe the employe who open the mail
place restrict endors for deposit onli on all check receiv
prepar a list of the monei check and other receipt
forward all remitt to the person respons for prepar and make the daili
bank deposit
forward the total of all remitt to the person respons for compar it to the
authent deposit ticket and amount record
is a lock box us
do cash sale occur if ye
ar cash receipt prenumb
is an independ check of prenumb receipt done daili and reconcil to cash
collect
do cash refund requir approv
ar cash receipt deposit intact daili
ar employe who handl receipt bond
is the account receiv bookkeep restrict from
prepar the bank deposit
obtain access to the cash receipt book
have access to collect from custom
ar bank instruct not to cash check drawn to the order of the compani
is the cashier restrict from gain access to the account receiv record and bank
and custom statement
ar area where physic handl of cash take place reason safeguard
is the person who make post to the gener ledger independ of the cash receipt
and account receiv function
doe a person independ of the cashier or account receiv function handl
custom complaint
