2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Register Manipulation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Register Manipulation 
Some employees might ring a “no sale” or ot her non-cash transaction to mask the theft of 
sales. The false transaction is entered on the register so that it appears a sale is being rung up. 
The perpetrator opens the register drawer and pretends to place the cash he has just received 
in the drawer, but in reality he pockets the cash. To the casual observer it looks as though 
the sale is being properly recorded.  
 
Some employees may also rig their registers so that a sale can be entered on the register keys, 
but will not appear on the register tapes. The employee can then safely skim the sale. Anyone 
observing the employee will see the sale entered, see the cash drawer open, etc., yet the 
register tape will not reflect the transaction.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A service station employee hid stolen gasoline sales by simply  lifting the ribbon from the 
printer on his register. He collected and pocketed the sales, which were not recorded on the 
register tape. The fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next 
transaction should appear and replace the ribb on. The next transaction would be printed 
without leaving any blank space on the tape, apparently leaving no trace of the fraud.   
 
When the ribbon is removed from the register, the result is a blank space on the register tape 
where the skimmed sale should have been printed. Unusual gaps between transactions on a 
register tape may mean that someone is skimming sales.  
 
Fraudsters will often manually roll back the tape when they replace the ribbon on their 
registers so that there is no gap between transactions. Most register transactions, however, 
are sequentially numbered. If a transaction has been omitted from the register tape, the result 
is a break in the sequence. For instance, if an employee skimmed sale #155, then the register 
tape would only show transactions #153, #154, #156, #157 and so on. The missing 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.405 
transaction numbers, omitted because the ribbon was lifted when they took place, would 
indicate fraud.  
 



:


regist manipul
some employe might ring a no sale or ot her noncash transact to mask the theft of
sale the fals transact is enter on the regist so that it appear a sale is be rung up
the perpetr open the regist drawer and pretend to place the cash he ha just receiv
in the drawer but in realiti he pocket the cash to the casual observ it look as though
the sale is be properli record
some employe mai also rig their regist so that a sale can be enter on the regist kei
but will not appear on the regist tape the employe can then safe skim the sale anyon
observ the employe will see the sale enter see the cash drawer open etc yet the
regist tape will not reflect the transact
exampl
a servic station employe hid stolen gasolin sale by simpli lift the ribbon from the
printer on hi regist he collect and pocket the sale which were not record on the
regist tape the fraudster would then roll back the tape to the point where the next
transact should appear and replac the ribb on the next transact would be print
without leav ani blank space on the tape appar leav no trace of the fraud
when the ribbon is remov from the regist the result is a blank space on the regist tape
where the skim sale should have been print unusu gap between transact on a
regist tape mai mean that someon is skim sale
fraudster will often manual roll back the tape when thei replac the ribbon on their
regist so that there is no gap between transact most regist transact howev
ar sequenti number if a transact ha been omit from the regist tape the result
is a break in the sequenc for instanc if an employe skim sale 155 then the regist
tape would onli show transact 153 154 156 157 and so on the miss
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1405
transact number omit becaus the ribbon wa lift when thei took place would
indic fraud
