2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Understated Sales


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Understated Sales  
The discussion above focused on purely off-book sales, those which are never recorded. 
Understated sales work differently because the transaction in question is posted to the 
books, but for a lower amount than what the perpetrator actually collected. (See 
“Understated Sales” flowchart.) One way employees commit understated sales schemes is by 
altering receipts or preparing false receipts that misstate the amount of sales. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee wrote receipts to customers for their purchases, but she removed the carbon 
paper backing on the receipts so that they did not produce a company copy. The employee 
then used a pencil to prepare company copies that showed lower purchase prices. For 
example, if the customer had paid $100, the company copy might reflect a payment of $80. 
The employee skimmed the difference between the actual amount  of revenue and the amount 
reflected on the fraudulent receipt. 
 
Understated sales schemes are commonly undertaken by employees who work at the cash 
register. In a typical scheme an employee enters a sales total that is lower than the amount 
actually paid by the customer. The employee skims the difference between the actual 
purchase price of the item and the sales figure recorded on the register. For instance, if an 
item is sold for $100, the employee could ring up  the sale of an $80 item and skim the excess 
$20.  
 
Rather than reduce the price of an item, an employee might record the sale of fewer items. If 
100 units are sold, for instance, an employee might only record the sale of 50 units and skim 
the excess receipts.  
 
A similar method is used when sales are made on account. The bill to the customer reflects 
the true amount of the sale, but the receivable is understated in the company books. For 
instance, a company might be owed $1,000, but the receivable is recorded as $800. (Sales are 
correspondingly understated by $200.) When the customer makes payment on the account, 
the employee can skim $200 and post the $800 to the account. The account will appear to 
have been paid in full.  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.408                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.409 
FALSE DISCOUNTS 
Those employees with the authority to grant discounts may utilize this authority to skim 
sales and receivables. In a false discount skimming scheme, an employee accepts full 
payment for an item, but records the transaction as if the customer had been given a 
discount. The employee skims the amount of the discount. For example, on a $100 
purchase, if an employee granted a false discount of 20 percent, he could skim $20 and leave 
the company’s books in balance.  
 



:


underst sale
the discuss abov focus on pure offbook sale those which ar never record
underst sale work differ becaus the transact in question is post to the
book but for a lower amount than what the perpetr actual collect see
underst sale flowchart on wai employe commit underst sale scheme is by
alter receipt or prepar fals receipt that misstat the amount of sale
exampl
an employe wrote receipt to custom for their purchas but she remov the carbon
paper back on the receipt so that thei did not produc a compani copi the employe
then us a pencil to prepar compani copi that show lower purchas price for
exampl if the custom had paid 100 the compani copi might reflect a payment of 80
the employe skim the differ between the actual amount of revenu and the amount
reflect on the fraudul receipt
underst sale scheme ar commonli undertaken by employe who work at the cash
regist in a typic scheme an employe enter a sale total that is lower than the amount
actual paid by the custom the employe skim the differ between the actual
purchas price of the item and the sale figur record on the regist for instanc if an
item is sold for 100 the employe could ring up the sale of an 80 item and skim the excess
20
rather than reduc the price of an item an employe might record the sale of fewer item if
100 unit ar sold for instanc an employe might onli record the sale of 50 unit and skim
the excess receipt
a similar method is us when sale ar made on account the bill to the custom reflect
the true amount of the sale but the receiv is underst in the compani book for
instanc a compani might be ow 1000 but the receiv is record as 800 sale ar
correspondingli underst by 200 when the custom make payment on the account
the employe can skim 200 and post the 800 to the account the account will appear to
have been paid in full
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1408 2011 fraud examin manual
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1409
fals discount
those employe with the author to grant discount mai util thi author to skim
sale and receiv in a fals discount skim scheme an employe accept full
payment for an item but record the transact as if the custom had been given a
discount the employe skim the amount of the discount for exampl on a 100
purchas if an employe grant a fals discount of 20 percent he could skim 20 and leav
the compani book in balanc
