2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/Forcing Account Balances or Destroying Transaction Records


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Forcing Account Balances or Destroying Transaction Records 
Among the most dangerous receivables skimming schemes are those in which the 
perpetrator is in charge of collecting and posting payments. If a fraudster has a hand in both 
ends of the receipting process, he can falsify records to conceal the theft of receivables 
payments. For example, the fraudster might post the customer’s payments to their 
receivables accounts, even though the payments will never be deposited. This keeps the 
receivable from aging, but it creates an imbalance in the cash account. The perpetrator hides 
the imbalance by forcing the total on the cash account, overstating it to match the total 
postings to accounts receivable. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The chief financial officer of a small corporation stole approximately $100,000 from his 
company by diverting customer checks. This in dividual controlled all the books and records 
for the victim company. He stole checks from customers and deposited them in his personal 
bank account. The customers’ payments were still posted to keep the receivables from aging.  
 
The perpetrator stole checks in an amount equal to the victim company’s tax liability. To 
keep the books in balance, he would prepare checks payable to the IRS, but he never 
mailed them. The checks were recorded in the victim’s records and the false disbursements 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.413 
offset the amount of false postings to acco unts receivable. The scheme was uncovered when 
the IRS notified the victim company that its taxes were delinquent.  
 
Some fraudsters simply destroy all records that might prove that they have been stealing. 
Destroying records en masse does not prevent the victim organization from realizing that it 
is being robbed, but it may help conceal the identity of the thief.  
 



:


forc account balanc or destroi transact record
among the most danger receiv skim scheme ar those in which the
perpetr is in charg of collect and post payment if a fraudster ha a hand in both
end of the receipt process he can falsifi record to conceal the theft of receiv
payment for exampl the fraudster might post the custom payment to their
receiv account even though the payment will never be deposit thi keep the
receiv from ag but it creat an imbal in the cash account the perpetr hide
the imbal by forc the total on the cash account overst it to match the total
post to account receiv
exampl
the chief financi offic of a small corpor stole approxim 100000 from hi
compani by divert custom check thi in dividu control all the book and record
for the victim compani he stole check from custom and deposit them in hi person
bank account the custom payment were still post to keep the receiv from ag
the perpetr stole check in an amount equal to the victim compani tax liabil to
keep the book in balanc he would prepar check payabl to the ir but he never
mail them the check were record in the victim record and the fals disburs
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1413
offset the amount of fals post to acco unt receiv the scheme wa uncov when
the ir notifi the victim compani that it tax were delinqu
some fraudster simpli destroi all record that might prove that thei have been steal
destroi record en mass doe not prevent the victim organ from realiz that it
is be rob but it mai help conceal the ident of the thief
