2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Skimming/False Account Entries


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


False Account Entries 
Intercepting the customer’s statements will keep him in the dark as to the status of his 
account, but as long as the customer’s payments are being skimmed, his account is slipping 
further and further past due. The perpetrator must bring the account back up to date in 
order to conceal his crime. Lapping is one way to keep accounts current as the employee 
skims from them. Another way is to make false entries in the victim organization’s 
accounting system.  
 
DEBITS TO EXPENSE ACCOUNTS 
An employee might conceal the skimming of funds by making unsupported entries in the 
victim company’s books. If a payment is made on a receivable, for instance, the proper entry 
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receivable. Instead of debiting cash, the employee might 
choose to debit an expense account. This transaction still keeps the company’s books in 
balance, but the incoming cash is never recorded. In addition, the customer’s receivable 
account is credited, so it will not become delinquent.  
 
DEBITS TO AGING OR FICTITIOUS RECEIVABLES 
The same method discussed above is used when employees debit existing or fictitious 
accounts receivable in order to conceal skimmed cash. For example, an employee who has 
skimmed one customer’s payments might add the stolen amounts to aging accounts that are 
soon to be written off as uncollectible, or to very large accounts where a small debit might 
go unnoticed.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.416                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Some perpetrators also set up completely fictitious accounts and debit them for the cost of 
skimmed receivables. The employees then simply wait for the fictitious receivables to age 
and be written off as uncollectable. In the meantime, the fictitious receivables carry the cost 
of a skimming scheme where it will not be detected.  
 
WRITING OFF ACCOUNT BALANCES 
Some employees cover their skimming by posting entries to contra revenue accounts such as 
“discounts and allowances.” If, for instance, an employee intercepts a $1,000 payment, he 
would create a $1,000 “discount” on the acco unt to compensate for the missing money. 
Another account that might be used in this type of concealment is the bad debts expense 
account.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A billing manager was author ized to write off certain patient balances as hardship 
allowances. This employee accepted payments from  patients, then instructed billing personnel 
to write off the balance in question. The payments were never posted; they were intercepted 
by the billing manager. She covered approximately $30,000 in stolen funds by using her 
authority to write off patients’ balances.  
 



:


fals account entri
intercept the custom statement will keep him in the dark as to the statu of hi
account but as long as the custom payment ar be skim hi account is slip
further and further past due the perpetr must bring the account back up to date in
order to conceal hi crime lap is on wai to keep account current as the employe
skim from them anoth wai is to make fals entri in the victim organ
account system
debit to expens account
an employe might conceal the skim of fund by make unsupport entri in the
victim compani book if a payment is made on a receiv for instanc the proper entri
is a debit to cash and a credit to the receiv instead of debit cash the employe might
choos to debit an expens account thi transact still keep the compani book in
balanc but the incom cash is never record in addit the custom receiv
account is credit so it will not becom delinqu
debit to ag or fictiti receiv
the same method discuss abov is us when employe debit exist or fictiti
account receiv in order to conceal skim cash for exampl an employe who ha
skim on custom payment might add the stolen amount to ag account that ar
soon to be written off as uncollect or to veri larg account where a small debit might
go unnot
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1416 2011 fraud examin manual
some perpetr also set up complet fictiti account and debit them for the cost of
skim receiv the employe then simpli wait for the fictiti receiv to ag
and be written off as uncollect in the meantim the fictiti receiv carri the cost
of a skim scheme where it will not be detect
write off account balanc
some employe cover their skim by post entri to contra revenu account such as
discount and allow if for instanc an employe intercept a 1000 payment he
would creat a 1000 discount on the acco unt to compens for the miss monei
anoth account that might be us in thi type of conceal is the bad debt expens
account
exampl
a bill manag wa author iz to write off certain patient balanc as hardship
allow thi employe accept payment from patient then instruct bill personnel
to write off the balanc in question the payment were never post thei were intercept
by the bill manag she cover approxim 30000 in stolen fund by us her
author to write off patient balanc
