2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Cash Larceny


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Cash Larceny 
In the occupational fraud setting, a cash larceny may be defined as the intentional taking of 
an employer’s cash (the term cash includes both currency and checks) without the consent 
and against the will of the employer.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.420                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A cash larceny scheme can take place in any circumstance in which an employee has access 
to cash. Every company must deal with the receipt, deposit, and distribution of cash, so 
every company is potentially vulnerable to a cash larceny scheme. While the circumstances in 
which an employee might steal cash are nearly limitless, most larceny schemes involve the 
theft of incoming cash, currency on hand (in a cash register, cash box, etc.), or theft of cash 
from the victim organization’s bank deposits.  
 
Incoming Cash 
Theft of Cash from the Register 
A large percentage of cash larceny schemes occur at the cash register, and for good reason—
 the register is usually where the cash is. The register (or similar cash collection points like 
cash drawers or cash boxes) is usually the most common point of access to cash for 
employees, so it is understandable that this is where larceny schemes frequently occur. 
Furthermore, there is often a great deal of activity at the register, numerous transactions that 
require employees to handle cash. This can serve as a cover for the theft of cash. In a flurry 
of activity, with money being passed back and forth between customer and employee, an 
employee can often slip cash out of the register and into his pocket undetected.  
 
The most straightforward cash larceny scheme is to simply open the register and remove 
currency or checks. (See “Cash Larceny from the Register” flowchart.) The theft is often 
committed as a sale is being conducted so that it appears to be part of the transaction. In 
other circumstances, the perpetrator waits for a slow moment when no one is around to 
notice him digging into the cash drawer.  
 
Recall that the difficulty in detecting skimming schemes comes from the fact that the stolen 
funds are never entered on the victim organization’s accounts. In a larceny scheme, on the 
other hand, the funds that the perpetrator steals have already been reflected on the register 
tape. As a result, an imbalance will result between the register tape and the cash drawer.  
 
A register is balanced by comparing the transactions on the register tape to the amount of 
cash on hand. Sales, returns, and other register transactions that are recorded on the register 
tape are added to or subtracted from a known balance to arrive at a total for the period in 
question. The actual cash is then counted and the two totals are compared. If the register 
tape shows that there should be more cash in the register than what is present, the 
discrepancy may be due to larceny. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.421 
 
 
The actual method for taking money at the register — opening the register and removing 
currency — rarely varies. It is the methods used by perpetrators to avoid getting caught that 
distinguish larceny schemes. Oddly, in many instances the perpetrator has no plan for 
avoiding detection. A large part of fraud is rationalizing; the employee convinces himself that 
he is somehow entitled to what he is taking, or that what he is doing is not actually a crime. 
Register larceny schemes frequently begin when the perpetrator convinces himself that he is 
only “borrowing” the funds to cover a temporary monetary need. These people might carry 
the missing currency in their registers for several days, deluding themselves in the belief that 
they will one day repay the funds they have stolen.  
 
The employee who does nothing to camouflage his crimes is easily caught. More dangerous 
is the person taking active steps to hide his crimes. One basic way for an employee to 
disguise the fact that he is stealing currency is to take money from someone else’s register.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.422                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In some retail organizations, employees are assigned to certain registers. Alternatively, one 
register is used and each employee has an access code. When cash is missing from a certain 
cashier’s register, that cashier is obviously the most likely suspect for the theft. Therefore, by 
stealing from a coworker’s register, or by using someone else’s access code to enter the 
register, the perpetrator makes sure that another employee will be the prime suspect in the 
theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A teller for a retail sales company simply signed onto a register, rang a “no sale” and took 
currency from the drawer. Over  a period of time, the teller took approximately $6,000 
through this simple method. In order to get away with the theft, the teller waited until a 
coworker was on break, then logged onto that person’s register, rang a “no sale” and took 
the cash. The resulting cash shortage therefore appeared in the register of an honest 
employee, deflecting attention from the true thief.  
 
A very unsophisticated way to avoid detection is to steal currency in very small amounts over 
an extended period of time. Because the missing amounts are small, the shortages may be 
dismissed as accounting errors rather than theft. Typically, the employee becomes dependent 
on the extra money he is pilfering and his thefts increase in scale or become more frequent, 
which causes the scheme to be uncovered. Most retail organizations track overages or 
shortages by employee, making this method largely ineffective. 
 
REVERSING TRANSACTIONS 
Some employees conceal cash larceny by processing reversing transactions, which cause the 
register tape to reconcile to the amount of cash on hand after the theft. By processing false 
voids or refunds, an employee can reduce the cash balance reflected on the register tape.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier received payments from a customer and recorded the transactions on her system. 
She stole the payments from the customers, then destroyed the company’s receipts that 
reflected the transactions. To complete the cover-up, the cashier went back and voided the 
transactions that she had entered at the time the payments were received. The reversing 
entries brought the receipt totals in to balance with the cash on hand.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.423 
REGISTER MANIPULATION 
Instead of using reversing entries, an employee might manually alter the register tape. Again, 
the purpose of this activity is to force a balance between the cash on hand and the actual 
cash received. An employee might use white-out to cover up a sale whose proceeds were 
stolen, or he might simply cross out or alter the numbers on the tape so that the register 
total and the cash drawer balance. This type of concealment is not common because, in 
general, the alterations will be noticeable. 
 
ALTERING CASH COUNTS 
Another method for concealing cash larceny is to alter the cash counts on registers. When 
cash from a register is totaled and prepared for deposit, an employee simply records the 
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appears to balance with the total on the register 
tape. Obviously, employees who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charged with 
verifying the amount of cash on hand in their own register, but this control is often 
overlooked.  
 
DESTROYING REGISTER TAPES   
If the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balance, the next best thing is to prevent 
others from computing the totals and discovering the imbalance. Employees who are 
stealing from the register sometimes destroy detail tapes that would implicate them in a 
crime. When detail tapes are missing or defaced, it may be because someone is trying to 
conceal a fraud.  
 
Other Larceny of Sales and Receivables 
Not all receipts arrive via the cash register. Employees can just as easily steal money received 
at other points. One of the more common methods is to take checks received through the 
mail, post the payments to the accounting system, but steal the checks. (See “Other Cash 
Larceny” flowchart.) Obviously, this type of scheme leaves the cash account out of balance. 
From a perpetrator’s perspective, it would make  much more sense to take checks that have 
not yet been posted to customer accounts. Often, this type of cash larceny scheme is 
committed by an employee who claims to only be “borrowing” the funds for a short while—
 one of the classic rationalizations in occupational fraud schemes.  
 
Those employees who have total control of a company’s accounting system can overcome 
the problem of out-of-balance accounts. It is common, especially in small businesses, for a 
single person to control all of a company’s deposits and ledgers. These employees can steal 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.424                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
incoming cash that has already been posted, then conceal the crime by making unsupported 
entries in the victim organization’s books. Poor separation of duties is very often the 
weakness that allows cash larceny schemes to go undetected.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee posted customer payments to the accounts receivable journal but stole the cash 
received. This resulted in an imbalance in the victim company’s cash account. But the 
perpetrator had control over the company’s deposits and all its ledgers. This allowed her to 
conceal her crime by making unsupported entr ies in the company’s books that produced a 
fictitious balance between receipts and ledgers.  
 
In circumstances in which payments are stolen but nonetheless posted to the cash receipts 
journal, reversing entries are sometimes used to balance the victim company’s accounts. The 
incoming payment is initially credited to the customer’s account, but the entry is later 
reversed with an unauthorized adjustment such as a “courtesy discount.” 
 
A less elegant way to hide a crime is to simply destroy all records that might prove that the 
perpetrator has been stealing. This “slash and burn” concealment technique does not 
prevent the victim company from realizing that it has been robbed, but it may help conceal 
the identity of the thief.  
 
Cash Larceny from the Deposit 
At some point in every revenue-generating business, someone must physically take the 
company’s currency and checks to the bank. This person or persons, left alone literally 
holding the bag, will have an opportunity to take a portion of the money prior to depositing 
it into the company’s accounts.  
 
Typically, when a company receives cash, someone is assigned to tabulate the receipts, list 
the form of payment (currency or check), and prepare a deposit slip for the bank. Then 
another employee takes the cash and deposits it in the bank. The person who made out the 
deposit generally retains one copy of the slip. This copy is matched to a receipted copy of 
the slip, which is stamped by the bank when the deposit is made.  
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.425 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.426                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
This procedure is designed to prevent the theft of funds from the deposit, but thefts still 
occur, often because the process is not adhered to. (See “Cash Larceny from the Deposit” 
flowchart.) For example, when one person is in charge of preparing the deposit slips, making 
the deposit, and reconciling the bank statement, that person can pilfer money from the day’s 
receipts and conceal it by falsifying the deposit slips. If the day’s receipts are $1,000, the 
perpetrator might fill out a deposit slip for $5 00 and steal the other $500. The employee then 
makes correspondingly false entries in the books, understating the day’s receipts. This 
process creates a false balance in the victim organization’s records.  
 
A failure to reconcile the bank copy of the deposit slip with the office copy can result in 
fraud. When the person making the deposit knows his company does not reconcile the two 
copies, he can steal cash from the deposit on the way to the bank and alter the deposit slip 
so that it reflects a lesser amount. In some cases sales records will also be altered to match 
the diminished deposit.  
 
When cash is stolen from the deposit, the receipted deposit slip will of course be out of 
balance with the company’s copy of the deposit slip (unless the perpetrator also prepared the 
deposit). To correct this problem, some perpetrators alter the bank copy of the deposit slip 
after it has been validated. This brings the two copies back into balance.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee altered 24 deposit slips and validated bank receipts in the course of a year to 
conceal the theft of over $15, 000. These documents were altered with white-out or a ball 
point pen to match the company’s cash reports.  
 
One common-sense issue that is sometimes over looked by organizations is the handling of 
the deposit on the way to the bank. Once prepared, the deposit should immediately be put in 
a safe place until it is taken to the bank. Unfortunately, some organizations leave their 
deposits carelessly unattended. For example, some companies prepare the daily deposit, then 
leave it in the office overnight to be taken to the bank the next morning. Employees familiar 
with this routine have little trouble pilfering checks and currency from the deposit after 
hours.  
 
 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.427 
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.428                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
As with all cash larceny schemes, stealing from the company deposit can be rather difficult 
to conceal. In most cases these schemes are only successful in the long term when the 
person who counts the cash also makes the deposit. In any other circumstance the success of 
the scheme depends primarily on the inattentiveness of those charged with preparing and 
reconciling the deposit. 
 
Deposit Lapping   
One method that fraudsters sometimes use to conceal cash larceny from the deposit is 
lapping. Lapping occurs when an employee steals the deposit from day one, then replaces it 
with day two’s deposit. Day two is replaced with day three, and so on. The perpetrator is 
always one day behind, but as long as no one demands an up-to-the minute reconciliation of 
the deposits to the bank statement—and if daily receipts do not drop precipitously — he may 
be able to avoid detection for a period of time. Lapping is discussed in more detail in the 
Skimming section.  
 
Deposits in Transit 
A final strategy used to conceal stolen deposits is to carry the missing money as deposits in 
transit, which are a way of accounting for discrepancies between the company’s records and 
the bank statement.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee was responsible for receiving collections, issuing receipts, posting transactions, 
reconciling accounts, and making deposits. This employee took over $20,000 in collections 
from her employer over a five-month period. To hide her theft, the perpetrator carried the 
missing money as deposits in transit, meaning that the missing money would appear on the 
next month’s bank statement. Of course, it never did. The balance was carried for several 
months as “d.i.t.” until an auditor recognized the discrepancy and put a halt to the fraud.  
 
Detection of Cash Larceny 
Receipt Recording  
In-depth analysis of the cash receipts and recording process is the key to detecting a cash 
larceny scheme. Areas of analysis may include: 
• Mail and register receipt points. 
• Journalizing and recording of the receipts. 
• Security of the cash from receipt to deposit. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.429 
Control Objectives 
In analyzing the cash receipt process, it is important to meet the following control 
objectives: 
• Cash receipts must be complete. Each day’s receipts must be promptly collected and 
deposited in full. 
• Each receivable transaction recorded must be legitimate and have supporting 
documentation.  
• All information included in the transaction must be correctly verified as to amount, date, 
account coding, and descriptions. 
• The cash must be safeguarded while in the physical possession of the company. 
• There must be appropriate personnel responsible for overseeing cash control processes.  
• Cash register tape totals should be reconciled to the amount of cash in drawer. 
• An independent listing of cash receipts should be prepared before the receipts are 
submitted to the cashier or accounts receivable bookkeeper. 
• An independent person should verify the listing against the deposit slips. 
• Authenticated deposit slips should be retained and reconciled to the corresponding 
amounts in the cash receipts records. 
• The bank deposit should be made by someone other than the cashier or the accounts 
receivable bookkeeper. A person independent of the cash receipts and accounts 
receivable functions should compare entries to the cash receipts journal with: 
? Authenticated bank deposit slips 
? Deposit per the bank statements 
• Areas where physical handling of cash takes place should be reasonably safeguarded. 
 
Analytical Review 
Analyzing the relationship between sales, cost of sales, and the returns and allowances can 
detect inappropriate refunds and discounts.  
• If a large cash fraud is suspected, a thorough review of these accounts may enlighten the 
examiner as to the magnitude of the suspected fraud.  
• An analysis of refunds and returns and allowances with the actual flow of inventory may 
reveal some fraud schemes. The refund should cause an entry to inventory, even if it is 
damaged inventory. Likewise, a return will cause a corresponding entry to an inventory 
account.  
  
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.430                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• There should be a linear relationship between sales and returns and allowances over a 
relevant range. Any change in this relationship may point to a fraud scheme unless there 
is another valid explanation such as a change in the manufacturing process, change in 
product line, or change in price. 
 
Detection at the Register 
• As cash is received, whether at a register or through the mail, it is important to ensure 
that the employees responsible for completing these important tasks are informed of 
their responsibility and properly supervised.  
• Access to the register must be closely monitored and access codes must be kept secure.  
• An employee other than the register worker should be responsible for preparing register 
count sheets and agreeing them to register totals.  
• Popular concealment methods must be watched for. These methods, discussed earlier, 
include checks for cash, reversing transactions, register tape destruction or alteration, 
and sales cash counts. 
• Complete register documentation and cash must be delivered to the appropriate 
personnel in a timely manner.  
• Cash thefts are sometimes revealed by customers who have either paid money on an 
account and have not received credit, or in some cases, when they notice that the credit 
they have been given does not agree with the payment they have made. Complaints and 
inquiries are also received frequently from banks. 
 
Cash Account Analysis 
Cash larceny can be detected by reviewing and analyzing all journal entries made to the cash 
accounts. This review and analysis should be performed on a regular basis. If an employee is 
unable to conceal the fraud through altering the source documents, such as the cash register 
tape, then he may resort to making a journal entry directly to cash. In general (and except in 
financial institutions), there are very few instances in everyday business activity where an 
independent journal entry is necessary for cash. One of these exceptions is the recording of 
the bank service charge. However, this is an easy journal entry to trace to its source 
documentation, namely the bank statement. Therefore, all other entries directly to cash are 
suspect and should be traced to their source documentation or explanation. Suspect entries 
will generally credit the cash account and correspondingly debit various other accounts such 
as a sales contra account or bad debt expenses. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.431 
Prevention of Cash Larceny 
Segregation of Duties 
The primary prevention of cash larceny is segregation of duties. Whenever one individual 
has control over the entire accounting transaction (e.g., authorization, recording, and 
custody), the opportunity is present for cash fraud. Each of the following duties and 
responsibilities should ideally be segregated:  
• Cash receipts 
• Cash counts 
• Bank deposits 
• Deposit receipt reconciliation 
• Bank reconciliations 
• Posting of deposits 
• Cash disbursements 
 
If any one person has the authority to collect the cash, deposit the receipts, record that 
collection, and disburse company funds, the risk that fraud can occur is high. 
 
Assignment Rotation and Mandatory Vacations 
Many internal fraud schemes are continuous in nature and require ongoing efforts by the 
employee to conceal defalcations. Mandatory job rotation is an excellent method of 
detecting cash fraud. By establishing a mandatory job or assignment rotation, the 
concealment element is interrupted. If mandatory vacations are within the company’s 
policies, it is important that during the employee’s absence, the normal workload of that 
employee be performed by another individual. The purpose of mandatory vacations is lost if 
the work is allowed to remain undone during the employee’s time off.  
 
Surprise Cash Counts and Procedure Supervision 
Surprise cash counts and supervisory observations are a useful fraud prevention method if 
properly used. It is important that employees know that cash will be counted on a sporadic 
and unscheduled basis. These surprise counts must be made at all steps of the process from 
receiving the check to deposit. 
 
Physical Security of Cash 
• Ensure proper segregation of duties of key personnel. 
• Review the check and cash composition of the daily bank deposit during unannounced 
cash counts and during substantive audit tests of cash receipts. 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.432                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review the entity’s records of the numerical series of printed prenumbered receipts, and 
verify that these receipts are used sequentially (including voided documents). 
• Review the timeliness of deposits from locations to the central treasurer function. 
• Observe cash receipting operations of locations. 
• Prepare and review a schedule of all cash receipting functions from a review of revenue 
reports, from cash receipt forms at the central treasurer function, and from discussion 
with knowledgeable employees. 
• Prepare and analyze an inventory of all imprest and change funds by purpose, amount, 
custodian, date, and location. 
• Audit all revenue sources on a cycle. 
• Periodically use comparative analytical reviews to determine which functions have 
unfavorable trends. 
• Determine reason(s) why revenue has changed from previous reporting periods. 
• Confirm responses obtained from managers by using alternative records or through 
substantive audit tests. 
• Adhere to a communicated policy of unannounced cash counts. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Fraudulent Disbursements 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.501 



:


cash larceni
in the occup fraud set a cash larceni mai be defin as the intent take of
an employ cash the term cash includ both currenc and check without the consent
and against the will of the employ
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1420 2011 fraud examin manual
a cash larceni scheme can take place in ani circumst in which an employe ha access
to cash everi compani must deal with the receipt deposit and distribut of cash so
everi compani is potenti vulner to a cash larceni scheme while the circumst in
which an employe might steal cash ar nearli limitless most larceni scheme involv the
theft of incom cash currenc on hand in a cash regist cash box etc or theft of cash
from the victim organ bank deposit
incom cash
theft of cash from the regist
a larg percentag of cash larceni scheme occur at the cash regist and for good reason
the regist is usual where the cash is the regist or similar cash collect point like
cash drawer or cash box is usual the most common point of access to cash for
employe so it is understand that thi is where larceni scheme frequent occur
furthermor there is often a great deal of activ at the regist numer transact that
requir employe to handl cash thi can serv as a cover for the theft of cash in a flurri
of activ with monei be pass back and forth between custom and employe an
employe can often slip cash out of the regist and into hi pocket undetect
the most straightforward cash larceni scheme is to simpli open the regist and remov
currenc or check see cash larceni from the regist flowchart the theft is often
commit as a sale is be conduct so that it appear to be part of the transact in
other circumst the perpetr wait for a slow moment when no on is around to
notic him dig into the cash drawer
recal that the difficulti in detect skim scheme come from the fact that the stolen
fund ar never enter on the victim organ account in a larceni scheme on the
other hand the fund that the perpetr steal have alreadi been reflect on the regist
tape as a result an imbal will result between the regist tape and the cash drawer
a regist is balanc by compar the transact on the regist tape to the amount of
cash on hand sale return and other regist transact that ar record on the regist
tape ar ad to or subtract from a known balanc to arriv at a total for the period in
question the actual cash is then count and the two total ar compar if the regist
tape show that there should be more cash in the regist than what is present the
discrep mai be due to larceni
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1421
the actual method for take monei at the regist open the regist and remov
currenc rare vari it is the method us by perpetr to avoid get caught that
distinguish larceni scheme oddli in mani instanc the perpetr ha no plan for
avoid detect a larg part of fraud is ration the employe convinc himself that
he is somehow entitl to what he is take or that what he is do is not actual a crime
regist larceni scheme frequent begin when the perpetr convinc himself that he is
onli borrow the fund to cover a temporari monetari need these peopl might carri
the miss currenc in their regist for sever dai delud themselv in the belief that
thei will on dai repai the fund thei have stolen
the employe who doe noth to camouflag hi crime is easili caught more danger
is the person take activ step to hide hi crime on basic wai for an employe to
disguis the fact that he is steal currenc is to take monei from someon els regist
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1422 2011 fraud examin manual
in some retail organ employe ar assign to certain regist altern on
regist is us and each employe ha an access code when cash is miss from a certain
cashier regist that cashier is obvious the most like suspect for the theft therefor by
steal from a cowork regist or by us someon els access code to enter the
regist the perpetr make sure that anoth employe will be the prime suspect in the
theft
exampl
a teller for a retail sale compani simpli sign onto a regist rang a no sale and took
currenc from the drawer over a period of time the teller took approxim 6000
through thi simpl method in order to get awai with the theft the teller wait until a
cowork wa on break then log onto that person regist rang a no sale and took
the cash the result cash shortag therefor appear in the regist of an honest
employe deflect attent from the true thief
a veri unsophist wai to avoid detect is to steal currenc in veri small amount over
an extend period of time becaus the miss amount ar small the shortag mai be
dismiss as account error rather than theft typic the employe becom depend
on the extra monei he is pilfer and hi theft increas in scale or becom more frequent
which caus the scheme to be uncov most retail organ track overag or
shortag by employe make thi method larg ineffect
revers transact
some employe conceal cash larceni by process revers transact which caus the
regist tape to reconcil to the amount of cash on hand after the theft by process fals
void or refund an employe can reduc the cash balanc reflect on the regist tape
exampl
a cashier receiv payment from a custom and record the transact on her system
she stole the payment from the custom then destroi the compani receipt that
reflect the transact to complet the coverup the cashier went back and void the
transact that she had enter at the time the payment were receiv the revers
entri brought the receipt total in to balanc with the cash on hand
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1423
regist manipul
instead of us revers entri an employe might manual alter the regist tape again
the purpos of thi activ is to forc a balanc between the cash on hand and the actual
cash receiv an employe might us whiteout to cover up a sale whose proce were
stolen or he might simpli cross out or alter the number on the tape so that the regist
total and the cash drawer balanc thi type of conceal is not common becaus in
gener the alter will be notic
alter cash count
anoth method for conceal cash larceni is to alter the cash count on regist when
cash from a regist is total and prepar for deposit an employe simpli record the
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appear to balanc with the total on the regist
tape obvious employe who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charg with
verifi the amount of cash on hand in their own regist but thi control is often
overlook
destroi regist tape
if the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balanc the next best thing is to prevent
other from comput the total and discov the imbal employe who ar
steal from the regist sometim destroi detail tape that would implic them in a
crime when detail tape ar miss or defac it mai be becaus someon is try to
conceal a fraud
other larceni of sale and receiv
not all receipt arriv via the cash regist employe can just as easili steal monei receiv
at other point on of the more common method is to take check receiv through the
mail post the payment to the account system but steal the check see other cash
larceni flowchart obvious thi type of scheme leav the cash account out of balanc
from a perpetr perspect it would make much more sens to take check that have
not yet been post to custom account often thi type of cash larceni scheme is
commit by an employe who claim to onli be borrow the fund for a short while
on of the classic ration in occup fraud scheme
those employe who have total control of a compani account system can overcom
the problem of outofbal account it is common especi in small busi for a
singl person to control all of a compani deposit and ledger these employe can steal
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1424 2011 fraud examin manual
incom cash that ha alreadi been post then conceal the crime by make unsupport
entri in the victim organ book poor separ of duti is veri often the
weak that allow cash larceni scheme to go undetect
exampl
an employe post custom payment to the account receiv journal but stole the cash
receiv thi result in an imbal in the victim compani cash account but the
perpetr had control over the compani deposit and all it ledger thi allow her to
conceal her crime by make unsupport entr i in the compani book that produc a
fictiti balanc between receipt and ledger
in circumst in which payment ar stolen but nonetheless post to the cash receipt
journal revers entri ar sometim us to balanc the victim compani account the
incom payment is initi credit to the custom account but the entri is later
revers with an unauthor adjust such as a courtesi discount
a less eleg wai to hide a crime is to simpli destroi all record that might prove that the
perpetr ha been steal thi slash and burn conceal techniqu doe not
prevent the victim compani from realiz that it ha been rob but it mai help conceal
the ident of the thief
cash larceni from the deposit
at some point in everi revenuegener busi someon must physic take the
compani currenc and check to the bank thi person or person left alon liter
hold the bag will have an opportun to take a portion of the monei prior to deposit
it into the compani account
typic when a compani receiv cash someon is assign to tabul the receipt list
the form of payment currenc or check and prepar a deposit slip for the bank then
anoth employe take the cash and deposit it in the bank the person who made out the
deposit gener retain on copi of the slip thi copi is match to a receipt copi of
the slip which is stamp by the bank when the deposit is made
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1425
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1426 2011 fraud examin manual
thi procedur is design to prevent the theft of fund from the deposit but theft still
occur often becaus the process is not adher to see cash larceni from the deposit
flowchart for exampl when on person is in charg of prepar the deposit slip make
the deposit and reconcil the bank statement that person can pilfer monei from the dai
receipt and conceal it by falsifi the deposit slip if the dai receipt ar 1000 the
perpetr might fill out a deposit slip for 5 00 and steal the other 500 the employe then
make correspondingli fals entri in the book underst the dai receipt thi
process creat a fals balanc in the victim organ record
a failur to reconcil the bank copi of the deposit slip with the offic copi can result in
fraud when the person make the deposit know hi compani doe not reconcil the two
copi he can steal cash from the deposit on the wai to the bank and alter the deposit slip
so that it reflect a lesser amount in some case sale record will also be alter to match
the diminish deposit
when cash is stolen from the deposit the receipt deposit slip will of cours be out of
balanc with the compani copi of the deposit slip unless the perpetr also prepar the
deposit to correct thi problem some perpetr alter the bank copi of the deposit slip
after it ha been valid thi bring the two copi back into balanc
exampl
an employe alter 24 deposit slip and valid bank receipt in the cours of a year to
conceal the theft of over 15 000 these document were alter with whiteout or a ball
point pen to match the compani cash report
on commonsens issu that is sometim over look by organ is the handl of
the deposit on the wai to the bank onc prepar the deposit should immedi be put in
a safe place until it is taken to the bank unfortun some organ leav their
deposit carelessli unattend for exampl some compani prepar the daili deposit then
leav it in the offic overnight to be taken to the bank the next morn employe familiar
with thi routin have littl troubl pilfer check and currenc from the deposit after
hour
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1427
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1428 2011 fraud examin manual
as with all cash larceni scheme steal from the compani deposit can be rather difficult
to conceal in most case these scheme ar onli success in the long term when the
person who count the cash also make the deposit in ani other circumst the success of
the scheme depend primarili on the inattent of those charg with prepar and
reconcil the deposit
deposit lap
on method that fraudster sometim us to conceal cash larceni from the deposit is
lap lap occur when an employe steal the deposit from dai on then replac it
with dai two deposit dai two is replac with dai three and so on the perpetr is
alwai on dai behind but as long as no on demand an uptoth minut reconcili of
the deposit to the bank statementand if daili receipt do not drop precipit he mai
be abl to avoid detect for a period of time lap is discuss in more detail in the
skim section
deposit in transit
a final strategi us to conceal stolen deposit is to carri the miss monei as deposit in
transit which ar a wai of account for discrep between the compani record and
the bank statement
exampl
an employe wa respons for receiv collect issu receipt post transact
reconcil account and make deposit thi employe took over 20000 in collect
from her employ over a fivemonth period to hide her theft the perpetr carri the
miss monei as deposit in transit mean that the miss monei would appear on the
next month bank statement of cours it never did the balanc wa carri for sever
month as dit until an auditor recogn the discrep and put a halt to the fraud
detect of cash larceni
receipt record
indepth analysi of the cash receipt and record process is the kei to detect a cash
larceni scheme area of analysi mai includ
mail and regist receipt point
journal and record of the receipt
secur of the cash from receipt to deposit
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1429
control object
in analyz the cash receipt process it is import to meet the follow control
object
cash receipt must be complet each dai receipt must be promptli collect and
deposit in full
each receiv transact record must be legitim and have support
document
all inform includ in the transact must be correctli verifi as to amount date
account code and descript
the cash must be safeguard while in the physic possess of the compani
there must be appropri personnel respons for overse cash control process
cash regist tape total should be reconcil to the amount of cash in drawer
an independ list of cash receipt should be prepar befor the receipt ar
submit to the cashier or account receiv bookkeep
an independ person should verifi the list against the deposit slip
authent deposit slip should be retain and reconcil to the correspond
amount in the cash receipt record
the bank deposit should be made by someon other than the cashier or the account
receiv bookkeep a person independ of the cash receipt and account
receiv function should compar entri to the cash receipt journal with
authent bank deposit slip
deposit per the bank statement
area where physic handl of cash take place should be reason safeguard
analyt review
analyz the relationship between sale cost of sale and the return and allow can
detect inappropri refund and discount
if a larg cash fraud is suspect a thorough review of these account mai enlighten the
examin as to the magnitud of the suspect fraud
an analysi of refund and return and allow with the actual flow of inventori mai
reveal some fraud scheme the refund should caus an entri to inventori even if it is
damag inventori likewis a return will caus a correspond entri to an inventori
account
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1430 2011 fraud examin manual
there should be a linear relationship between sale and return and allow over a
relev rang ani chang in thi relationship mai point to a fraud scheme unless there
is anoth valid explan such as a chang in the manufactur process chang in
product line or chang in price
detect at the regist
as cash is receiv whether at a regist or through the mail it is import to ensur
that the employe respons for complet these import task ar inform of
their respons and properli supervis
access to the regist must be close monitor and access code must be kept secur
an employe other than the regist worker should be respons for prepar regist
count sheet and agre them to regist total
popular conceal method must be watch for these method discuss earlier
includ check for cash revers transact regist tape destruct or alter
and sale cash count
complet regist document and cash must be deliv to the appropri
personnel in a time manner
cash theft ar sometim reveal by custom who have either paid monei on an
account and have not receiv credit or in some case when thei notic that the credit
thei have been given doe not agre with the payment thei have made complaint and
inquiri ar also receiv frequent from bank
cash account analysi
cash larceni can be detect by review and analyz all journal entri made to the cash
account thi review and analysi should be perform on a regular basi if an employe is
unabl to conceal the fraud through alter the sourc document such as the cash regist
tape then he mai resort to make a journal entri directli to cash in gener and except in
financi institut there ar veri few instanc in everydai busi activ where an
independ journal entri is necessari for cash on of these except is the record of
the bank servic charg howev thi is an easi journal entri to trace to it sourc
document name the bank statement therefor all other entri directli to cash ar
suspect and should be trace to their sourc document or explan suspect entri
will gener credit the cash account and correspondingli debit variou other account such
as a sale contra account or bad debt expens
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1431
prevent of cash larceni
segreg of duti
the primari prevent of cash larceni is segreg of duti whenev on individu
ha control over the entir account transact eg author record and
custodi the opportun is present for cash fraud each of the follow duti and
respons should ideal be segreg
cash receipt
cash count
bank deposit
deposit receipt reconcili
bank reconcili
post of deposit
cash disburs
if ani on person ha the author to collect the cash deposit the receipt record that
collect and disburs compani fund the risk that fraud can occur is high
assign rotat and mandatori vacat
mani intern fraud scheme ar continu in natur and requir ongo effort by the
employe to conceal defalc mandatori job rotat is an excel method of
detect cash fraud by establish a mandatori job or assign rotat the
conceal element is interrupt if mandatori vacat ar within the compani
polici it is import that dure the employe absenc the normal workload of that
employe be perform by anoth individu the purpos of mandatori vacat is lost if
the work is allow to remain undon dure the employe time off
surpris cash count and procedur supervis
surpris cash count and supervisori observ ar a us fraud prevent method if
properli us it is import that employe know that cash will be count on a sporad
and unschedul basi these surpris count must be made at all step of the process from
receiv the check to deposit
physic secur of cash
ensur proper segreg of duti of kei personnel
review the check and cash composit of the daili bank deposit dure unannounc
cash count and dure substant audit test of cash receipt
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1432 2011 fraud examin manual
review the entiti record of the numer seri of print prenumb receipt and
verifi that these receipt ar us sequenti includ void document
review the timeli of deposit from locat to the central treasur function
observ cash receipt oper of locat
prepar and review a schedul of all cash receipt function from a review of revenu
report from cash receipt form at the central treasur function and from discuss
with knowledg employe
prepar and analyz an inventori of all imprest and chang fund by purpos amount
custodian date and locat
audit all revenu sourc on a cycl
period us compar analyt review to determin which function have
unfavor trend
determin reason why revenu ha chang from previou report period
confirm respons obtain from manag by us altern record or through
substant audit test
adher to a commun polici of unannounc cash count
financi transact asset misappropri fraudul disburs
2011 fraud examin manual 1501
