2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: CASH RECEIPTS/Cash Larceny/Theft of Cash from the Register


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Cash Receipts Schemes


:


Theft of Cash from the Register 
A large percentage of cash larceny schemes occur at the cash register, and for good reason—
 the register is usually where the cash is. The register (or similar cash collection points like 
cash drawers or cash boxes) is usually the most common point of access to cash for 
employees, so it is understandable that this is where larceny schemes frequently occur. 
Furthermore, there is often a great deal of activity at the register, numerous transactions that 
require employees to handle cash. This can serve as a cover for the theft of cash. In a flurry 
of activity, with money being passed back and forth between customer and employee, an 
employee can often slip cash out of the register and into his pocket undetected.  
 
The most straightforward cash larceny scheme is to simply open the register and remove 
currency or checks. (See “Cash Larceny from the Register” flowchart.) The theft is often 
committed as a sale is being conducted so that it appears to be part of the transaction. In 
other circumstances, the perpetrator waits for a slow moment when no one is around to 
notice him digging into the cash drawer.  
 
Recall that the difficulty in detecting skimming schemes comes from the fact that the stolen 
funds are never entered on the victim organization’s accounts. In a larceny scheme, on the 
other hand, the funds that the perpetrator steals have already been reflected on the register 
tape. As a result, an imbalance will result between the register tape and the cash drawer.  
 
A register is balanced by comparing the transactions on the register tape to the amount of 
cash on hand. Sales, returns, and other register transactions that are recorded on the register 
tape are added to or subtracted from a known balance to arrive at a total for the period in 
question. The actual cash is then counted and the two totals are compared. If the register 
tape shows that there should be more cash in the register than what is present, the 
discrepancy may be due to larceny. 
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.421 
 
 
The actual method for taking money at the register — opening the register and removing 
currency — rarely varies. It is the methods used by perpetrators to avoid getting caught that 
distinguish larceny schemes. Oddly, in many instances the perpetrator has no plan for 
avoiding detection. A large part of fraud is rationalizing; the employee convinces himself that 
he is somehow entitled to what he is taking, or that what he is doing is not actually a crime. 
Register larceny schemes frequently begin when the perpetrator convinces himself that he is 
only “borrowing” the funds to cover a temporary monetary need. These people might carry 
the missing currency in their registers for several days, deluding themselves in the belief that 
they will one day repay the funds they have stolen.  
 
The employee who does nothing to camouflage his crimes is easily caught. More dangerous 
is the person taking active steps to hide his crimes. One basic way for an employee to 
disguise the fact that he is stealing currency is to take money from someone else’s register.  
 
Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts Financial Transactions   
1.422                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In some retail organizations, employees are assigned to certain registers. Alternatively, one 
register is used and each employee has an access code. When cash is missing from a certain 
cashier’s register, that cashier is obviously the most likely suspect for the theft. Therefore, by 
stealing from a coworker’s register, or by using someone else’s access code to enter the 
register, the perpetrator makes sure that another employee will be the prime suspect in the 
theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A teller for a retail sales company simply signed onto a register, rang a “no sale” and took 
currency from the drawer. Over  a period of time, the teller took approximately $6,000 
through this simple method. In order to get away with the theft, the teller waited until a 
coworker was on break, then logged onto that person’s register, rang a “no sale” and took 
the cash. The resulting cash shortage therefore appeared in the register of an honest 
employee, deflecting attention from the true thief.  
 
A very unsophisticated way to avoid detection is to steal currency in very small amounts over 
an extended period of time. Because the missing amounts are small, the shortages may be 
dismissed as accounting errors rather than theft. Typically, the employee becomes dependent 
on the extra money he is pilfering and his thefts increase in scale or become more frequent, 
which causes the scheme to be uncovered. Most retail organizations track overages or 
shortages by employee, making this method largely ineffective. 
 
REVERSING TRANSACTIONS 
Some employees conceal cash larceny by processing reversing transactions, which cause the 
register tape to reconcile to the amount of cash on hand after the theft. By processing false 
voids or refunds, an employee can reduce the cash balance reflected on the register tape.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier received payments from a customer and recorded the transactions on her system. 
She stole the payments from the customers, then destroyed the company’s receipts that 
reflected the transactions. To complete the cover-up, the cashier went back and voided the 
transactions that she had entered at the time the payments were received. The reversing 
entries brought the receipt totals in to balance with the cash on hand.  
 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Cash Receipts 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.423 
REGISTER MANIPULATION 
Instead of using reversing entries, an employee might manually alter the register tape. Again, 
the purpose of this activity is to force a balance between the cash on hand and the actual 
cash received. An employee might use white-out to cover up a sale whose proceeds were 
stolen, or he might simply cross out or alter the numbers on the tape so that the register 
total and the cash drawer balance. This type of concealment is not common because, in 
general, the alterations will be noticeable. 
 
ALTERING CASH COUNTS 
Another method for concealing cash larceny is to alter the cash counts on registers. When 
cash from a register is totaled and prepared for deposit, an employee simply records the 
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appears to balance with the total on the register 
tape. Obviously, employees who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charged with 
verifying the amount of cash on hand in their own register, but this control is often 
overlooked.  
 
DESTROYING REGISTER TAPES   
If the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balance, the next best thing is to prevent 
others from computing the totals and discovering the imbalance. Employees who are 
stealing from the register sometimes destroy detail tapes that would implicate them in a 
crime. When detail tapes are missing or defaced, it may be because someone is trying to 
conceal a fraud.  
 



:


theft of cash from the regist
a larg percentag of cash larceni scheme occur at the cash regist and for good reason
the regist is usual where the cash is the regist or similar cash collect point like
cash drawer or cash box is usual the most common point of access to cash for
employe so it is understand that thi is where larceni scheme frequent occur
furthermor there is often a great deal of activ at the regist numer transact that
requir employe to handl cash thi can serv as a cover for the theft of cash in a flurri
of activ with monei be pass back and forth between custom and employe an
employe can often slip cash out of the regist and into hi pocket undetect
the most straightforward cash larceni scheme is to simpli open the regist and remov
currenc or check see cash larceni from the regist flowchart the theft is often
commit as a sale is be conduct so that it appear to be part of the transact in
other circumst the perpetr wait for a slow moment when no on is around to
notic him dig into the cash drawer
recal that the difficulti in detect skim scheme come from the fact that the stolen
fund ar never enter on the victim organ account in a larceni scheme on the
other hand the fund that the perpetr steal have alreadi been reflect on the regist
tape as a result an imbal will result between the regist tape and the cash drawer
a regist is balanc by compar the transact on the regist tape to the amount of
cash on hand sale return and other regist transact that ar record on the regist
tape ar ad to or subtract from a known balanc to arriv at a total for the period in
question the actual cash is then count and the two total ar compar if the regist
tape show that there should be more cash in the regist than what is present the
discrep mai be due to larceni
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1421
the actual method for take monei at the regist open the regist and remov
currenc rare vari it is the method us by perpetr to avoid get caught that
distinguish larceni scheme oddli in mani instanc the perpetr ha no plan for
avoid detect a larg part of fraud is ration the employe convinc himself that
he is somehow entitl to what he is take or that what he is do is not actual a crime
regist larceni scheme frequent begin when the perpetr convinc himself that he is
onli borrow the fund to cover a temporari monetari need these peopl might carri
the miss currenc in their regist for sever dai delud themselv in the belief that
thei will on dai repai the fund thei have stolen
the employe who doe noth to camouflag hi crime is easili caught more danger
is the person take activ step to hide hi crime on basic wai for an employe to
disguis the fact that he is steal currenc is to take monei from someon els regist
asset misappropri cash receipt financi transact
1422 2011 fraud examin manual
in some retail organ employe ar assign to certain regist altern on
regist is us and each employe ha an access code when cash is miss from a certain
cashier regist that cashier is obvious the most like suspect for the theft therefor by
steal from a cowork regist or by us someon els access code to enter the
regist the perpetr make sure that anoth employe will be the prime suspect in the
theft
exampl
a teller for a retail sale compani simpli sign onto a regist rang a no sale and took
currenc from the drawer over a period of time the teller took approxim 6000
through thi simpl method in order to get awai with the theft the teller wait until a
cowork wa on break then log onto that person regist rang a no sale and took
the cash the result cash shortag therefor appear in the regist of an honest
employe deflect attent from the true thief
a veri unsophist wai to avoid detect is to steal currenc in veri small amount over
an extend period of time becaus the miss amount ar small the shortag mai be
dismiss as account error rather than theft typic the employe becom depend
on the extra monei he is pilfer and hi theft increas in scale or becom more frequent
which caus the scheme to be uncov most retail organ track overag or
shortag by employe make thi method larg ineffect
revers transact
some employe conceal cash larceni by process revers transact which caus the
regist tape to reconcil to the amount of cash on hand after the theft by process fals
void or refund an employe can reduc the cash balanc reflect on the regist tape
exampl
a cashier receiv payment from a custom and record the transact on her system
she stole the payment from the custom then destroi the compani receipt that
reflect the transact to complet the coverup the cashier went back and void the
transact that she had enter at the time the payment were receiv the revers
entri brought the receipt total in to balanc with the cash on hand
financi transact asset misappropri cash receipt
2011 fraud examin manual 1423
regist manipul
instead of us revers entri an employe might manual alter the regist tape again
the purpos of thi activ is to forc a balanc between the cash on hand and the actual
cash receiv an employe might us whiteout to cover up a sale whose proce were
stolen or he might simpli cross out or alter the number on the tape so that the regist
total and the cash drawer balanc thi type of conceal is not common becaus in
gener the alter will be notic
alter cash count
anoth method for conceal cash larceni is to alter the cash count on regist when
cash from a regist is total and prepar for deposit an employe simpli record the
wrong amount so that the cash on hand appear to balanc with the total on the regist
tape obvious employe who deal with the receipt of cash should not be charg with
verifi the amount of cash on hand in their own regist but thi control is often
overlook
destroi regist tape
if the fraudster cannot make the cash and the tape balanc the next best thing is to prevent
other from comput the total and discov the imbal employe who ar
steal from the regist sometim destroi detail tape that would implic them in a
crime when detail tape ar miss or defac it mai be becaus someon is try to
conceal a fraud
