2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Misuse of Inventory and Other Assets/The Costs of Inventory Misuse


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


The Costs of Inventory Misuse 
The costs of inventory misuse are difficult to quantify. To many individuals, this type of 
fraud is not viewed as a crime, but rather as “borrowing.” In truth, the cost to a company 
from this kind of scheme is often immaterial. When a perpetrator borrows a stapler for the 
night or takes home some tools to perform a household repair, the cost to his company is 
negligible, as long as the assets are returned unharmed. 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Oth er Assets Financial Transactions   
1.602                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
On the other hand, misuse schemes could be very costly. Take, for example, the situation 
discussed above in which an employee uses company equipment to operate a side business 
during work hours. Since the employee is not performing his work duties, the employer 
suffers a loss in productivity. If the low productivity continues, the employer might have to 
hire additional employees to compensate, which means more capital diverted to wages. If the 
employee’s business competes with the employer’s, then lost business could be an additional 
cost. Unauthorized use of equipment can also mean additional wear and tear, causing the 
equipment to break down sooner than it would have under normal business conditions. 
Additionally, when an employee “borrows” comp any property, there is no guarantee that he 
will bring it back. This is precisely how some theft schemes begin. Despite some opinions to 
the contrary, asset misuse is not always a harmless crime.  
 
 



:


the cost of inventori misus
the cost of inventori misus ar difficult to quantifi to mani individu thi type of
fraud is not view as a crime but rather as borrow in truth the cost to a compani
from thi kind of scheme is often immateri when a perpetr borrow a stapler for the
night or take home some tool to perform a household repair the cost to hi compani is
neglig as long as the asset ar return unharm
asset misappropri inventori and oth er asset financi transact
1602 2011 fraud examin manual
on the other hand misus scheme could be veri costli take for exampl the situat
discuss abov in which an employe us compani equip to oper a side busi
dure work hour sinc the employe is not perform hi work duti the employ
suffer a loss in product if the low product continu the employ might have to
hire addit employe to compens which mean more capit divert to wage if the
employe busi compet with the employ then lost busi could be an addit
cost unauthor us of equip can also mean addit wear and tear caus the
equip to break down sooner than it would have under normal busi condit
addition when an employe borrow comp ani properti there is no guarante that he
will bring it back thi is precis how some theft scheme begin despit some opinion to
the contrari asset misus is not alwai a harmless crime
