2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Theft of Inventory and Other Assets/Larceny Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Larceny Schemes  
The textbook definition of larceny is “Felonious stealing, taking and carrying, leading, riding, 
or driving away another’s personal property, with intent to convert it or to deprive owner 
thereof. The unlawful taking and carrying away of property of another with intent to 
appropriate it to use inconsistent with latter’s rights.” 1 This definition is so broad, it 
encompasses every kind of asset theft. In order to gain a more specific understanding of the 
methods used to steal inventory and other assets, the definition of larceny has been 
restricted. For the purposes of classifying asset misappropriations, the term larceny is meant 
to refer to the most basic type of inventory theft, the schemes in which an employee simply 
takes inventory from the company premises without attempting to conceal the theft in the 
books and records. (See “Non-cash Larceny” flowchart.) In other fraud schemes, employees 
may create false documentation to justify the shipment of merchandise or tamper with 
inventory records to conceal missing assets. La rceny schemes are more blunt. The culprit in 
these crimes takes company assets without trying to “justify” their absence.  
                                                          
1 Blacks, p. 792. 
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.603 
 
 
 
Most non-cash larceny schemes are not very complicated. They are typically committed by 
employees (warehouse personnel, inventory clerks, shipping clerks, etc.) with access to 
inventory or supplies. Many employees simply carry company assets away in open view of 
other employees. People tend to assume that their friends and acquaintances are acting 
honestly. When they see a trusted coworker taking something out of the workplace, most 
people assume that the culprit has a legitimate reason for doing so.  
 
 
Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets Financial Transactions   
1.604                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A university faculty member was leaving his offic es to take a position at a new school. This 
person was permitted to take a small number of items to his new job, but certainly exceeded 
the intentions of the school when he loaded tw o trucks full of university lab equipment and 
computers worth several hundred thousand doll ars. The perpetrator simply packed up these 
stolen assets along with his personal items and drove away.  
 
Unfortunately, in all too many cases the coworkers of the perpetrator are fully aware that he 
is stealing company assets, yet they refrain from reporting the crime. There are several 
reasons that employees might ignore illegal conduct, such as a sense of duty to their friends, 
a “management vs. labor” mentality, poor channe ls of communication for whistleblowers, or 
intimidation of honest employees by the thief. When high-ranking personnel are stealing 
from their companies, employees often overlook the crime because they fear they will lose 
their jobs if they report it. In some cases, the coworkers may be assisting in the theft.  
 
EXAMPLE 
A school superintendent was not only pilfering school accounts but was also stealing school 
assets. A search of his residence revealed a cell ar filled with school property. A number of 
school employees knew or suspected the superintendent was involved in illegal dealings, but 
he was very powerful and people were afraid to report him for fear of retaliation. As a 
result, he was able to steal from  the school for several years.  
 
Ironically, employees who steal inventory are often highly trusted within their organizations. 
Because these employees are trusted, they may be given access to restricted areas, safes, 
supply rooms, or other areas where company assets are kept. This access makes it easy for 
these employees to steal.  
 
It can be unwise for an employee to physically carry inventory and other assets off the 
premises of his company. This practice carries with it the inherent risk and potential 
embarrassment of being caught red-handed with stolen goods on his person. Some 
employees avoid this problem by mailing company assets from the victim organization to a 
location where they can retrieve them without fear of being observed.  
  
Financial Transactions  Asset Misappropriation: Inventory and Other Assets 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.605 
EXAMPLE 
A spare-parts custodian took several thousand dollars worth of computer chips and mailed 
them to a company that had no  business dealings with the custodian’s employer. He then 
reclaimed the merchandise as his own. By taking the step of mailing the stolen inventory, 
the fraudster allowed the postal service to  unwittingly do his dirty work for him. 
 



:


larceni scheme
the textbook definit of larceni is feloni steal take and carri lead ride
or drive awai anoth person properti with intent to convert it or to depriv owner
thereof the unlaw take and carri awai of properti of anoth with intent to
appropri it to us inconsist with latter right 1 thi definit is so broad it
encompass everi kind of asset theft in order to gain a more specif understand of the
method us to steal inventori and other asset the definit of larceni ha been
restrict for the purpos of classifi asset misappropri the term larceni is meant
to refer to the most basic type of inventori theft the scheme in which an employe simpli
take inventori from the compani premis without attempt to conceal the theft in the
book and record see noncash larceni flowchart in other fraud scheme employe
mai creat fals document to justifi the shipment of merchandis or tamper with
inventori record to conceal miss asset la rceni scheme ar more blunt the culprit in
these crime take compani asset without try to justifi their absenc
1 black p 792
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1603
most noncash larceni scheme ar not veri complic thei ar typic commit by
employe warehous personnel inventori clerk ship clerk etc with access to
inventori or suppli mani employe simpli carri compani asset awai in open view of
other employe peopl tend to assum that their friend and acquaint ar act
honestli when thei see a trust cowork take someth out of the workplac most
peopl assum that the culprit ha a legitim reason for do so
asset misappropri inventori and other asset financi transact
1604 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a univers faculti member wa leav hi offic es to take a posit at a new school thi
person wa permit to take a small number of item to hi new job but certainli exceed
the intent of the school when he load tw o truck full of univers lab equip and
comput worth sever hundr thousand doll ar the perpetr simpli pack up these
stolen asset along with hi person item and drove awai
unfortun in all too mani case the cowork of the perpetr ar fulli awar that he
is steal compani asset yet thei refrain from report the crime there ar sever
reason that employe might ignor illeg conduct such as a sens of duti to their friend
a manag vs labor mental poor chann ls of commun for whistleblow or
intimid of honest employe by the thief when highrank personnel ar steal
from their compani employe often overlook the crime becaus thei fear thei will lose
their job if thei report it in some case the cowork mai be assist in the theft
exampl
a school superintend wa not onli pilfer school account but wa also steal school
asset a search of hi resid reveal a cell ar fill with school properti a number of
school employe knew or suspect the superintend wa involv in illeg deal but
he wa veri power and peopl were afraid to report him for fear of retali as a
result he wa abl to steal from the school for sever year
iron employe who steal inventori ar often highli trust within their organ
becaus these employe ar trust thei mai be given access to restrict area safe
suppli room or other area where compani asset ar kept thi access make it easi for
these employe to steal
it can be unwis for an employe to physic carri inventori and other asset off the
premis of hi compani thi practic carri with it the inher risk and potenti
embarrass of be caught redhand with stolen good on hi person some
employe avoid thi problem by mail compani asset from the victim organ to a
locat where thei can retriev them without fear of be observ
financi transact asset misappropri inventori and other asset
2011 fraud examin manual 1605
exampl
a sparepart custodian took sever thousand dollar worth of comput chip and mail
them to a compani that had no busi deal with the custodian employ he then
reclaim the merchandis as hi own by take the step of mail the stolen inventori
the fraudster allow the postal servic to unwittingli do hi dirti work for him
