2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Open Sources of Information/Why Do Companies Resort to Corporate Espionage?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Why Do Companies Resort to Corporate Espionage? 
If so much lies “out there,” why do people pay for industrial and corporate spies? Why do 
they bother with illegal methods? Why do companies not stick to standard research to learn 
what they need about their competitors, and why do they use intelligence agents and analysts 
instead of routine researchers? The answer to these questions is twofold. 
 
First, even if the intelligence gatherer adheres strictly to using only open sources, mere facts 
do not constitute intelligence or knowledge. Collecting raw data brings one only to the 
threshold of the process. Data must then undergo analysis to be turned into a useful 
product. Analysis involves summarizing, comparing, and explaining the data. The craft of 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.805 
intelligence lies in the ability of the provider to distill mountains of facts from diverse 
sources into a concise product that is actionable by its consumer. 
 
The term “actionable” means the product must have the depth, character, and quality on 
which an executive may base sound decisions. Merely knowing what one’s competitors are 
up to falls short of the mark. Good intelligence identifies the actions an executive should 
take to seize an opportunity or to diminish or eliminate a threat. It is good to know what the 
problem is, but far better to know how the problem can be solved. Even though open 
sources are available to the general public, organizations still utilize intelligence professionals’ 
skills to create actionable intelligence from the mass of public information.  
 
The second reason organizations utilize intelligence professionals is that the remaining five 
percent of needed information is proprietary. This last segment often becomes critical to 
competitive survival, and organizations or individuals are sometimes willing to sidestep the 
law to obtain it. Intelligence professionals know the “tricks of the trade” for gathering 
sensitive proprietary information that can give their clients a competitive edge.  
 
While legal protections exist for trade secrets and other proprietary information, smart 
organizations do not passively rely on the threat of civil actions or criminal penalties to 
protect their information assets. Rather, they take affirmative steps to erect their own 
security barriers around their critical proprietary information. Such barriers dramatically 
increase the costs, never mind the legal liabilities, of obtaining protected information.  
 
If a company or foreign intelligence service must have the trade secrets of a target to 
complete the information picture they are formulating, they must be willing to invest. In 
many cases, this means employing the services of intelligence professionals. Utilizing 
experience and training, the intelligence professional conducts a campaign or mission using 
secure methods to protect the collection effort, preventing legal repercussions for the client. 
 
There is a cost factor involved in intelligence gathering, which tends to keep companies and 
corporate spies from rushing into covert proprietary intelligence activity. A wise intelligence 
campaign will utilize open sources, at least initially, as much as possible. Only when the 
effort can go no further, and business needs dictate acquiring additional information, does 
intelligence gathering enter the proprietary realm. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.806                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


why do compani resort to corpor espionag
if so much li out there why do peopl pai for industri and corpor spi why do
thei bother with illeg method why do compani not stick to standard research to learn
what thei need about their competitor and why do thei us intellig agent and analyst
instead of routin research the answer to these question is twofold
first even if the intellig gather adher strictli to us onli open sourc mere fact
do not constitut intellig or knowledg collect raw data bring on onli to the
threshold of the process data must then undergo analysi to be turn into a us
product analysi involv summar compar and explain the data the craft of
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1805
intellig li in the abil of the provid to distil mountain of fact from divers
sourc into a concis product that is action by it consum
the term action mean the product must have the depth charact and qualiti on
which an execut mai base sound decis mere know what on competitor ar
up to fall short of the mark good intellig identifi the action an execut should
take to seiz an opportun or to diminish or elimin a threat it is good to know what the
problem is but far better to know how the problem can be solv even though open
sourc ar avail to the gener public organ still util intellig profession
skill to creat action intellig from the mass of public inform
the second reason organ util intellig profession is that the remain five
percent of need inform is proprietari thi last segment often becom critic to
competit surviv and organ or individu ar sometim will to sidestep the
law to obtain it intellig profession know the trick of the trade for gather
sensit proprietari inform that can give their client a competit edg
while legal protect exist for trade secret and other proprietari inform smart
organ do not passiv reli on the threat of civil action or crimin penalti to
protect their inform asset rather thei take affirm step to erect their own
secur barrier around their critic proprietari inform such barrier dramat
increas the cost never mind the legal liabil of obtain protect inform
if a compani or foreign intellig servic must have the trade secret of a target to
complet the inform pictur thei ar formul thei must be will to invest in
mani case thi mean emploi the servic of intellig profession util
experi and train the intellig profession conduct a campaign or mission us
secur method to protect the collect effort prevent legal repercuss for the client
there is a cost factor involv in intellig gather which tend to keep compani and
corpor spi from rush into covert proprietari intellig activ a wise intellig
campaign will util open sourc at least initi as much as possibl onli when the
effort can go no further and busi need dictat acquir addit inform doe
intellig gather enter the proprietari realm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1806 2011 fraud examin manual
