2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/The Intelligence Pyramid/Basic Sources


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Basic Sources 
After establishing clearly defined goals, the CI professional crafts a collection plan. In a well-
 organized intelligence-gathering plan, the CI professional moves up the pyramid, collecting 
additional information, while continuing to narrow the focus of his search. After exercising 
fundamental techniques, the second level of the pyramid involves accessing basic sources. 
These sources include some that are already familiar: 
• Government sources 
? SEC (from the EDGAR database, www.sec.gov/edgarhp.htm) 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.808                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? 10-K annual report 
? 10-Q quarterly report 
? Proxy statements 
? 13-D major stock acquisitions 
? 14-D tender offers 
? State corporate filings 
? Corporate registrations 
? UCC filings 
? Regulatory filings, professional licensing, etc. 
? Officer/Director (O/D) database 
• Industrial reports and studies 
• Industry analyst reports  
• State industrial directories 
• Trade and business magazines 
• Statistical sources (example: Standard Rate and Data Service [advertising])  
• Trade associations (from the Encyclopedia of Associations and Directories in Print 
provided by Gale Industries)  
• Databases with stories: 
? Thomson Research (http://research.thomsonib.com) — 3,500 research reports are 
added to this source daily. 
? DataTimes—full text newspapers 
 



:


basic sourc
after establish clearli defin goal the ci profession craft a collect plan in a well
organ intelligencegath plan the ci profession move up the pyramid collect
addit inform while continu to narrow the focu of hi search after exercis
fundament techniqu the second level of the pyramid involv access basic sourc
these sourc includ some that ar alreadi familiar
govern sourc
sec from the edgar databas wwwsecgovedgarhphtm
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1808 2011 fraud examin manual
10k annual report
10q quarterli report
proxi statement
13d major stock acquisit
14d tender offer
state corpor file
corpor registr
ucc file
regulatori file profession licens etc
officerdirector od databas
industri report and studi
industri analyst report
state industri directori
trade and busi magazin
statist sourc exampl standard rate and data servic advertis
trade associ from the encyclopedia of associ and directori in print
provid by gale industri
databas with stori
thomson research httpresearchthomsonibcom 3500 research report ar
ad to thi sourc daili
datatimesful text newspap
