2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Building Financial Statements/Costs of Goods Sold


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Costs of Goods Sold 
Labor costs can be derived by a spy from wages listed in newspaper classified ads and from 
wage surveys at the local chamber of commerce. The state workforce commission will also 
have wage surveys for certain occupations. The number of employees for the target can be 
gathered from OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) records and by 
counting cars in the parking lot for each shift.  
 
Determining indirect labor costs can be accomplished in several ways. The best method is to 
consult statistical manuals for the target’s ind ustry, which give the respective percentages of 
direct and indirect labor costs. In addition, estimating the numbers of managerial and 
professional workers entering the plant will supply a guideline. Spies look for clues such as 
the types of cars that employees drive (a Saab or a pickup truck?), the clothing they wear (a 
suit or overalls?), and the items they carry to work (briefcases and laptops or lunchboxes?). 
The chamber of commerce may also be able to supply the numbers of salaried personnel at  
a plant.  
 
The types and amount of raw materials used at a plant may be available from the state air 
pollution control board or the local fire department’s hazardous materials unit. Surveillance 
of truck deliveries to the site is another source. The cost of materials is available from 
suppliers or their catalogs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.815 



:


cost of good sold
labor cost can be deriv by a spy from wage list in newspap classifi ad and from
wage survei at the local chamber of commerc the state workforc commiss will also
have wage survei for certain occup the number of employe for the target can be
gather from osha occup safeti and health administr record and by
count car in the park lot for each shift
determin indirect labor cost can be accomplish in sever wai the best method is to
consult statist manual for the target ind ustri which give the respect percentag of
direct and indirect labor cost in addit estim the number of manageri and
profession worker enter the plant will suppli a guidelin spi look for clue such as
the type of car that employe drive a saab or a pickup truck the cloth thei wear a
suit or overal and the item thei carri to work briefcas and laptop or lunchbox
the chamber of commerc mai also be abl to suppli the number of salari personnel at
a plant
the type and amount of raw materi us at a plant mai be avail from the state air
pollut control board or the local fire depart hazard materi unit surveil
of truck deliveri to the site is anoth sourc the cost of materi is avail from
supplier or their catalog
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1815
