2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Posing as an Employee or Contract Laborer


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Posing as an Employee or Contract Laborer 
Penetrating a company can be very simple. As indicated earlier, one common technique is to 
obtain work as a security officer or a member of the janitorial crew for the victim 
organization. Anyone who saw the movie Wall Street might remember Charlie Sheen’s 
character putting on a janitor’s overalls to ga in access to sensitive information at a rival 
company. Even if the hiring company does a background check on all potential employees 
(usually nothing more than a cursory criminal history search) a good corporate spy will rarely 
have a serious criminal record. It is not likely that a spy will be screened out during a routine 
hiring process.  
 
Security professionals often comment that the best spies are people who have advanced 
technical knowledge; for example, Ph.D.s in electrical engineering or biotechnology. If a spy 
needs highly technical information on a competitor, he may have to use a person with an 
advanced technical background who knows how to identify and/or access the sought after 
materials.  
 
Individuals with high-level technical skills and high security privileges generally have to be 
recruited from within a targeted organization. However, in some intelligence campaigns a 
spy will plant a person with advanced technical credentials in a targeted company in a 
professional capacity. That person gains access to the target’s proprietary information and 
funnels it out to the spy. A person who penetrates a company in this manner is known as a 
“sleeper,” an infiltrator who works on a long-term basis with an acceptable cover. Sleepers 
will be discussed in more detail later in this section.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.835 



:


pose as an employe or contract labor
penetr a compani can be veri simpl as indic earlier on common techniqu is to
obtain work as a secur offic or a member of the janitori crew for the victim
organ anyon who saw the movi wall street might rememb charli sheen
charact put on a janitor overal to ga in access to sensit inform at a rival
compani even if the hire compani doe a background check on all potenti employe
usual noth more than a cursori crimin histori search a good corpor spy will rare
have a seriou crimin record it is not like that a spy will be screen out dure a routin
hire process
secur profession often comment that the best spi ar peopl who have advanc
technic knowledg for exampl phd in electr engin or biotechnolog if a spy
need highli technic inform on a competitor he mai have to us a person with an
advanc technic background who know how to identifi andor access the sought after
materi
individu with highlevel technic skill and high secur privileg gener have to be
recruit from within a target organ howev in some intellig campaign a
spy will plant a person with advanc technic credenti in a target compani in a
profession capac that person gain access to the target proprietari inform and
funnel it out to the spy a person who penetr a compani in thi manner is known as a
sleeper an infiltr who work on a longterm basi with an accept cover sleeper
will be discuss in more detail later in thi section
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1835
