2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Moles and Sleepers


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Moles and Sleepers  
If a client has a very long-range interest in monitoring a company, he may place a spy in that 
company as a permanent employee. This employee, known as a sleeper, keeps a low profile 
and reports to his control on a regular basis about the operations of the company. This kind 
of spy, especially if well schooled in tradecraft, will be extremely difficult to detect. With all 
the electronic spydrops available through e-mail, the sleeper never even has to risk exposure 
by meeting directly with his control.  
 
One way to help prevent the introduction of sleepers is to perform thorough background 
checks (where permitted by law) on all applicants. This may help detect operatives who have 
padded their résumés to make sure they get hired.  Of course, a clever spy will make sure that 
there is a convincing reference for every piece of information on an operative’s résumé. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.836                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A mole functions in the same manner as a sleeper. The difference between the two is that a 
sleeper is a person who is deliberately planted as an employee in a company to extract 
information. A mole, by contrast, is usually an existing employee of the targeted organization 
who is somehow compromised, agreeing to turn over her company’s secrets to the business 
intelligence professional. When recruiting moles, intelligence specialists look for employees 
who are stable enough in their professional and personal life to function as spies on a long-
 term basis. As discussed earlier, there are a number of ways to recruit a mole, but the prime 
motivation is usually greed.  
 



:


mole and sleeper
if a client ha a veri longrang interest in monitor a compani he mai place a spy in that
compani as a perman employe thi employe known as a sleeper keep a low profil
and report to hi control on a regular basi about the oper of the compani thi kind
of spy especi if well school in tradecraft will be extrem difficult to detect with all
the electron spydrop avail through email the sleeper never even ha to risk exposur
by meet directli with hi control
on wai to help prevent the introduct of sleeper is to perform thorough background
check where permit by law on all applic thi mai help detect oper who have
pad their rsum to make sure thei get hire of cours a clever spy will make sure that
there is a convinc refer for everi piec of inform on an oper rsum
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1836 2011 fraud examin manual
a mole function in the same manner as a sleeper the differ between the two is that a
sleeper is a person who is deliber plant as an employe in a compani to extract
inform a mole by contrast is usual an exist employe of the target organ
who is somehow compromis agre to turn over her compani secret to the busi
intellig profession when recruit mole intellig specialist look for employe
who ar stabl enough in their profession and person life to function as spi on a long
term basi as discuss earlier there ar a number of wai to recruit a mole but the prime
motiv is usual greed
