2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Infiltration Techniques/Warning Signs of Infiltrations


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Warning Signs of Infiltrations 
If a spy does his job properly, it will be very difficult to detect an infiltration. Generally, 
organizations have a better chance of preventing infiltrations by establishing appropriate 
security measures such as accompanying all vendors while on-site, and requiring security 
badges for access to sensitive areas. Detection can be difficult, but there are some signs that 
organizations can look for that might indicate there is a spy in their midst:  
• Employees who are most likely to be recruited as spies are those who exhibit some sort 
of bitterness or resentment toward their employer. Be alert for abnormal activities by 
employees who seem to feel that they are under-appreciated, under-utilized, or are 
treated unfairly.  
• Employees who express some sort of political or moral opposition to an organization’s 
operations may be susceptible to a false flag recruitment. 
• Employees who are undergoing a personal financial problem (frequently associated with 
drug addiction, gambling addiction, high medical expenses, or some other personal 
crisis) may also be vulnerable to recruitment. 
• Employees who suddenly undergo a major lifestyle change, buying luxury items, taking 
exotic vacations, etc., with no apparent increase in income should be watched. This is a 
common red flag of fraud schemes, but may also indicate an employee who is being paid 
for divulging trade secrets. 
• Employees who frequently work late or come to work early may be trying to get access 
to confidential materials. This behavior is particularly suspicious when the employee in 
question works unusual hours as compared to others in his department.  
• In some cases, moles will actually discuss their covert activity with their coworkers. 
Employees should be trained to report this, as well as other suspicious behavior.  
• Employees who seem to spend a lot of time in areas not necessary to their work 
functions, particularly areas where sensitive materials are stored, may be attempting to 
misappropriate company secrets. This should be investigated, particularly if the employee 
is found in these areas after hours.  
• Similarly, employees who attempt to access sensitive computer files that are either above 
their authorization level or outside the scope of their work duties might warrant 
investigation. Organizations should maintain an automated journal that records events 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.840                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
such as attempted access of restricted files.  
• If employees have sensitive files saved on their hard drives or disks, this may be a sign 
that they are misdirecting that information. This is especially true when the employee in 
question is not working on, or should not have access to, the file in question. If records 
reveal that this employee has e-mailed the proprietary information to an off-site location, 
this is another indicator of information theft. 
• Vendors should be escorted at all times when  on the organization’s premises. Any time a 
vendor is seen loitering unescorted around file rooms, offices, mail rooms, shipping 
docks, computer media storage areas, or other sensitive zones, the incident should be 
reported as a security violation and potential intrusion attempt. The same is true for 
janitorial personnel, security guards, trash collectors, and other non-employees. 
• Spies may come disguised as repairpersons, janitors, deliverymen, etc. Incidents in  
which service technicians show up without having been called may indicate an  
attempted infiltration.  
• Employee reports of lost security badges, access cards, passwords, etc. could be a sign 
that a spy has stolen these items in order to infiltrate a site. 
• Obviously, if files or computer disks that contain sensitive information are missing, this 
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropriation of information. In general, spies will copy—
 rather than steal—proprietary information, but sometimes sensitive documents are 
actually pilfered. 
• Employee desks or offices that have been tampered with are a common sign of 
intrusion. Reports of stolen materials clearly point to an infiltration, but more frequently 
intruders will only rifle through files, desks, or computer disks, choosing to copy 
sensitive information rather than steal it. Employees should be trained to report 
incidents where their offices or desks appear to have been “messed up,” even when no 
materials have been stolen.  
• Security personnel should log reports of persons who try to enter a facility without 
proper identification or authorization. Similarly, attempts to piggyback into a facility by 
following a person with authorization could be a sign of an attempted intrusion.  
• Reports of trespassing or other criminal activity near a secure facility may also indicate a 
surveillance campaign. In particular, instances where strangers are seen loitering around 
the outside of the facility or digging through trash bins could be signs of corporate 
spying. 
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.841 



:


warn sign of infiltr
if a spy doe hi job properli it will be veri difficult to detect an infiltr gener
organ have a better chanc of prevent infiltr by establish appropri
secur measur such as accompani all vendor while onsit and requir secur
badg for access to sensit area detect can be difficult but there ar some sign that
organ can look for that might indic there is a spy in their midst
employe who ar most like to be recruit as spi ar those who exhibit some sort
of bitter or resent toward their employ be alert for abnorm activ by
employe who seem to feel that thei ar underappreci underutil or ar
treat unfairli
employe who express some sort of polit or moral opposit to an organ
oper mai be suscept to a fals flag recruit
employe who ar undergo a person financi problem frequent associ with
drug addict gambl addict high medic expens or some other person
crisi mai also be vulner to recruit
employe who suddenli undergo a major lifestyl chang bui luxuri item take
exot vacat etc with no appar increas in incom should be watch thi is a
common red flag of fraud scheme but mai also indic an employe who is be paid
for divulg trade secret
employe who frequent work late or come to work earli mai be try to get access
to confidenti materi thi behavior is particularli suspici when the employe in
question work unusu hour as compar to other in hi depart
in some case mole will actual discuss their covert activ with their cowork
employe should be train to report thi as well as other suspici behavior
employe who seem to spend a lot of time in area not necessari to their work
function particularli area where sensit materi ar store mai be attempt to
misappropri compani secret thi should be investig particularli if the employe
is found in these area after hour
similarli employe who attempt to access sensit comput file that ar either abov
their author level or outsid the scope of their work duti might warrant
investig organ should maintain an autom journal that record event
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1840 2011 fraud examin manual
such as attempt access of restrict file
if employe have sensit file save on their hard drive or disk thi mai be a sign
that thei ar misdirect that inform thi is especi true when the employe in
question is not work on or should not have access to the file in question if record
reveal that thi employe ha email the proprietari inform to an offsit locat
thi is anoth indic of inform theft
vendor should be escort at all time when on the organ premis ani time a
vendor is seen loiter unescort around file room offic mail room ship
dock comput media storag area or other sensit zone the incid should be
report as a secur violat and potenti intrus attempt the same is true for
janitori personnel secur guard trash collector and other nonemploye
spi mai come disguis as repairperson janitor deliverymen etc incid in
which servic technician show up without have been call mai indic an
attempt infiltr
employe report of lost secur badg access card password etc could be a sign
that a spy ha stolen these item in order to infiltr a site
obvious if file or comput disk that contain sensit inform ar miss thi
is a clear sign of a theft or misappropri of inform in gener spi will copi
rather than stealproprietari inform but sometim sensit document ar
actual pilfer
employe desk or offic that have been tamper with ar a common sign of
intrus report of stolen materi clearli point to an infiltr but more frequent
intrud will onli rifl through file desk or comput disk choos to copi
sensit inform rather than steal it employe should be train to report
incid where their offic or desk appear to have been mess up even when no
materi have been stolen
secur personnel should log report of person who try to enter a facil without
proper identif or author similarli attempt to piggyback into a facil by
follow a person with author could be a sign of an attempt intrus
report of trespass or other crimin activ near a secur facil mai also indic a
surveil campaign in particular instanc where stranger ar seen loiter around
the outsid of the facil or dig through trash bin could be sign of corpor
spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1841
