2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Transactional Intelligence/Decoy Websites


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Decoy Websites 
The Internet offers additional avenues for collecting information. One tactic used by spies is 
to set up a website to collect résumés for particular technical specialties. Included on the 
website is a questionnaire that visitors are instructed to fill out “to aid in placing you.” The 
site can also require visitors to register for “free” research services. The information that the 
applicants provide makes it possible to keep a log of the links that they access.  
 
It is not difficult to create a site that targets will visit; it is  simply a matter of doing some 
research on hot topics in a particular field. The spy creates a site that has the necessary 
metatags for search engines to pick up the title. She fills the site with relevant links and 
builds logging software into the site to track the links that users access. This can create a 
profile of the user and help the spy determine what he is interested in. The spy can even call 
users as a follow-up. The user is impressed because someone from the site took an interest 
in him, and this gives the spy a natural lead-in to pump the subject for information. 
 
A decoy website might also enable the spy to gain access to the target’s computer system. 
For instance, people frequently use the same user ID and password for a number of 
different applications because it is easier to remember than having several different 
passwords. The spy’s website might require visitors to enter a user ID and password for the 
“research services” or to view bogus job postings. This information is stored by the website 
and later used to try to gain access to the target’s computer system. Decoy websites can also 
be set up so that visitors unwittingly download viruses or other malicious software. This may 
not necessarily help a spy gain information, but it can help sabotage a company’s computer 
system.  
 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.844                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


decoi websit
the internet offer addit avenu for collect inform on tactic us by spi is
to set up a websit to collect rsum for particular technic specialti includ on the
websit is a questionnair that visitor ar instruct to fill out to aid in place you the
site can also requir visitor to regist for free research servic the inform that the
applic provid make it possibl to keep a log of the link that thei access
it is not difficult to creat a site that target will visit it is simpli a matter of do some
research on hot topic in a particular field the spy creat a site that ha the necessari
metatag for search engin to pick up the titl she fill the site with relev link and
build log softwar into the site to track the link that user access thi can creat a
profil of the user and help the spy determin what he is interest in the spy can even call
user as a followup the user is impress becaus someon from the site took an interest
in him and thi give the spy a natur leadin to pump the subject for inform
a decoi websit might also enabl the spy to gain access to the target comput system
for instanc peopl frequent us the same user id and password for a number of
differ applic becaus it is easier to rememb than have sever differ
password the spy websit might requir visitor to enter a user id and password for the
research servic or to view bogu job post thi inform is store by the websit
and later us to try to gain access to the target comput system decoi websit can also
be set up so that visitor unwittingli download virus or other malici softwar thi mai
not necessarili help a spy gain inform but it can help sabotag a compani comput
system
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1844 2011 fraud examin manual
