2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Social Engineering/Countering Social Engineering


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Countering Social Engineering 
There are a number of security measures organizations can adopt to counteract social 
engineering schemes. While a few technical solutions may help, the majority of controls for 
this type of attack involve training employees to be aware of how social engineering works, 
the data that spies will seek, and the information that employees are allowed to disseminate.  
 
Help desk employees should be trained to ask specific, identifying questions before giving 
out any information over the phone. The organization should clearly explain the minimum 
identification requirements that callers must meet before information can be distributed. A 
two-factor authentication rule should be mandatory. If a caller fails to identify himself 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.850                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
according to the authentication rule, the person taking the call should report this incident to 
the security group as an unauthorized intrusion attempt.  
 
When information is given out, it should be harmless, boilerplate information. Passwords or 
personal identification numbers should never be distributed over the phone without 
concrete proof of the caller’s identity. References to key administrative, technical, and billing 
contacts for the corporate Internet domain should also be as anonymous as possible. If a 
company does not list its domain administrator by title, then a spy may not know exactly 
whom to impersonate when he calls the help desk. Techniques already discussed such as 
properly disposing of confidential trash will also help prevent dumpster divers from coming 
up with contact information that they can use to trick employees. 
 
Employee awareness is another key to fighting social engineering. Employees may be told 
what information to give out and what authentication factors to require, but it is another 
thing to get them to follow these procedures. One of the most effective ways to promote 
compliance with security policies is to make people aware of threats and actual instances of 
social engineering attacks. Some organizations maintain internal websites or distribute 
employee newsletters with stories about security breaches, along with prevention tips and 
information.  
 
An even more effective awareness method is to selectively test employees’ security readiness. 
For instance, security personnel should call their own organization’s help desk to see what 
information they can obtain without identifying themselves. It is also a good idea to run the 
“systems administrator” scam on employees six months after they have started, to see if they 
remember not to give out their passwords to random MIS calls. If employees give up 
information without following procedures, they should get a stern warning about their 
security responsibilities. This type of reminder will be remembered far longer than a  
training session.  
 
 



:


counter social engin
there ar a number of secur measur organ can adopt to counteract social
engin scheme while a few technic solut mai help the major of control for
thi type of attack involv train employe to be awar of how social engin work
the data that spi will seek and the inform that employe ar allow to dissemin
help desk employe should be train to ask specif identifi question befor give
out ani inform over the phone the organ should clearli explain the minimum
identif requir that caller must meet befor inform can be distribut a
twofactor authent rule should be mandatori if a caller fail to identifi himself
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1850 2011 fraud examin manual
accord to the authent rule the person take the call should report thi incid to
the secur group as an unauthor intrus attempt
when inform is given out it should be harmless boilerpl inform password or
person identif number should never be distribut over the phone without
concret proof of the caller ident refer to kei administr technic and bill
contact for the corpor internet domain should also be as anonym as possibl if a
compani doe not list it domain administr by titl then a spy mai not know exactli
whom to imperson when he call the help desk techniqu alreadi discuss such as
properli dispos of confidenti trash will also help prevent dumpster diver from come
up with contact inform that thei can us to trick employe
employe awar is anoth kei to fight social engin employe mai be told
what inform to give out and what authent factor to requir but it is anoth
thing to get them to follow these procedur on of the most effect wai to promot
complianc with secur polici is to make peopl awar of threat and actual instanc of
social engin attack some organ maintain intern websit or distribut
employe newslett with stori about secur breach along with prevent tip and
inform
an even more effect awar method is to select test employe secur readi
for instanc secur personnel should call their own organ help desk to see what
inform thei can obtain without identifi themselv it is also a good idea to run the
system administr scam on employe six month after thei have start to see if thei
rememb not to give out their password to random mi call if employe give up
inform without follow procedur thei should get a stern warn about their
secur respons thi type of remind will be rememb far longer than a
train session
