2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Cloaking and Misdirection/Misdirection


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Misdirection   
Attempts to compromise employees or information controls demand an immediate 
response. The question is whether to simply shore up security or use the situation to 
misdirect the opposition. Misdirection involves feeding information thieves false facts in 
order to neutralize their intelligence efforts. 
 
Careful guidance from senior management will be necessary. If misdirection is determined to 
be the best way to protect the organization, the false facts that are released must not come 
back to hurt the company, its officers, its stockholders, or its investors. 
 
Assuming that a misdirection policy is approved and carefully crafted, it might work as 
follows. Suppose security has detected an employment advertisement that appears designed 
to lure technical staff to phony interviews so they can be pumped for information. Security 
can go on the offensive to counter this threat by sending technical staff members with 
business intelligence training as decoys. Their goal is to give an impressive technical 
interview that sends the opponent following dead end leads. At the same time, the decoy is 
able to gather intelligence on what the industrial spies are after. This type of information 
strengthens defenses at the target company. 
 
At trade fairs, conventions, and technical meetings, employees should have a prepared story 
to tell industrial spies. When confronted with camouflaged questioning about an industrial 
process, employees can relate information that sounds convincing but that actually leads the 
opposition astray. Again, such misinformation must be sufficiently technical in nature so its 
general release to the public would not damage the company.  
 



:


misdirect
attempt to compromis employe or inform control demand an immedi
respons the question is whether to simpli shore up secur or us the situat to
misdirect the opposit misdirect involv feed inform thiev fals fact in
order to neutral their intellig effort
care guidanc from senior manag will be necessari if misdirect is determin to
be the best wai to protect the organ the fals fact that ar releas must not come
back to hurt the compani it offic it stockhold or it investor
assum that a misdirect polici is approv and carefulli craft it might work as
follow suppos secur ha detect an employ advertis that appear design
to lure technic staff to phoni interview so thei can be pump for inform secur
can go on the offens to counter thi threat by send technic staff member with
busi intellig train as decoi their goal is to give an impress technic
interview that send the oppon follow dead end lead at the same time the decoi is
abl to gather intellig on what the industri spi ar after thi type of inform
strengthen defens at the target compani
at trade fair convent and technic meet employe should have a prepar stori
to tell industri spi when confront with camouflag question about an industri
process employe can relat inform that sound convinc but that actual lead the
opposit astrai again such misinform must be suffici technic in natur so it
gener releas to the public would not damag the compani
