2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Technical Surveillance 
The popular image of the spy, at least as portrayed on television and in the movies, is very 
often associated with all sorts of high-tech gadgets: everything from miniature cameras to 
exotic listening devices to radio wristwatches and telephones hidden in shoes. Obviously, 
many of these devices are fanciful and, while they may provide interesting entertainment, 
they are far removed from the real world of corporate espionage. 
 
Corporate spies do, however, employ various forms of technological surveillance equipment, 
the tools varying according to the needs of the job at hand. In general, corporate spies only 
resort to using high-tech equipment when simpler means are not available to accomplish the 
task. In some cases a miniature camera might be called for to copy sensitive documents, but 
not when a nearby copy machine can be used to achieve the same result. In other instances a 
wiretap may be needed, but only when there is no other means to monitor a subject’s 
communications. Sometimes satellite tracking of motor vehicles becomes necessary, but not 
when simple visual surveillance will tell the spy where the subject has traveled. In other 
words, corporate spies that know what they are doing do not employ technology for the sake 
of using fancy gadgets.  
 
When spies do resort to the use of technical surveillance equipment, it is usually to gather 
nondocumentary evidence, or information that cannot be found through open sources or in 
the target’s files. The methods that spies employ to gather nondocumentary information 
include: (1) taking photographs, (2) conducting surveillance and visual sightings, (3) listening 
to conversations, (4) monitoring computers and computer communications, (5) analyzing 
traffic at a plant, and (6) monitoring emanations from computers and telecommunications 
equipment. 
 
Nondocumentary information has certain advantages. It captures changes over time 
(photographs taken at different times) or processes as they occur (videotaping). Electronic 
surveillance can provide the spy with information that would take many hours of 
documentary analysis to acquire. Aerial photography provides a broad perspective on the 
manufacturing physical plant that is not ordinarily possible with documents alone. 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.862                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Intercepting computer communications and emanations can provide an inside look at the 
supply, purchasing, manufacturing, and marketing channels of a target that cannot be 
replicated by another source.  
 
The fact that a technical activity is possible does not mean that it is advisable. Most types of 
electronic surveillance carry potentially serious repercussions. In many cases they are clearly 
illegal. Any prudent spy will employ technical intelligence methods with restraint. Only 
amateurs will rush into a surveillance operation by “bugging” this line and that junction box. 
These novices ignore the fact that the more one bugs, the greater the chances of having the 
surveillance campaign discovered. In addition, a corporate spy with any seasoning will realize 
that indiscriminate bugging produces too much signal traffic to analyze.  
 
Experienced corporate spies know what they are looking for and devise carefully protected 
collection plans before initiating their surveillance campaigns. They know that the more time 
spent planning, the more likely it is that their electronic surveillance will go undetected and 
the greater the intelligence yield will be. The rules most BI professionals use for protected 
electronic surveillance include the following: 
 
If devices (such as microphones or video cameras) are to be left on-site, those devices must 
not be traceable back to the spy or the client. The markings on the equipment must not 
establish a trail on which to build an investigation. Experienced spies use generic equipment 
available from multiple sources. 
 
Wire taps and their associated devices must blend into their surroundings so nothing appears 
out of the ordinary to the layperson. Smart spies do not use contraptions that can easily be 
identified as bugs.   
 
Radio transmitters must not send signals in those parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that 
are in common commercial use. Professionals avoid using cellular telephone bands, CB 
channels, or AM or FM radio channels for covert transmissions. They also find out if the 
target site uses commercial two-way radio frequencies and avoid using those bands. 
 
A competent spy does not leave a hard wire connection between the wiretap and the place 
where he conducts listening. If someone located the tap, all that person would have to do is 
trace the hard wire line to locate the spy.  
 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.863 
If the spy conducts off-site reception of computer emanations and signals, the reception 
vehicle or site should have sufficient camouflage or should be adequately disguised to avoid 
any notice or detection. 
 
A good spy never reveals anything about an intelligence campaign to anyone except her 
client, even after the job is finished. 
 
Once a job is finished and a report has been written and delivered to the client, a spy 
destroys all documentary evidence of the campaign. 
 



:


technic surveil
the popular imag of the spy at least as portrai on televis and in the movi is veri
often associ with all sort of hightech gadget everyth from miniatur camera to
exot listen devic to radio wristwatch and telephon hidden in shoe obvious
mani of these devic ar fanci and while thei mai provid interest entertain
thei ar far remov from the real world of corpor espionag
corpor spi do howev emploi variou form of technolog surveil equip
the tool vari accord to the need of the job at hand in gener corpor spi onli
resort to us hightech equip when simpler mean ar not avail to accomplish the
task in some case a miniatur camera might be call for to copi sensit document but
not when a nearbi copi machin can be us to achiev the same result in other instanc a
wiretap mai be need but onli when there is no other mean to monitor a subject
commun sometim satellit track of motor vehicl becom necessari but not
when simpl visual surveil will tell the spy where the subject ha travel in other
word corpor spi that know what thei ar do do not emploi technolog for the sake
of us fanci gadget
when spi do resort to the us of technic surveil equip it is usual to gather
nondocumentari evid or inform that cannot be found through open sourc or in
the target file the method that spi emploi to gather nondocumentari inform
includ 1 take photograph 2 conduct surveil and visual sight 3 listen
to convers 4 monitor comput and comput commun 5 analyz
traffic at a plant and 6 monitor eman from comput and telecommun
equip
nondocumentari inform ha certain advantag it captur chang over time
photograph taken at differ time or process as thei occur videotap electron
surveil can provid the spy with inform that would take mani hour of
documentari analysi to acquir aerial photographi provid a broad perspect on the
manufactur physic plant that is not ordinarili possibl with document alon
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1862 2011 fraud examin manual
intercept comput commun and eman can provid an insid look at the
suppli purchas manufactur and market channel of a target that cannot be
replic by anoth sourc
the fact that a technic activ is possibl doe not mean that it is advis most type of
electron surveil carri potenti seriou repercuss in mani case thei ar clearli
illeg ani prudent spy will emploi technic intellig method with restraint onli
amateur will rush into a surveil oper by bug thi line and that junction box
these novic ignor the fact that the more on bug the greater the chanc of have the
surveil campaign discov in addit a corpor spy with ani season will realiz
that indiscrimin bug produc too much signal traffic to analyz
experienc corpor spi know what thei ar look for and devis carefulli protect
collect plan befor initi their surveil campaign thei know that the more time
spent plan the more like it is that their electron surveil will go undetect and
the greater the intellig yield will be the rule most bi profession us for protect
electron surveil includ the follow
if devic such as microphon or video camera ar to be left onsit those devic must
not be traceabl back to the spy or the client the mark on the equip must not
establish a trail on which to build an investig experienc spi us gener equip
avail from multipl sourc
wire tap and their associ devic must blend into their surround so noth appear
out of the ordinari to the layperson smart spi do not us contrapt that can easili be
identifi as bug
radio transmitt must not send signal in those part of the electromagnet spectrum that
ar in common commerci us profession avoid us cellular telephon band cb
channel or am or fm radio channel for covert transmiss thei also find out if the
target site us commerci twowai radio frequenc and avoid us those band
a compet spy doe not leav a hard wire connect between the wiretap and the place
where he conduct listen if someon locat the tap all that person would have to do is
trace the hard wire line to locat the spy
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1863
if the spy conduct offsit recept of comput eman and signal the recept
vehicl or site should have suffici camouflag or should be adequ disguis to avoid
ani notic or detect
a good spy never reveal anyth about an intellig campaign to anyon except her
client even after the job is finish
onc a job is finish and a report ha been written and deliv to the client a spy
destroi all documentari evid of the campaign
