2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Preliminary Search Procedures/INSPECTING TELEPHONES


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


INSPECTING TELEPHONES 
If the mouthpieces or earpieces on telephone handsets have screw-off plastic covers, remove 
them and make sure no transmitters or unusual looking components are attached to the 
microphone condensers. Also examine the markings on the condenser unit. Do they match a 
condenser from a similar telephone kept in a secure area? If the markings are significantly 
different, have them checked by a representative from the telephone manufacturer. 
 
If the cover on the handset is one solid piece of plastic, look at the two screws that hold the 
plastic plate on. If the screws have scratches on them (e.g., from a screwdriver) remove the 
screws and take the plate off. Examine the condensers for signs of tampering or for 
miniature transmitters.  
 
Examine the back or underside of the telephones. Look for unusual components taped or 
held by a magnet to the back metal plate. Also look for unusual wires protruding from the 
phone. (This means any wires other than the regular plastic sheathed cord that is found on 
all telephones.) If these examinations are negative, then the telephone is probably secure.  
 
If you still suspect the presence of a listening device, do not attempt to disassemble the main 
part of the telephone. You may damage the unit. Instead, look at the screws holding down 
the main body of the phone to the metal plate. If those screws show signs of tampering, 
have someone from the manufacturer examine the unit. 
 
It is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephone attaches to the wall. 
Carefully remove the cover and check for any electronic components inside. In a normal 
wall box, you should only see wires and screw points where the wires are tied together. 
Extraneous components could be electronic listening devices. If you are not sure whether 
the item you have identified is actually a transmitter or microphone, contact a qualified 
                                                          
2 The Granite Island Group, a technical surveillance countermeasures firm, provides photographs of some 
electronic surveillance equipment on its website. (www.tscm.com/whatistscm.html) 
Financial Transactions  Theft of Intellectual Property 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.871 
countermeasures expert, the phone company, or a representative from the phone 
manufacturer.  
 



:


inspect telephon
if the mouthpiec or earpiec on telephon handset have screwoff plastic cover remov
them and make sure no transmitt or unusu look compon ar attach to the
microphon condens also examin the mark on the condens unit do thei match a
condens from a similar telephon kept in a secur area if the mark ar significantli
differ have them check by a repres from the telephon manufactur
if the cover on the handset is on solid piec of plastic look at the two screw that hold the
plastic plate on if the screw have scratch on them eg from a screwdriv remov the
screw and take the plate off examin the condens for sign of tamper or for
miniatur transmitt
examin the back or undersid of the telephon look for unusu compon tape or
held by a magnet to the back metal plate also look for unusu wire protrud from the
phone thi mean ani wire other than the regular plastic sheath cord that is found on
all telephon if these examin ar neg then the telephon is probabl secur
if you still suspect the presenc of a listen devic do not attempt to disassembl the main
part of the telephon you mai damag the unit instead look at the screw hold down
the main bodi of the phone to the metal plate if those screw show sign of tamper
have someon from the manufactur examin the unit
it is also a good idea to inspect the wall box where the telephon attach to the wall
carefulli remov the cover and check for ani electron compon insid in a normal
wall box you should onli see wire and screw point where the wire ar ti togeth
extran compon could be electron listen devic if you ar not sure whether
the item you have identifi is actual a transmitt or microphon contact a qualifi
2 the granit island group a technic surveil countermeasur firm provid photograph of some
electron surveil equip on it websit wwwtscmcomwhatistscmhtml
financi transact theft of intellectu properti
2011 fraud examin manual 1871
countermeasur expert the phone compani or a repres from the phone
manufactur
