2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Minicameras


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Minicameras 
With the advent of copy machines in almost every American business, the need to employ 
the minicamera to capture information from documents dramatically declined. Because 
many sensitive documents are stored in electronic format, computer media such as disks, 
CDs, USB flash drives, and other storage devices have also eroded the need for film 
cameras. Some applications do, however, still exist for the minicamera. Documents such as 
maps, schematics, diagrams, and engineering drawings frequently cannot be easily copied due 
to their size. The minicamera is a viable option for capturing the information on these items.  
 
Concealed stationary cameras with large rolls of film have largely been replaced by video 
cameras. Film is difficult to replace at hidden, sensitive sites. It is also expensive to process. 
Videotape is cheap, needs no processing, and ca n be recorded off-site, far from the video 
camera/transmitter. Thus, even if the target company discovers the hidden video camera, 
the footage will remain safely in the spy’s control.  

Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.874                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 



:


minicamera
with the advent of copi machin in almost everi american busi the need to emploi
the minicamera to captur inform from document dramat declin becaus
mani sensit document ar store in electron format comput media such as disk
cd usb flash drive and other storag devic have also erod the need for film
camera some applic do howev still exist for the minicamera document such as
map schemat diagram and engin draw frequent cannot be easili copi due
to their size the minicamera is a viabl option for captur the inform on these item
conceal stationari camera with larg roll of film have larg been replac by video
camera film is difficult to replac at hidden sensit site it is also expens to process
videotap is cheap need no process and ca n be record offsit far from the video
cameratransmitt thu even if the target compani discov the hidden video camera
the footag will remain safe in the spy control
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1874 2011 fraud examin manual
