2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Technical Surveillance/Monitoring Computer Emanations


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Monitoring Computer Emanations  
Digital computers process information with a series of 0s and 1s. These two digits do not 
translate to “on” and “off” states, but rather to high and low currents. These currents cause 
pixels on a computer screen to fire, producing high voltage pulses that emanate into the 
surrounding environment. Computer emanations form a detectable and decodable pattern. A 
detector or receiver, known as a Van Eck unit, can reproduce keyboard entries on a 
computer screen even from a considerable distance. 
 
A Van Eck unit consists of a directional antenna, logic circuits, and two adjustable oscillators 
(one for the vertical and one for the horizontal). With proper adjustments, a van parked 
across the street, equipped with a Van Eck receiver, can decode the emanations from a 
keyboard operator inside a neighboring building. Devices like CPUs, taped drives, disk 
drives, and communications devices all generate electromagnetic radiation, which Van Eck 
receivers can detect. 
 
To prevent competitors from monitoring computer emanations, organizations can shield 
their computer equipment and transmission lines: a process known as Tempesting. While this 
process is used extensively in the military and by certain defense contractors, the costs 
involved prevent many private sector businesses from employing Tempest procedures.  
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.876                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


monitor comput eman
digit comput process inform with a seri of 0s and 1s these two digit do not
translat to on and off state but rather to high and low current these current caus
pixel on a comput screen to fire produc high voltag puls that eman into the
surround environ comput eman form a detect and decod pattern a
detector or receiv known as a van eck unit can reproduc keyboard entri on a
comput screen even from a consider distanc
a van eck unit consist of a direct antenna logic circuit and two adjust oscil
on for the vertic and on for the horizont with proper adjust a van park
across the street equip with a van eck receiv can decod the eman from a
keyboard oper insid a neighbor build devic like cpu tape drive disk
drive and commun devic all gener electromagnet radiat which van eck
receiv can detect
to prevent competitor from monitor comput eman organ can shield
their comput equip and transmiss line a process known as tempest while thi
process is us extens in the militari and by certain defens contractor the cost
involv prevent mani privat sector busi from emploi tempest procedur
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1876 2011 fraud examin manual
