2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/THEFT OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY/Program for Safeguarding Proprietary Information (SPI)/Computer Systems


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Theft of Intellectual Property


:


Computer Systems 
Passwords are the most common defense against computer intrusion, but to be effective, 
they must be used along with good control procedures. Passwords should be as complex as 
the user can memorize, but never less than six random alphanumeric characters. The 
company must change passwords regularly and close them out as soon as an employee leaves 
the organization. Management should train em ployees to log off terminals before leaving 
them unattended. The company can also install an automatic log-off program whereby a 
terminal that is not in use for a certain number of minutes will be automatically logged off. 
 
Theft of Intellectual Property  Financial Transactions   
1.882                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A secure encryption device can be employed to protect confidential files, especially when 
transmitting them by modem. Encryption techniques found in popular software packages 
available at a local computer store are probably not secure enough. These programs are in 
wide use and are usually no match for a sophisticated hacker. If files are not encrypted, they 
may be vulnerable to anyone with access to your computer.  
 
A company should also consider the use of virus scanning software. One of the best 
safeguards against viruses or any other kind of data loss is to have a secure backup 
procedure.  
 
Many companies have not yet figured out what to do with the electronic data stored in their 
systems. While some form of paperwork filing or shredding system may be in place, often 
electronic information is organized according to each user’s personal system and deleted 
only when the individual chooses to do so. Even when files are deleted, savvy computer 
experts can often re-create the erased material. This means that everything sent through the 
computer from a birthday greeting to a “smoking gun” document is being preserved. 
 
This is potentially crippling in the event of a lawsuit. Lawyers are becoming aware of the 
storage of data and are requesting electronic evidence in many cases. Lawyers, pouring 
through backups of documents long ago thought deleted, find incriminating memos such as 
“I know this may be illegal, but do it anyway,” or “Please destroy this evidence.” Often such 
documents result in the case being settled for more than it may really be worth because the 
company does not want to run the risk that such documents will inflame the jury into 
awarding large punitive damages. 
 
Companies should institute procedures for deciding what should be kept and what 
shouldn’t. Also, backup files should be kept under lock and key. One 8mm tape can hold as 
much as 1,500 boxes of information. Anyone can grab such a tape and easily sneak it out of 
the building. 
 



:


comput system
password ar the most common defens against comput intrus but to be effect
thei must be us along with good control procedur password should be as complex as
the user can memor but never less than six random alphanumer charact the
compani must chang password regularli and close them out as soon as an employe leav
the organ manag should train em ploye to log off termin befor leav
them unattend the compani can also instal an automat logoff program wherebi a
termin that is not in us for a certain number of minut will be automat log off
theft of intellectu properti financi transact
1882 2011 fraud examin manual
a secur encrypt devic can be emploi to protect confidenti file especi when
transmit them by modem encrypt techniqu found in popular softwar packag
avail at a local comput store ar probabl not secur enough these program ar in
wide us and ar usual no match for a sophist hacker if file ar not encrypt thei
mai be vulner to anyon with access to your comput
a compani should also consid the us of viru scan softwar on of the best
safeguard against virus or ani other kind of data loss is to have a secur backup
procedur
mani compani have not yet figur out what to do with the electron data store in their
system while some form of paperwork file or shred system mai be in place often
electron inform is organ accord to each user person system and delet
onli when the individu choos to do so even when file ar delet savvi comput
expert can often recreat the eras materi thi mean that everyth sent through the
comput from a birthdai greet to a smoke gun document is be preserv
thi is potenti crippl in the event of a lawsuit lawyer ar becom awar of the
storag of data and ar request electron evid in mani case lawyer pour
through backup of document long ago thought delet find incrimin memo such as
i know thi mai be illeg but do it anywai or pleas destroi thi evid often such
document result in the case be settl for more than it mai realli be worth becaus the
compani doe not want to run the risk that such document will inflam the juri into
award larg punit damag
compani should institut procedur for decid what should be kept and what
shouldnt also backup file should be kept under lock and kei on 8mm tape can hold as
much as 1500 box of inform anyon can grab such a tape and easili sneak it out of
the build
