2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Handling Documents as Physical Evidence/Recognizing Phony Documents


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


Recognizing Phony Documents 
Forensic document examiners apply scientific methods and use a variety of technical 
instruments in conducting examinations and comparisons of documents. Individual minute 
characteristics in handwriting and typewriting are examined and compared with genuine 
comparison standards. Detailed analyses are made of document features for proof of 
changes or modifications. Instruments used include sensitive measuring devices, low-power 
magnifying glasses, several types of microscopes, ultraviolet and infrared lighting, optical 
filters, micro and macro photography, computerized image-enhancement systems, sensitive 
instruments to detect faint indented writings, and numerous others. Various chemical 
analyses are also conducted. 
 
Although not expected to be a documents expert, an observant fraud examiner might be 
able to recognize some features of documents that could alert him to their fraudulent nature: 
• Signature forgeries  might be recognized by irregularities noticeable in the written letters 
and/or by their differences in size from a genuine signature. A side-by-side comparison 
with a genuine signature might reveal the differences. However, remember that advanced 
age, poor health, temporary injury, and the use of drugs and alcohol can result in similar 
discrepancies and might mislead the examiner. Genuine comparison samples should be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtained, and a forensic document examiner consulted to make an expert determination. 
(See the “How to Obtain Handwriting Samples” section.) 
• Substituted pages  in multiple-page documents, such as contracts and wills, can often be 
spotted by holding each page in front of a bright light. Differences in the whiteness, 
density, thickness, opacity, and paper-fiber patterns of the substituted sheets might be 
apparent. 
• Some ink differences, alterations, erasures, and obliterations are also revealed by holding the 
paper in front of a bright light or holding a light over the writings at different angles and 
observing differences in the color and reflectivity of the inks or disturbances to the paper 
surface. 
• Counterfeited printed documents, such as checks, stock and bond certificates, business forms 
and stationery, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and other identification documents, are 
sometimes readily disclosed by side-by-side comparisons with corresponding genuine 
documents. Be alert for the use of incorrect or different versions or form revisions of 
the documents. For forensic examinations, it will be necessary to obtain and furnish 
genuine comparison samples of the printed documents to the document examiner. (See 
the “Counterfeit Printed Documents” section.) 
• Suspicious indented writings might be revealed by reducing the light in the room and holding 
a bright beam of light (a narrow-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp will do the 
job) low and parallel to the page surface. (See the “Indented Writings” section.) 
 
 



:


recogn phoni document
forens document examin appli scientif method and us a varieti of technic
instrument in conduct examin and comparison of document individu minut
characterist in handwrit and typewrit ar examin and compar with genuin
comparison standard detail analys ar made of document featur for proof of
chang or modif instrument us includ sensit measur devic lowpow
magnifi glass sever type of microscop ultraviolet and infrar light optic
filter micro and macro photographi computer imageenhanc system sensit
instrument to detect faint indent write and numer other variou chemic
analys ar also conduct
although not expect to be a document expert an observ fraud examin might be
abl to recogn some featur of document that could alert him to their fraudul natur
signatur forgeri might be recogn by irregular notic in the written letter
andor by their differ in size from a genuin signatur a sidebysid comparison
with a genuin signatur might reveal the differ howev rememb that advanc
ag poor health temporari injuri and the us of drug and alcohol can result in similar
discrep and might mislead the examin genuin comparison sampl should be
analyz document investig
3108 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain and a forens document examin consult to make an expert determin
see the how to obtain handwrit sampl section
substitut page in multiplepag document such as contract and will can often be
spot by hold each page in front of a bright light differ in the white
densiti thick opac and paperfib pattern of the substitut sheet might be
appar
some ink differ alter erasur and obliter ar also reveal by hold the
paper in front of a bright light or hold a light over the write at differ angl and
observ differ in the color and reflect of the ink or disturb to the paper
surfac
counterfeit print document such as check stock and bond certif busi form
and stationeri birth certif driver licens and other identif document ar
sometim readili disclos by sidebysid comparison with correspond genuin
document be alert for the us of incorrect or differ version or form revis of
the document for forens examin it will be necessari to obtain and furnish
genuin comparison sampl of the print document to the document examin see
the counterfeit print document section
suspici indent write might be reveal by reduc the light in the room and hold
a bright beam of light a narrowbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp will do the
job low and parallel to the page surfac see the indent write section
