2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ANALYZING DOCUMENTS/Identifying Writings/Forgeries/SIMULATED AND TRACED FORGERIES


:


Investigation


:


Analyzing Documents


:


SIMULATED AND TRACED FORGERIES  
A simulated or traced forgery is a writing, usually a signature, prepared by carefully copying 
or tracing a model example of another person’s writings. Although identifiable as a forgery, a 
simulated or traced signature forgery often does not contain enough normal handwriting 
characteristics of the forger to permit expert identification. 
 
Remember, no one writes his signature exactly the same way twice. If two signatures look 
exactly alike, try superimposing the signature areas of the two documents by holding them in 
front of a bright light. If they precisely match, then one or both are traced forgeries. Be 
aware that in some instances it might be possible to locate the original document bearing the 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.111 
genuine signature that was traced. This regularly occurs in employee fraud and 
embezzlement cases in banks and other financial institutions where the account holder’s 
signature card on file served as the source for the tracing. If the forged signature(s) precisely 
superimposes over the genuine signature, then it is also likely that faint indentations might 
be present in the signature area of the original genuine document. Also, ink traces from the 
genuine signature might be transferred to the reverse side of the traced signature(s). Latent 
fingerprint treatment of the original source document might reveal the fingerprints of  
the suspect. 
  



:


simul and trace forgeri
a simul or trace forgeri is a write usual a signatur prepar by carefulli copi
or trace a model exampl of anoth person write although identifi as a forgeri a
simul or trace signatur forgeri often doe not contain enough normal handwrit
characterist of the forger to permit expert identif
rememb no on write hi signatur exactli the same wai twice if two signatur look
exactli alik try superimpos the signatur area of the two document by hold them in
front of a bright light if thei precis match then on or both ar trace forgeri be
awar that in some instanc it might be possibl to locat the origin document bear the
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3111
genuin signatur that wa trace thi regularli occur in employe fraud and
embezzl case in bank and other financi institut where the account holder
signatur card on file serv as the sourc for the trace if the forg signatur precis
superimpos over the genuin signatur then it is also like that faint indent might
be present in the signatur area of the origin genuin document also ink trace from the
genuin signatur might be transfer to the revers side of the trace signatur latent
fingerprint treatment of the origin sourc document might reveal the fingerprint of
the suspect
