2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Entrepreneurial Enterprises


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Entrepreneurial Enterprises 
Telemarketers deal not only in machinery-oriented scams like those above. The raising of 
exotic animals like ostriches and emus for luxury items and for slaughter has been a popular 
scam for a while, including weekend retreats to a model farm for would-be ranchers. In the 
last 10 years, the 900 telephone number service has been used to swindle those who set out 
to be swindlers themselves. People are convinced they can make a fortune charging between 
$3 and $10 a minute for recorded messages providing entertainment, psychic readings, or 
information available for free from other sources. 
 
Scams involving computer technology are usually successful due to the layman’s lack of 
knowledge in that field. Although around 80 percent of American households own some 
type of computer, few actually understand the intricate details of how computers function. 
Whatever the nature of the opportunity, there are signs that indicate that it is not legitimate. 
Among the most common: 
• Classified ads urging the prospect to call an 800 number. 
• Wild, unsubstantiated claims about potential earnings. 
• Promises about exclusive territories, assurances about good locations, or the assistance 
of a professional locator. 
• References specified by the company. 
  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1718                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The lack of a complete disclosure document containing information about the 
promoter’s experience, lawsuit history, audited financial statements, and substantiation 
for earnings assertions. 
 



:


entrepreneuri enterpris
telemarket deal not onli in machineryori scam like those abov the rais of
exot anim like ostrich and emu for luxuri item and for slaughter ha been a popular
scam for a while includ weekend retreat to a model farm for wouldb rancher in the
last 10 year the 900 telephon number servic ha been us to swindl those who set out
to be swindler themselv peopl ar convinc thei can make a fortun charg between
3 and 10 a minut for record messag provid entertain psychic read or
inform avail for free from other sourc
scam involv comput technolog ar usual success due to the layman lack of
knowledg in that field although around 80 percent of american household own some
type of comput few actual understand the intric detail of how comput function
whatev the natur of the opportun there ar sign that indic that it is not legitim
among the most common
classifi ad urg the prospect to call an 800 number
wild unsubstanti claim about potenti earn
promis about exclus territori assur about good locat or the assist
of a profession locat
refer specifi by the compani
consum fraud financi transact
11718 2011 fraud examin manual
the lack of a complet disclosur document contain inform about the
promot experi lawsuit histori audit financi statement and substanti
for earn assert
