2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Travel/Vacation Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Travel/Vacation Schemes 
Offers of free or discount travel that never materializes. Consumers need to be skeptical of 
offers for “free” trips. Airlines and other well-known companies sometimes operate contests 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1721 
for travel prizes; however, there are also companies that offer “free” trips to try to lure 
people into buying their products or services. Consumers also need to know what is included 
with the trip; a “free” or incredibly cheap trip may have hidden costs. For instance, the 
cruise may be free, but the consumer has to pay to fly to the departure point and stay in a 
hotel at their own expense. Or they may have to endure a long, high-pressure sales pitch for 
a timeshare or travel club membership as part of the trip. Often the best travel deals are only 
available for off-peak times, not during school vacations, holidays, or other popular  
travel dates.  
 
To avoid being victims of travel/vacation schemes, consumers should confirm all travel 
arrangements. If transportation and hotel are included in the travel package, ask how to 
contact those companies and confirm with them directly that the reservations have been 
made. Consumers should do their own travel research; it’s easy to get information from a 
local travel agent or other sources such as newspapers, books, and the Internet. When 
making travel arrangements, it is advisable to pay with a credit card. Fraudulent travel 
operators can take a consumer’s money and run and even legitimate companies can go out 
of business. Paying with a credit card allows the consumer to dispute the charges if the 
promises that are made are not kept. 
 



:


travelvac scheme
offer of free or discount travel that never materi consum need to be skeptic of
offer for free trip airlin and other wellknown compani sometim oper contest
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11721
for travel prize howev there ar also compani that offer free trip to try to lure
peopl into bui their product or servic consum also need to know what is includ
with the trip a free or incred cheap trip mai have hidden cost for instanc the
cruis mai be free but the consum ha to pai to fly to the departur point and stai in a
hotel at their own expens or thei mai have to endur a long highpressur sale pitch for
a timeshar or travel club membership as part of the trip often the best travel deal ar onli
avail for offpeak time not dure school vacat holidai or other popular
travel date
to avoid be victim of travelvac scheme consum should confirm all travel
arrang if transport and hotel ar includ in the travel packag ask how to
contact those compani and confirm with them directli that the reserv have been
made consum should do their own travel research it easi to get inform from a
local travel agent or other sourc such as newspap book and the internet when
make travel arrang it is advis to pai with a credit card fraudul travel
oper can take a consum monei and run and even legitim compani can go out
of busi pai with a credit card allow the consum to disput the charg if the
promis that ar made ar not kept
