2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Product Fronts/SPECULATIONS


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


SPECULATIONS 
For the purpose of this course, the term speculation describes any investment proposition not 
covered as financial instruments or MLMs. This includes franchise offerings and business 
opportunities in general, work-at-home promotions, and investments in areas like real estate 
or mineral rights. These are good old-fashioned investments, except when they’re Ponzi 
schemes. 
 
Franchise scams hawk such opportunities as pay phone businesses or vending machines. By 
their nature, such businesses are spread out geographically and don’t involve much direct 
contact with the promoter and the franchise holder.  
 
Work-at-home promotions are also favorite tools of the franchise scammer. Computer 
technology is a popular front, since thousands of people really are setting up businesses from 
their homes. A few early dividend checks, per the Ponzi playbook, are often enough to 
overcome a client’s hesitation and provoke a more sizeable investment. Then the promoters 
can fold up and move to another state, or another coast.  
 
Big-money speculations often base their high-flown claims in the ground beneath our feet. 
Land, and the minerals drawn from it like gold, coal, and oil, has anciently been regarded as 
the ultimate commodity. The ground is the fundament of every human endeavor so, perhaps 
the land swindle is also the fundament of fraud. Someone, somewhere, it seems, has always 
been selling flooded lots to homesteaders, salting gold mines with chunks of pyrite, or 
assuring a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acres of desert he 
just bought for a song. 
 
Obviously, a commercial environment that thrives on speculation is ripe for Ponzi fraud. 
Remember, the Ponzi element in a Ponzi scheme is only a technique — giving back a few 
dollars to sweeten the pot. Anything that can coax people to part with their money, from 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1748                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
emu farms to underwater land developments, can be run as a Ponzi. All the name Ponzi 
really means is that a few marks get paid. This lends a competitive element to an otherwise 
run-of-the-mill fraud. Instead of everyone losing, some lucky players do make money. 
 
Speculations frauds don’t always start out as cons, but when their rollercoaster dips, many 
speculators find it too tempting to hang on and ride — they figure they can phony their way 
through the crisis, and pick up again later. Again, it’s math that usually dooms these players. 
They simply can’t make money fast enough to feed the deficits. They need a payoff so big 
nothing short of a miracle — or more fraud — will suffice. 
 
Speculators can quickly get caught in a chain reaction, where each fraud demands more 
fraud. By the time these organizations are shut down, they’re spending half of their resources 
or more just covering up their criminal acts.  
 



:


specul
for the purpos of thi cours the term specul describ ani invest proposit not
cover as financi instrument or mlm thi includ franchis offer and busi
opportun in gener workathom promot and invest in area like real estat
or miner right these ar good oldfashion invest except when theyr ponzi
scheme
franchis scam hawk such opportun as pai phone busi or vend machin by
their natur such busi ar spread out geograph and dont involv much direct
contact with the promot and the franchis holder
workathom promot ar also favorit tool of the franchis scammer comput
technolog is a popular front sinc thousand of peopl realli ar set up busi from
their home a few earli dividend check per the ponzi playbook ar often enough to
overcom a client hesit and provok a more sizeabl invest then the promot
can fold up and move to anoth state or anoth coast
bigmonei specul often base their highflown claim in the ground beneath our feet
land and the miner drawn from it like gold coal and oil ha ancient been regard as
the ultim commod the ground is the fundament of everi human endeavor so perhap
the land swindl is also the fundament of fraud someon somewher it seem ha alwai
been sell flood lot to homestead salt gold mine with chunk of pyrit or
assur a rich merchant the new aqueduct will cut across the thousand acr of desert he
just bought for a song
obvious a commerci environ that thrive on specul is ripe for ponzi fraud
rememb the ponzi element in a ponzi scheme is onli a techniqu give back a few
dollar to sweeten the pot anyth that can coax peopl to part with their monei from
consum fraud financi transact
11748 2011 fraud examin manual
emu farm to underwat land develop can be run as a ponzi all the name ponzi
realli mean is that a few mark get paid thi lend a competit element to an otherwis
runofthemil fraud instead of everyon lose some lucki player do make monei
specul fraud dont alwai start out as con but when their rollercoast dip mani
specul find it too tempt to hang on and ride thei figur thei can phoni their wai
through the crisi and pick up again later again it math that usual doom these player
thei simpli cant make monei fast enough to feed the deficit thei need a payoff so big
noth short of a miracl or more fraud will suffic
specul can quickli get caught in a chain reaction where each fraud demand more
fraud by the time these organ ar shut down theyr spend half of their resourc
or more just cover up their crimin act
