2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Identity Theft/Utility Companies, Health Clubs, and Schools


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Utility Companies, Health Clubs, and Schools 
Utility companies, health clubs, and schools all carry identifiers that a fraudster can make use 
of. Once again, the Social Security number is used on many applications and is a key to 
obtaining other information. 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1760                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
A California woman used a stolen Social Security number to obtain thousands of dollars 
in credit and then filed for bankruptcy in the name of her victim. She was sentenced to 16 
months in federal prison. In addition to the prison term, she was ordered to pay restitution 
in the amount of $13,928 and pay a $5,000 criminal fine.  
 
She admitted that she assumed the identity of another woman with a similar name in order 
to obtain loans that she was not qualified to receive. The FBI began investigating the case 
after it was contacted by the victim, an English professor at a university in Georgia. The 
professor had graduated from a college in Arizona that the defendant also briefly attended, 
and both women had received student loans that were administered through the same 
company.  
 
Due to a computer mix-up, documents belonging to the professor — which included her 
Social Security number — were sent to the defendant. Shortly thereafter, the professor began 
receiving telephone calls from companies that she had never heard of claiming she owed them 
large sums of money. 
 



:


util compani health club and school
util compani health club and school all carri identifi that a fraudster can make us
of onc again the social secur number is us on mani applic and is a kei to
obtain other inform
consum fraud financi transact
11760 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
a california woman us a stolen social secur number to obtain thousand of dollar
in credit and then file for bankruptci in the name of her victim she wa sentenc to 16
month in feder prison in addit to the prison term she wa order to pai restitut
in the amount of 13928 and pai a 5000 crimin fine
she admit that she assum the ident of anoth woman with a similar name in order
to obtain loan that she wa not qualifi to receiv the fbi began investig the case
after it wa contact by the victim an english professor at a univers in georgia the
professor had graduat from a colleg in arizona that the defend also briefli attend
and both women had receiv student loan that were administ through the same
compani
due to a comput mixup document belong to the professor which includ her
social secur number were sent to the defend shortli thereaft the professor began
receiv telephon call from compani that she had never heard of claim she ow them
larg sum of monei
