2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Identity Theft/Tracking Down the Thief


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Tracking Down the Thief 
There are many ways that the fraud examiner can track down an identity thief. Some require 
the assistance of law enforcement, while others do not. Examples of techniques that have 
been successfully used to catch an identity thief are: 
• Establish surveillance of the address in question. 
• Have overnight delivery services “flag” the address in question. 
• Subpoena telephone records for the telephone(s) being used by the perpetrator. 
• Contact credit bureaus and have them “fl ag” the true account holder’s file. 
• Contact the Social Security Administration to determine if the number is listed twice in 
the system. 
• Obtain videos from retailers showing the perpetrator making purchases using the 
victim’s identity. 
• Obtain a copy of the perpetrator’s picture on the fictitious driver’s license. 
• Track down addresses and telephone numbers that do not belong to the victim but show 
up in their file. 
• Have the victim notify the fraud examiner when further breaches occur. 
• Report the fraud to law enforcement. 
 



:


track down the thief
there ar mani wai that the fraud examin can track down an ident thief some requir
the assist of law enforc while other do not exampl of techniqu that have
been successfulli us to catch an ident thief ar
establish surveil of the address in question
have overnight deliveri servic flag the address in question
subpoena telephon record for the telephon be us by the perpetr
contact credit bureau and have them fl ag the true account holder file
contact the social secur administr to determin if the number is list twice in
the system
obtain video from retail show the perpetr make purchas us the
victim ident
obtain a copi of the perpetr pictur on the fictiti driver licens
track down address and telephon number that do not belong to the victim but show
up in their file
have the victim notifi the fraud examin when further breach occur
report the fraud to law enforc
