2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


HEALTH CARE FRAUD 
 
According to the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services (CMS), total health care 
expenditures are estimated to have reached approximately $2.5 trillion by the end of 2009, 
and are projected to rise to over $4.5 trillion by 2019 and comprise 19.3 percent of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). Per person health spending is expected to reach over $8,600 by 
the end of 2011 and is projected to increase to $13,400 by the end of 2019. 
 
Health care spending continues to increase much faster than the overall economy. This gap 
between health care spending and the overall economy is one of the main reasons that fraud 
in the health care industry is so prevalent. According to the U.S. Government Accountability 
Office (GAO), the most common estimate of health insurance fraud is 10 percent of our 
total health care spending. However, because no one knows exactly what the figure is, the 
figure has also been estimated to be from 3–10 percent per year. Health care providers 
perpetrate the majority of this fraud. 
 
 
Laws Relating to Health Care Fraud 
Numerous criminal and civil federal and state laws are available in the prosecution of health 
care fraud. In addition, regulatory agencies are also available for licensure action.  
 
Federal Criminal Laws 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
As part of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996, 
Congress made a number of changes to the federal criminal code. In fact, the promulgation 
of HIPAA was the first massive sweep to wipe out health care fraud.  
 
The Act established several criminal statutes related specifically to health care fraud.  Under 
HIPAA, there are five federal crimes directed at health care fraud. Specifically, HIPAA made 
it illegal for anyone to knowingly and willfully: 
• Carry out a scheme to defraud any health care benefit program (18, U.S.C., § 1347) 
• Steal or embezzle any funds, property, or money of a health care benefit program (18, U.S.C., § 669) 
• Make false statements relating to health care matters (18, U.S.C., § 1035) 
• Obstruct a criminal investigations of a health care offense (18, U.S.C., § 1518) 
 
Health Care Fraud Financial Transactions   
1.1202                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
More specifically, under section 1347, which establishes a federal offense of “health care 
fraud,” it is illegal for anyone to:  
• Knowingly and willfully  
• Executes, or attempts to execute  
• A scheme or artifice intended to 
? Defraud a health care benefit program, or 
? By false or fraudulent means, obtain money or property owned by, or under the 
custody or control of, any health care benefit program 
 
The term health care benefit program as used in these statutes is defined to mean “any public or 
private plan or contract, affecting commerce, under which any medical benefit, item, or 
service is provided to any individual, and includes any individual or entity who is providing a 
medical benefit, item, or service for which payment may be made under the plan  
or contract.” 
 
The Act also provides that a judge order a person convicted of a federal health care offense 
to forfeit any property that can be traced from the proceeds received from the offense. More 
information concerning these statutes is set out in the Law section. 
 
Moreover, pursuant to its purpose in providing funds to combat health care fraud, HIPAA 
launched the Fraud and Abuse Control Program, which: 
• Coordinates federal, state, and local law enforcement programs to control fraud and 
abuse as applicable to Medicaid programs;  
• Conducts investigations, audits, evaluations, and inspections as they relate to delivery and 
payment for Medicaid services;  
• Modifies and establishes Safe Harbor Provisions;  
• Issues advisory opinions and special fraud alerts; and  
• Provides reporting and disclosure requirements of adverse actions (under the Health 
Care Fraud and Abuse Data Collection Program).  
 
Furthermore, as part of the implementation of HIPAA, the Secretary of the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS) was directed to create the Health Integrity and 
Protection Data Bank (HIPDB). The HIPDB is a reporting mechanism that allows users to 
access and review final adverse actions taken against practitioners, providers, and suppliers. 
Access to the data bank, however, is limited to federal and state government agencies and 
health plans.  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1203 
The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute (42, U.S.C., § 1320a-7b(b)) 
The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute (also known as the Federal Healthcare 
Anti-kickback Act) may also be used to combat healthcare fraud. This statute prohibits an 
individual from making payments to induce the purchase of healthcare goods or services that 
will be paid for by a federal health care program. Specifically, the statute prohibits: 
• The knowing and willful 
• Payment or receipt of any form of remuneration (including kickbacks, bribes, and 
rebates)  
• To induce someone to recommend or to purchase, order, or recommend any service that 
may be paid for under a federal health care program 
 
The statute encompasses a very broad array of activities that can be classified as Medicaid 
fraud. It applies to all federally funded health care programs, not just Medicaid.  
 
The statute criminally penalizes individuals who actually receive, as well as those who merely 
solicit, Medicaid remuneration. So long as the defendant’s intent is knowing and willful, and 
his means of involvement includes the receipt or solicitation of the kickback, the crime is 
prosecutable. But generally, it is difficult to determine whether the defendant intended to act 
knowingly and willfully, and neither “knowingly” nor “willfully” is defined in the statute. 
Thus, their interpretations are left for the courts to decipher, and this has inherently led to 
discrepancies in determining a defendant’s intent. 
 
The following examples are types of activities that typically violate the Medicare and 
Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute: 
• Payments for Medicaid patient referrals 
• Payments from a self-referral joint venture to investors for Medicaid patient referrals 
• Involvement in a consignment agreement, whereby performance under the agreement is 
based upon a percentage-based compensation scheme 
• A physician who performs little or no services to Medicaid patients yet receives large 
amounts of money for referring those patients to hospitals under ostensible services 
contracts 
 
The Stark Law (Physician Self-Referrals) 
The Stark Law (also known as the physician self -referral law) attempts to limit the ability of 
physicians to profit from their referrals by prohibiting physicians from referring 
Medicare/Medicaid patients for designated health services (DHS) entities with which the 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1204                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
physician or his immediate family member has a financial relationship. The law was passed in 
two phases.   
 
Stark I was enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1989; it prohibited 
a physician from referring a patient to a clinical laboratory with which he (or an immediate 
family member) has a financial relationship. 
 
Stark II provided additional amendments and expanded the referral and billing prohibitions 
to additional “designated health services.” It strengthened Stark I’s prohibitions on physician 
referrals from certain designated health services (DHS) entities with which the physician or 
his immediate family member has a financial relationship. 
 
As related to Medicaid, Stark II prohibits a physician, in exchange for a payment of equity or 
reduction of debt, without an exception, to make: 
• A Medicaid referral;  
• A Medicaid claim; or  
• Compensation arrangement.  
 
In addition to these codified requirements, states often supplement the federal requirements 
with more stringent state requirements. For example, in Pennsylvania, physicians are 
prohibited from making any automatic referrals, whether they are enunciated in direct or 
indirect agreements with other health providers.  
 
Despite the general rule that physicians cannot profit from their referrals, there are several 
exceptions and safe harbor provisions to protect physicians from making certain referrals. In 
part, these exceptions include: referrals to and from physicians in the same group practice, 
same in-office ancillary services, prepaid plans, legitimate personal services arrangements, 
and physician recruitment. 
 
Although Stark II appears to mimic the Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute, the 
two laws are different. First, unlike the Anti-Kickback Act, which applies to all individuals, 
Stark II only applies to physicians and their family members. Second, where the Medicare 
and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute provides criminal penalties for its violations, Stark II is 
codified as a civil statute, and therefore only imposes monetary penalties, suspension, and 
termination. Finally, under Stark II, each Medi caid entity providing items or services for 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1205 
payment must comply with reporting requirements and disclose information relating to the 
entity’s ownership, investment, and compensation arrangements. 
 
Violations of Stark II may subject a defendant to  $15,000 for each service improperly billed 
or claimed, $100,000 for participation in a circumvention arrangement or scheme, exclusion 
from participating as a provider in Medicaid programs, and/or a penalty of $10,000 each day 
reporting is delinquent. 
 
False Claims and Statements 
Though there is a statute specifically designed to combat false claims in connection with 
health care benefits programs, the federal false claims statutes may be used to combat certain 
types of health care fraud. Some examples of false claims and statements include: 
• Falsified contractor qualifications 
• False certifications or assurances 
• False records or invoices 
• Invoices from nonexistent companies 
• Claims made in duplicate or altered invoices 
• Billing for fictitious employees 
• Billing for goods and services not provided 
• Inflated costs or substitution of cheaper goods 
 
Although these statutes are discussed in more detail in the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual, this discussion will provide a brief overview of the main false claims and 
statements statutes used to combat health care fraud, including: false statements under 
section 1001, the criminal False Claims Act, and the Civil False Claims Act. 
 
FALSE STATEMENTS (18, U.S.C., § 1001) 
Although there are a number of federal statutes that prohibit making false claims and 
statements to the federal government, the term false statement usually refers to the Federal 
False Statements statute laid out in Section 1001 of Title 18, United States Code. Briefly 
stated, the law prohibits a person from lying to or concealing information from a federal 
official. 
 
Under section 1001, a false statement can be oral, written, sworn or unsworn, signed or 
unsigned. The false statement, however, must be about a material fact, and it must be 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1206                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
capable of influencing the outcome of the agency action. The elements of a typical section 
1001 violation are set forth below: 
• The defendant made a false statement (or used a false document) 
• That was material 
• Regarding a matter within the jurisdiction of any agency of the United States 
• With knowledge of its falsity 
 
THE CRIMINAL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (18, U.S.C., § 287) 
This statute makes it illegal to present or make any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim 
against any agency or department of the United States. The crime is complete when the 
claim is presented and payment of the claim is not an element of the offense.  
 
To establish violation of this statute, the government must establish all of the following 
elements:  
• The defendant made or presented  
• Any claim that was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
• The defendant knew the claim was false, fictitious, or fraudulent 
 
Violators of this statute may be imprisoned not more than five years and subject to a fine of 
$250,000. 
 
THE CIVIL FALSE CLAIMS ACT (31, U.S.C., § 3729 ET SEQ.) 
The False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §§ 3729 through 3733) is a civil statute that generally 
provides liability for false statements and representations made to an officer or employee of 
the federal government. As the civil counterpart to the criminal False Claims Act, it provides 
a separate civil cause of action that may be taken in addition to a criminal prosecution. 
 
The Civil False Claims Act provides in part that a person who violates its provisions is liable 
to the government for any treble damages it sustains and a civil penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 
per false claim. 
 
The penalties for violation of the Act range from $5,000 to $10,000 plus up to three times 
the amount of the government’s damages. In  addition, violators may be suspended from 
participating in Medicaid programs. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1207 
In addition to allowing the government to recover penalties and damages for false claims, 
the Civil False Claims Act allows a private party to prosecute a civil action against the 
perpetrator(s) on behalf of the government. This is called a qui tam action and is discussed in 
further detail below. 
 
The most commonly prosecuted acts under the statute result from the following: 
• The receipt of false or fraudulent claims paid by the government 
• The use of false or fraudulent records or statements to avoid payment to the government 
 
To bring an action under the Civil False Claims Act stemming from Medicaid fraud, there 
must be a false statement or representation in connection with either of the following: 
• The wrongful disposal of Medicaid assets 
• Solicitation or payment of Medicaid claims 
 
Even if a state’s Medicaid program is admini stered exclusively by the state, because the 
program is subsidized with federal funds, all false or fraudulent claims submitted to the 
state’s Medicaid program fall within the guise of  the Civil False Claims Act as claims against 
the federal government. 
 
The following examples are typical violations under the Civil False Claims Act: 
• Physician billing for services provided by residents as if the services were performed by 
the physician 
• Billing for upcoded medical services covered by Medicaid 
• Marketing and selling bundles tests (necessa ry and unnecessary tests) to referring 
physicians, who then bill Medicaid at a higher rate than authorized 
• Misdiagnosing Medicaid beneficiaries as having medical conditions, and then billing for 
services that wouldn’t otherwise be covered 
 
Computer Fraud 
Section 1030 of Title 18, U.S. Code, may also be used to combat health care fraud schemes 
involving computers. Under this section, any scheme that uses a computer as the instrument 
or vehicle by which funds could be illegally transferred or uses a computer to obtain 
confidential information may be prosecuted.  
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1208                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
An insurance company employee generates a false claim in the company computer making a 
fraudulent payment to a friend who then  shares the bounty with the employee. 
 
Money Laundering 
The money laundering statutes may also be effective in deterring and punishing individuals 
who commit health care fraud. Section 1956 of Title 18, U.S. Code, criminalizes financial 
transactions involving proceeds of unlawful activity. Property qualifies as the proceeds of 
illegal activity if it is derived from a “specified unlawful activity,” which HIPAA amended to 
include health care offenses.  
 
Using the federal money laundering statutes is beneficial because they allow the government 
to seize property through civil forfeiture (i.e., the government may seize property before 
judgment to ensure it will be secure until a hearing can be held). 
 
The text of the money laundering statutes can be found in the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual. 
 
Other Federal Statutes 
The following federal laws are also commonly used in the prosecution of health care fraud 
cases. More detail on each of these statutes can be found in the “Law Related to Fraud” 
chapter in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual. 
• Mail and Wire Fraud, Title 18, U.S.C., §§ 1341, 1343 : Mail and wire fraud makes it a crime 
to use the mails or wire communications to perpetrate a scheme to defraud a victim of 
money or property (e.g., present a false claim to Medicare, state health plan, or private 
insurer).  
• Conspiracy, Title 18, U.S.C., § 371, Title 18, U.S.C., § 286 : Section 286 makes it a crime for 
two or more people to agree or conspire to defraud the United States by obtaining, or 
aiding in obtaining, payment or allowance of any false, fictitious, or fraudulent claim. 
• Obstruction of Federal Audit, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1516 : This statute, originally passed in 1988, 
makes it a felony for anyone to influence, obstruct, or impede a federal auditor in the 
performance of his official duties. This statute is relevant to health care fraud because 
audits are the main tool used by the government to monitor healthcare provider 
performance and are generally the first step in any health care fraud investigation.  
• Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO) Statute, Title 18, U.S.C., § 1961–1968: 
RICO outlaws the investment of ill-gotten gains in another business enterprise, the 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1209 
acquisition of an interest in an enterprise through certain illegal acts, and the conduct of 
the affairs of an enterprise through such acts. 
• Electronic Funds Transfer Act, Title 15, U.S.C., § 1693n: Section 1693n applies to paperless 
money transfers between accounts, and in general, it attaches criminal liability to the acts 
of giving false or inaccurate information under the banking laws and regulations and 
failing to provide information required under the banking laws and regulations. 
 
Civil Remedies 
There are many federal statutes that victims of health care fraud can use to obtain relief. The 
False Claims Act and RICO both provide for civil remedies in addition to criminal penalties.  
 
In addition, one of the most effective remedies is available under the Civil Monetary 
Penalties Law (42 U.S.C. § 1320a-7a). Under this  law, administrative actions can be invoked 
against providers who defraud any federally funded program by filing false claims or other 
improper billing practices. Any person (including an organization, agency, or other entity, 
but excluding a beneficiary) who violates the law is subject to civil monetary penalties. 
Violators can be fined up to $10,000 for each medical service that was fraudulently 
represented, and they may be excluded from participating in government programs.  
 
State Statutes 
Although fraud is illegal in every state, not all states have specific legislation against insurance 
fraud. Laws such as “grand theft,” “scheme to  defraud,” or “fraud by deception” must be 
used to charge offenders. Nineteen states have passed legislation that specifically prohibits 
insurance fraud although the effectiveness varies according to the provisions in each statute. 
For example, in some states, health insurance fraud is illegal, but there is no immunity to the 
insurance company for reporting fraud. 
 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) adopted the Insurance 
Fraud Prevention Model Act. The key provisions include:  
• Mandatory reporting of fraud. 
• Immunity from prosecution for reporting fraud. 
• Making insurance fraud a felony under state law.  
• Requiring a fraud warning on claim forms. 
• Requiring anti-fraud initiatives including mandatory special investigation units. 
• Restitution to the victim. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1210                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Regulatory Boards 
Since most medical practitioners are required to be licensed by their state to practice, the 
regulatory boards have jurisdiction over the licensees and can take action when appropriate. 
The regulatory boards will take action when the patient’s health is in jeopardy, fraud has 
been committed, continuing education requirements are not met, or other similar 
circumstances. In most instances, when a licensee is convicted of fraud, it is not automatic 
that his license is suspended or revoked. A separate action and investigation must be 
completed for that to happen. In many cases, however, when there is not enough evidence 
to sustain a criminal conviction, the licensing boards may be able to take action and offer 
relief. 
 
“Running” and “Capping” Legislation 
Many states have enacted legislation to prevent attorneys from using runners or cappers to 
solicit business. Although state disciplinary rules generally prohibit this practice, very few 
attorneys have received any substantial sanctions. Some states, such as California, have taken 
the initiative to criminalize running and capping.  
 
Under a California law passed in July 1993, insurance companies now have the right to bring 
a lawsuit against any person who hires runners or cappers to procure clients or patients to 
obtain workers’ compensation benefits (Ins. Code 1971.7). This action need not be brought 
in the insurance company’s name. Instead, the insurance company can act on behalf of the 
“People of the State of California.”  
 
 
Fraud by the Insurance Company 
Frauds committed by insurance companies include some of the following: 
• Submission of false documentation and improper billing 
• Mishandling claims 
• Failure to pay legitimate claims 
• Charging unapproved rates 
• Requesting rate increases based on fraudulent data 
• Using illegal or deceptive tactics to sell insurance 
• Failure to give “fee breaks”  
• Patient screening 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1211 
Submission of False Documents 
If the insurance company acts as an intermediary for the payer, such as Medicare, then the 
insurance company commits fraud when it improperly bills the government or submits false 
cost reports or audits. 
 
Mishandling Claims 
Mishandling claims also arises primarily in the area of an insurance company acting as an 
intermediary administering the insurance program of the payer. The insurance company is 
under a duty to try to detect false claims. Although it is impossible to detect every fraudulent 
claim, if a company bypasses its own claims verification procedures, it can be guilty of fraud. 
 
Failure to Pay Legitimate Claims 
The insurance company or carrier is required to pay any claim that is properly submitted, 
contains all the required the information, absent of fraud, and has benefits available. An 
insurance company might commit fraud when claims are consistently rejected even though 
the required information has been submitted. Many states have regulations regarding the 
amount of time an insurance company has to pay a “clean” claim — one that has all the 
needed information. Even if an insured has committed fraud in the past, and for some 
reason or another is still an insured, the insurance company must still adjudicate a valid 
claim. 
 
Charging Unapproved Rates 
Some states require insurance companies to obtain approval on their premium rates. Until 
the approval is received, the rates cannot be charged to the insured. An insurance company 
may improperly begin charging the unapproved rate before it is allowed to. 
 
Requesting Rate Increases Based on Fraudulent Data 
Similar to the above, insurance companies or carriers needing regulatory approval for rate 
increases use cost data to justify their increases. In order to get their rate hike, they may use 
fraudulent cost data.  
 
Deceptive or Illegal Sales Practices 
Insurance companies may promote or condone deceptive or illegal sales practices in order to 
increase sales. The most common example is to disguise an insurance policy as a savings plan 
or investment. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1212                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Failure to Give “Fee Breaks” 
An insurance company may be guilty of fraud if it fails to pass on fee breaks it negotiates 
with its providers. The alleged overcharging occurs when an insurance company negotiates a 
discount on a medical bill. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer’s 
co-payment is made on the full price rather than the discounted price, and the consumer 
ends up paying a higher percentage of their bill than they should. For example, if a bill is 
$1,000 and a 50 percent discount is negotiated, the consumer’s 20 percent portion should 
equal $100. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer pays 20 percent 
of the full $1,000, or $200.  
 
Patient Screening 
In the managed care environment, because so much emphasis is placed on preventive care, 
some insurance companies may be reducing their risk by limiting their insured to only 
healthy patients. 
 
Detection 
Detection of fraud committed by an insurance company may include the following: 
• Review complaints by insureds. 
• Compare financial statement data to data used to request rates. 
• Compare rates charged with rates approved. 
• Compare discounts negotiated with providers with the amounts allowed on the claims 
and coinsurance charged. 
• Review rejected members to determine if underwriting guidelines were abused. 
 
 
Employee Claims Fraud 
Employees of insurers, especially claims examiners and customer service representatives, can 
present additional problems to the fraud examiner. Due to their ability to access claims and 
subscriber files, the frauds perpetrated can be almost limitless. 
• Claims fraud using the employee’s contract  
• Claims fraud using another insured’s contract number 
• Claims payment using a relative’s contract 
• Claims adjustment system 
• Payment for canceled contracts or deceased insureds 
• Improper payee  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1213 
Claims Fraud Using the Employee’s Contract  
Claims employees generally have access to claims data and claim forms. They can sometimes 
adjust claims or pull someone’s claim, change the claimant’s contract number, and have the 
claim processed.  
 
Claims Fraud Using Another Insured’s Contract Number  
Employees who have access to insureds enrollment file can locate an insured with a similar 
name as the employee. From there, the employee only has to complete a claim form and 
submit the claims through the regular processing system. The employee only has to put his 
own address in order to receive the payment. 
 
Claims Payment Using a Relative’s Contract 
Employees can fabricate claims and submit them under a relative’s contract number. 
 
Claims Adjustment System  
Claims that are legitimately paid incorrectly need to be adjusted. An adjustment examiner can 
adjust a claim for fraudulent purposes also. 
 
Payment for Canceled Contracts or Deceased Insureds   
If an adjuster has access to the enrollment files, he may run across a deceased insured. By 
submitting or processing a claim before cancellation, an examiner can manipulate the claims 
system and divert payment to himself. 
 
Improper Payee  
A claim approver overrides a claim payment system and pays out claims to improper payees. 
The claim approver inserts her son and daughter-in-law as payee. Checks are submitted to 
other than the insured’s address. 
 
Detection 
The following steps can be used to determine if a company is dealing with an employee who 
is defrauding the system: 
• Pull high-dollar claim payments for insureds. Investigate all unusual patterns by  
verifying services. 
• Review printouts for special payee codes to search for employees. 
• Review printouts for a high number of adjusted claims per insured. 
  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1214                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review printouts of recently canceled contracts for unusual claims activity just prior to 
cancellation. 
• Once unusual activity has been identified, follow normal investigative procedures. 
• Review address change lists for employee names or unusual activity. 
 
 
Agent Fraud 
Nearly all insurance companies use the services of a broker or agent external to the firm. 
Unfortunately, the best interests of the insurance company are not always served. Several 
schemes have been identified that can be classified as fraudulent. 
 
Phony Groups 
Agents will set up bogus companies in order to sell health insurance to individuals at  
group rates. 
 
Phony or Nonexistent Policies 
Rather than going to the trouble of setting up a bogus company, many agents will sell a 
phony policy, and take the money and run. 
 
Medical Underwriting Fraud 
The broker will write a policy knowing that the client has pre-existing conditions that would 
prevent acceptance for coverage. 
 
Eligibility Fraud 
A broker may seek to add ineligible family members, girlfriends, or associates to a group 
policy by representing them as employees.  
 
Another eligibility fraud is where a broker may sell a low-cost group policy to an 
organization that employs a small percentage of people with serious health problems. A 
better rate can be obtained by separating healthy people from sick people. The broker splits 
off the unhealthy people in their own group, placing the coverage with an insurer of last 
resort such as a carrier that is given favorable tax status in exchange for issuing coverage  
to anyone. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1215 
ERISA Fraud 
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulates all trust accounts held by an 
employer for the purpose of paying benefits such as retirement annuities or health and life 
policies. Under the Act, if an insurance company believes that a plan administrator is 
engaging in violations of the Act, it is required to report the matter to the U.S. Department 
of Labor. As an example, a corporation may use funds collected from employees through 
payroll deduction to finance daily operations of the company.  
 
Payment Inducements 
These schemes involve brokers furnishing group coverage to individuals who would not 
otherwise qualify for such policies by adding them to legitimate groups or establishing a 
fictitious group for the purpose of obtaining waivers and/or cheaper rates. The broker 
profits not only from the normal sales commission, but also from a “surcharge” or billing 
fee that is added to the published premium that is collected from the policy holder by the 
broker. In another scenario, a broker may charge a markup for adding employees to a 
legitimate group.  
 
Switching Policies 
This scheme involves the agents telling the customers that they are obtaining one policy, 
taking the premium for that policy, and then buying a cheaper policy with less coverage 
instead. The agents then pocket the difference. 
 
 
Provider Fraud 
Provider fraud is a fraud perpetrated by medical practitioners, medical suppliers, or medical 
facilities on patients or customers in order to increase their own income by illicit means. 
 
The potential for fraud involving providers has grown with the increased use of computer 
equipment in generating bills. Additionally, providers possess the knowledge of medical 
techniques, procedures, and terminology needed to avoid being questioned by claim-
 handling personnel. More insurance companies are contracting directly with providers for 
billing arrangements, leaving patients out of the loop. In addition, patients are usually 
reluctant to accuse physicians of wrongdoing because they rely on the provider’s continued 
services and because, when providers engage in fraudulent practices, they often forgive any 
out-of-pocket expenses the patient incurs. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1216                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rolling Labs 
A rolling lab is a mobile laboratory that solicits insureds to participate in health screening tests 
at no cost to the insured. These labs are usually located in semi-trailers parked at health 
clubs, spas, shopping centers, or on vacant property. 
 
Patients are contacted by telephone for a free physical exam. Subsequent to exam, the 
insurance company is billed for eight to 10 claims totaling $8,000–$10,000 for a single date 
of testing performed by multiple providers. Additional claims are billed for later service dates 
even though no more testing is done. The lab moves to another location prior to the patient 
receiving the test results to avoid detection. 
 
The providers market their services in many ways. One way is to rent office space in a 
doctor’s office for one day and then test all of that doctor’s patients. The testing equipment 
itself might arrive in a truck or van and moves from one office to another. Another method 
involves setting up a temporary operation in a shopping center. Rolling labs are also set up at 
health spas, with all members tested at no charge. The most common method, however, is to 
simply set up a small office for a temporary period and use telephone solicitations. 
 
Clinical Labs 
Clinical labs have devised fraudulent billing practices to encourage physicians to order 
unnecessary tests on patients. The schemes caused specific blood tests to be included in a 
panel of frequently ordered tests. The ordering physician pays nothing or a nominal fee for 
the extra tests. The tests are then unbundled and billed separately by the lab to government 
payers and insurance companies.  
 
Suppliers 
Ambulance Transportation 
Fraudulent billing for ambulance transportation can include bills for more mileage than 
incurred, for trips never taken, or for noncovered trips. 
 
Infusion Care 
Fraud schemes involving infusion care treatment include: 
• Services billed at abnormally high rates in comparison to cost. 
• Bills for noncovered patients. 
• Bills in excess of physician’s prescription. 
• Bills for unnecessary treatment. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1217 
• Kickbacks given to the prescribing physician. 
 
Durable Medical Equipment Suppliers 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by suppliers of durable medical equipment frequently involve: 
• Falsified prescriptions. 
• Excessive supplies. 
• Equipment not delivered or billed before delivery. 
• Billing for equipment rental after equipment was returned. 
• Noncovered supplies,(for example, incontinent care kits). 
• Milk supplement scam. 
• Lymphedema pumps. 
• Scooter scam. 
 
Home Health Companies 
Fraud involving home health care companies gained national exposure after the federal 
government’s investigation of ABC Home Health  Care was released. At the time of the 
investigation, ABC was the largest privately held home health care provider in the United 
States. In 1994, ABC made some 7.8 million visits and billed Medicare $615.9 million. 
Among the types of fraud identified at ABC were: 
• Medical records were altered to make it appear that patients continued to need home 
health visits. 
• Managers directed employees to continue vi siting patients who, in the employee’s 
opinion, did not qualify for home health care because they were not homebound. 
• A manager directed a nurse to record visits that were never made. 
• A manager forged physicians’ signatures on plans of care. 
• If a care plan was signed by a physician, employees would alter the number of visits.  
• ABC reportedly charged Medicare for the cost  of acquiring other home health agencies 
by paying owners a small sum up front and the balance in salary under the form of 
employment agreements. 
• Managers directed employees to market ABC and its services with the intent of charging 
Medicare for costs that were not reimbursable. 
 
Pharmacy 
Fraud schemes stemming from pharmacy transactions include: 
• Merchandising — substituting something of value for a prescription drug. 
• Billing for brand name drugs but dispensing generic drugs. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1218                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Billing beyond amount prescribed. 
• Billing for drugs not prescribed. 
• Billing for a high-priced generic drug but dispensing a lower-priced generic drug. 
• Package size differential—billing third-party payers for the price of drugs purchased in 
small package sizes when they were purchased at less cost in larger quantities. 
• Black market purchasing—purchasing drugs at significantly reduced rates then 
dispensing at regular prices. 
 
Chiropractors 
Dishonest chiropractors may engage in fraud schemes, such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered or unnecessary services. 
• Billing for multiple family members. 
• Purchasing individual contracts for their patients. 
• Billing for physical therapy services when contract does not cover chiropractors. 
• Billing for excessive services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
While certain treatments by chiropractors are usually not covered by insurance, similar 
treatments by physicians may be covered. To correct this perceived inequity, some 
chiropractors have set up medical corporations and then hired medical doctors as employees. 
The chiropractor is CEO of the corporation and has total discretion of how the funds are 
disbursed. The net result of this set-up is that a medical doctor gives the stamp of approval 
to charges that might not otherwise be paid, and the chiropractor reaps the profits. 
 
Chiro-Shenanigans 
PATIENTS FOR LIFE 
Charging annual fees that exceed $5,000, practice management firms teach chiropractors 
how to build million-dollar practices in as little as two years. The literature advises the 
chiropractors not to tell patients the results of their initial exam or how long they will need 
treatment until they’ve been indoctrinated into the benefits of lifelong chiropractic care. 
 
Further, they promote care of infants that will continue for the lifetime of the patient. 
Patients who question the continuation of treatment are given the guilty treatment: “It’s a 
choice you have to make depending on how important your health is to you.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1219 
Patients don’t seem to be cured until the insurance benefits run out. When benefits are 
renewed in the next calendar year, the symptoms return, and a new series of treatment 
begins until benefits run out again.  
 
PATIENT RECRUITING PRACTICES 
Some chiropractors use questionable recruiting practices to lure new patients into their 
practices. These might include: 
• Coupons for free meals where the benefits of chiropractic care are explained. 
• Advertising for free initial care. 
• Booths at health fairs, malls, and spas offering free screenings. 
 
TREATMENT FOR NONSPINAL CONDITIONS 
At one time chiropractors only treated spinal problems; however, many chiropractors now 
claim that they can treat any medical condition, including cancer, hernias, pneumonia, 
anemia, and heart conditions. For example, one chiropractic pamphlet stated, “If you are 
suffering from kidney disease, the logical course is to visit your chiropractor. He will 
examine your spine to see where your trouble is.” 
 
OTHER QUESTIONABLE CHIROPRACTIC TREATMENT 
Other types of questionable chiropractic treatment include: 
• Surrogate testing where the leg of a mother is flexed to diagnose her child’s illness. 
• Spinal manipulation of newborn babies to get over the trauma of birth. 
• Spinal manipulation to treat epilepsy, asthma, bedwetting, and learning disabilities. 
• Applied kinesiology whereby diseases can be diagnosed by testing muscles with the help 
of particular food or nutrients. 
• Analysis of x-rays to identify homicidal tendencies. 
• The creation of a treatment plan prior to examination. 
• Spinal manipulations begun at an early age to prevent cancer.  
• Iridology or the examination of patients’ eyes for markings that will indicate what 
diseases the patient has or will get. 
• A magnetic device placed over the thymus gland to diagnose nutrient deficiencies. 
 
Red Flags 
Warning signs that a chiropractor may be engaging in dishonest practices include a 
chiropractor who: 
• Takes full spine or repeated x-rays. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1220                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Prescribes treatments before a medical history or physical are taken. 
• Solicits family members. 
• Promises to prevent disease through regular check-ups. 
• Promises no out-of-pocket expenses for patients. 
• Ends treatment when their insurance benefits are exhausted, but recontacts patients for 
maintenance treatment when their benefits are renewed. 
 
Podiatrists 
Like other medical providers, unethical podiatrists may: 
• Bill for services never rendered. 
• Bill for noncovered services. 
• Provide kickbacks to suppliers. 
 
Ophthalmologists 
Ophthalmol ogists may engage in fraudulent practices such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered and noncovered services. 
• Billing for unnecessary services. 
 
Psychiatrists and Psychiatric Clinics 
Fraud schemes committed by psychiatrists and psychiatric clinics can include: 
• Billing for services never rendered. 
• Billing for noncovered services, such as weight loss services or biofeedback. 
• Billing for services under psychiatrist’s name when the service was actually performed by 
a noncovered but licensed provider, such as a drug counselor or minister. 
• Billing for services performed by an unlicensed employee. 
• Admitting patients with false diagnoses. 
 
Anesthesiologists
Dishonest anesthesiologists may bills for more time than was rendered. 
 
Dental Fraud 
Fraud involving dental providers might include bills for: 
• X-rays that were not taken. 
• Crowns that were not cemented. 
• Amalgams for teeth that were not filled. 
• Teeth that were not extracted. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1221 
• Fillings for teeth that have previously been extracted. 
• More fillings than a person can possibly have. 
 
Allergists 
Fraud schemes involving allergists can include bills for: 
• Allergy testing not performed 
• Unnecessary services 
• Allergy shots not given. 
 
Infertility Treatment 
Infertility treatment is generally not a service covered by insurance. However, some less-than-honest 
providers will bill such services as hormonal replacement therapy in order to  
be paid. 
 
Impostor Provider 
An impostor provider is a provider who does not exist but bills fraudulent claims. A variation 
on this scam involves assuming the identify of a deceased provider and practice—or putting 
together a group of licensed providers—and fraudulently billing under the group’s provider 
identification code. 
 
Investigation Tips 
To help determine whether a provider is an imposter: 
• Call the telephone number on the bill to determine if the provider exists; however, keep 
in mind that a fictitious provider may actually have rented a location and established a 
telephone number. 
• Contact the applicable licensing board or state to determine if the alleged provider was 
licensed to practice in the area at the time the service was allegedly provided. 
• Check the provider’s Social Security number or Tax Identification number (if listed on 
the bill) with the applicable licensing board. 
• Visit the provider’s physical address to determine if it is valid; if it is, speak to the 
superintendent to determine the tenant for that address. 
• Contact the Postal Inspector to verify what mail is being dropped at that address. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1222                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Diagnoses 
When a provider knows that a service is not covered, he may use false diagnoses or 
procedure code manipulation to get a claim for the service paid. Examples of common 
services not covered are: 
• Annual physical examination. 
• School physicals. 
• Weight loss programs. 
• Stop smoking programs. 
• Investigational or experimental procedures. 
• Cosmetic surgery. 
 
In addition, physicians may justify the ordering of expensive x-rays or other diagnostic 
services by falsely purporting that a need exists to make such diagnostic inquiries. The 
services are rendered, but because is the claim for the services is based on false information 
and is used to deceive the insurance company, it is considered a false claim. 
 
Red Flags of Provider Fraud 
Warning signs that a provider is engaging in fraudulent practices include: 
• Pressure for rapid adjudication of claims. 
• Threats of legal action for delay in making payments. 
• Frequent telephone inquiries on claim status. 
• Assertive providers who demand same-day claim payment and special handling. 
• Charges submitted for payment with no supporting documentation available (such as x-
 rays or lab results). 
• Use of a P.O. box as return addresses. 
• Insured’s address on claim form is the same as provider. 
• Routine (not specialized) treatment for patients living more than 150 miles from  
the provider. 
• Referring physician and provider of service in same professional corporation. 
• Medical records that have been altered. 
• Medical records that have additional informat ion attached that would make an apparent 
noncovered service now covered. 
• Missing pages of medical records that would cover the period of time under review. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1223 
Fraud by the Medical Staff 
Employees of providers also have an opportunity to steal and cover up theft of cash. They 
can submit fraudulent claims for patients and divert the payments to themselves. If they are 
covered under insurance, they can also use their own contract to submit fraudulent claims. 
For many employees, care rendered by their employer (doctor) to them or their family is 
free, but claims may be filed and assignment not accepted. 
 
Another scheme involves the provider’s office calling in orders for unneeded prescription 
drugs to pharmacies. Once the drugs are picked up, they can be sold. For example, in a case 
involving collusion between a medical office employee and an elderly lady in a retirement 
community, the elderly lady had developed a business selling the drugs purchased from the 
employee to her friends and neighbors in her community. If the employee is in collusion 
with an insured, the fraudsters can collect not only from the sale of the drugs, but also from 
the proceeds of insurance claims. 
 
 
Kickbacks in the Health Care Industry 
Kickbacks in the health care industry can come from several sources. The medical 
community is facing competition that it has not faced in the past, and monetary offers to 
prospective patients have been difficult to refuse. For example, in one South Florida 
community, incentives such as free transportation to medical facilities, shopping centers, and 
refreshments are common. 
 
Examples of kickbacks are: 
• Payment for referral of patients 
• Waiver of deductible and co-payments 
• Payment for insurance contracts 
• Payment for vendor contracts 
 
Payment for Referral of Patients 
Providers in an area of high competition will pay from $50 to $500 to cappers or runners  for 
recruiting new patients. In addition, patients may receive $50 if they refer a patient to a 
provider. The provider makes up for the kickback in the unnecessary billing of medical 
expenses or false claims. In addition, providers will pay kickbacks to other physicians for 
patient referrals. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1224                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Waiver of Deductibles and Co-payments 
Most insurance contracts require patients to pay a deductible and co-payment for services 
rendered. One of the reasons for having co-payments is to make insureds take an active part 
in the financial responsibility for their care. To attract patients, however, providers will 
forgive the patient’s out-of-pocket expense, but will make up for it in additional services that 
are billed to the insurance company. 
 
Payment for Insurance Contracts 
Physicians with patients who are facing long-term care or lifetime treatment, such as dialysis 
for kidney failure, may purchase contracts for their patients. This ensures that the provider 
will be paid, and the patient has no out-of-pocket expense. 
 
Payment for Vendor Contracts 
Companies doing business with medical practitioners will pay a “consulting” fee for referring 
business to them or using their supplies. 
 
Payments to Adjusters 
In order to get a claim settled quickly, an insured, or someone operating on his behalf, may 
bribe adjusters or other claims-handling personnel to approve or speed up the payment of  
a claim. 
 
 
Inflated Billings 
Health care billings can be inflated by providers as well as insureds. The following are some 
of the most common fraud schemes encountered by investigators and claims approvers: 
• Altering claims  
• Adding services 
• Code manipulation 
 
Altered Claims 
Altering valid claims can be accomplished using a pen; photocopier; or scanner, computer, 
and printer. Common alterations are:  
• Amounts changed 
• Date of service changed 
• Name of patient changed 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1225 
For example, a medical bill can be altered by placing an additional number in front of the 
amount charged. The date of service can be altered so that it becomes a covered expense 
rather than one that was incurred prior to being eligible for coverage. The individual 
submitting a claim can change the name on the bill from a noncovered family member to 
one who is covered under the contract. 
 
Detection 
Procedures can help identify altered claims include: 
• Analyzing charges and identifying any excessive claims for prescription or medical 
services above an acceptable level. 
• Looking for any alterations, erasures, changes of  ink, or white-outs on the original bill 
prior to paying the claim. This is important in today’s environment in which original 
bills, checks, and other documents are destroyed as soon as they are microfilmed to 
minimize storage space for record keeping.  
• Training adjusters to look for obvious alterations when processing claims. 
 
Added Services 
Some fraudsters add on services never rendered to dates of actual services. In these cases, 
the verification process is the same as the procedures listed under the alteration process. 
 
Code Manipulation 
Code manipulation is a problem that is faced by all health insurers. Each service is identified 
using the American Medical Association’s uniformly accepted coding system, called the 
Physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology (CPT). Medicare and most private insurers have 
developed fee schedules that use CPT codes and their accompanying narrative descriptions 
as the basis for paying providers.  
 
However, because the coding system is complicated, providers and insurers often have 
difficulty identifying the codes that most accurately describe the services provided. The 
coding system is difficult to use because it attempts to identify codes for all accepted medical 
procedures, including codes to describe minor procedures that are components of more 
comprehensive procedures. Payment policies add to the difficulty. For example, the fee for 
surgery often includes the cost of related services for the global service period, that is, for a 
set number of days before and after the surgery. To prevent overpayment in these cases, 
insurers need to identify when claims for surgery include codes that represent related 
services and reduce the payment accordingly.  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1226                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
It is difficult for providers and insurers to maintain proficiency in proper coding practices 
because a substantial number of the codes are changed each year. These complexities can 
inadvertently lead providers to submit improperly coded claims. They also make insurers 
vulnerable to abuse from providers or billing services that attempt to maximize 
reimbursements by intentionally submitting claims containing inappropriate combinations  
of codes. 
 
Unbundling Charges/Fragmentation 
Simple unbundling occurs when a provider charges a comprehensive code as well as one or 
more component codes. For instance, in the examples illustrated below, the provider would 
be overpaid because the fee for the total procedure already includes the value of its 
component parts. 
 
Procedure 
Code Service Billed Correctly Billed Procedure 
58150 
58720 
49000 
44955 
58740  
Total Hysterectomy ($1,300)
 Removal of ovaries & tubes ($950) 
Exploration of abdomen ($671) 
Appendectomy ($250) 
Lysis of Adhesions ($550) 
 
Total Charge $3,721 
 
Total Hysterectomy
  
 
 
 
 
Total Payment $1,300 
29877 
 
29870 
Knee arthroscopy with debridement 
($1650) 
Diagnostic knee arthroscopy ($1625) 
 
Total Charge $3,275  
Knee arthroscopy with debridement  
 
Total Payment $1,650 
 
47610 
 
47600 
Cholecystectomy with common bile duct 
exploration ($1,997) 
Cholecystectomy ($705) 
 
Total Charge $2,702 
Cholecystectomy with common bile 
duct exploration 
 
 
Total Payment $1,997 
 
Unbundling can be detected through the use of a computer program that determines 
whether each code submitted is a component of one or more comprehensive codes. 
 
Mutually Exclusive Procedures 
A variation of unbundling, this scam involves billing for procedures that are  
either impossible to perform together or, by accepted standards, should not be  
performed together.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1227 
Global Service Period Violations 
Some dishonest providers will bill for a major procedure—such as a surgery—as well as 
related procedures, when the fee for the major procedure already includes the fee for related 
procedures during the predefined time period (the global service period). This type of fraud 
is possible because most surgery includes all related services for a set number of days before 
and after the surgery. Detecting these abuses can be difficult because the examiner must 
determine which services are related to the surgery and which are not. This difficulty is 
compounded by the fact that such services may be rendered by more than one provider. 
 
Upcoding 
Upcoding is billing for a higher level of service than was rendered. One common form of 
upcoding involves generic substitution—filling a prescription with a less expensive drug, 
while billing for the more expensive form of the drug.  
 
Misuse of New Patient Codes 
The CPT coding system includes special codes for new patient visits, which enable the 
physicians to be reimbursed for the additional work that new patient visits typically require. 
Consequently, physicians who want to pad their claims may bill for visits with established 
patients using new patient codes. 
 
 
Insured Fraud 
Insureds may attempt to perpetrate a fraud by submitting fictitious claims forms: 
• Multiple surgeries. 
• Multiple office visits. 
• Foreign claims — Patient supposedly goes out of the country and falls ill. 
• Noncovered dependents. 
 
Doctor/ER Shopping 
Excessive drug claims for controlled substance drugs. Patient “shops” for controlled 
substance drugs. One physician does not know that the other has prescribed the drug. In 
addition, the patient may shop for drugs in emergency rooms complaining of soft tissue 
injuries, sprains, and strains. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1228                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Misrepresentation on Application 
Failure by insured to list all prior medical conditions or group to list medical conditions  
of employees. 
 
Third-Party Fraud 
This category involves an unauthorized use of an insured’s identification card by another  
known person or unknown person. The insurance company is usually notified by the insured 
once they receive a benefit statement work sheet for services rendered. 
 
Death of Insured 
The primary insured passes away; however, the beneficiary does not notify the insurance 
carrier and continues to submit fictitious claims on medical expenses after the death of the 
insured. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• Determine how the insured lost his card. If stolen, the police should be contacted to 
determine if the crime was reported. A copy of the police report should be obtained. 
• Obtain an actual description of the cardholder so that identification can be made of the 
impostor who used the card improperly. 
• Visit the providers or medical doctors to obtain any information to identify  
the perpetrator. 
 
 
Criminal Rings 
Individual criminals infiltrate mailrooms and are able to obtain copies of legitimate bills 
submitted to providers. They subsequently establish a mail drop point or rent an office and 
begin submitting false claims to insurance companies by creating fictitious tax identification 
numbers. Since the claimants are genuine, insurance companies will normally pay these bills. 
 
 
Collusion 
Collusion  is the most difficult insurance fraud to detect since several people are involved in 
committing the fraud. Usually cases of this nature are disclosed by accident or by a tip 
received from someone who may have been involved and has had a falling-out. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1229 
Any time a frauds are committed by insureds, there is no question on the part of the 
perpetrators as to the intent to obtain funds to which they are not entitled. However, it is 
also extremely difficult to detect this type of fraud. 
 
Detection 
• Excessive billings report may show that a provider is submitting large amounts of 
expenses. In addition, the claimant requests substantial payments to be made to him 
rather than the provider. 
• Explanation of benefits, if submitted to the provider, will probably generate some 
reaction from the provider. If substantial, at the time that Form 1099 is submitted to the 
provider, there may also be comments by the provider. 
• Periodically, management should compare the membership/enrollment file to the Social 
Security file to determine if the insurance company is paying claims on deceased 
insureds. The membership file also may be compared to the file from the vital statistics 
department to search for divorced policyholders. 
 
Divorce 
An insured and a covered spouse file for divorce, but neither party notifies the insurance 
company. The ex-spouse, who remains at the address of record, continues to submit claims. 
 
Foreign Insured 
A foreign insured submits phony information that the primary insured passed away. For the 
last month he was hospitalized in a foreign hospital and a sizable bill was mailed to the 
carrier for payment. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• The claim file should be reviewed to determine if the charges are legitimate. 
• Determine if the medical language appears to be proper by comparing samples of bona 
fide claims. 
• It may be necessary to submit a letter to the attending physician to determine if the 
charges are correct. 
• Through law enforcement contacts, it may be necessary to obtain information regarding 
the legitimacy of the claim. 
• Check the style of the date. In many foreign countries, dates are listed with the day first, 
then the month and year, e.g., 07/01/08 would be 7 January 2008. If the U.S. style of 
dating is used (month/day/year), it may indicate a fraudulent claim. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1230                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Detection of External Fraud 
• Misspelled medical/dental terminology. 
• Unusual charges for a given service. 
• Similar handwriting by the claimant and the provider of service. 
• Typed, not printed bill heads. 
• Bills with irregular columns. 
• Unassigned bills that are normally assigned, such as large hospital or surgical bills. 
• Typed or handwritten hospital bills. 
• Drug receipts from the same pharmacy but on different color paper. 
• Erasures or alterations. 
• Lack of any provider’s signature on a claim form. 
• Absence of the provider’s medical degree, i.e., “Dr. John Doe” instead of “John Doe, 
M.D.” 
• An illegible provider signature on the bill submitted or the signature does not match the 
one on file. 
• Surgeries that don’t have other related services such as hospital charges. 
• Physician’s specialty does not agree with diagnosis. 
• Services billed do not agree with diagnosis. 
• Impossible or unlikely services. 
• Photocopied bills. 
• Other indicators that a claim approver or in vestigator should be aware of that could 
result in identifying a possible fraud: 
? Pressure by a claimant to pay a claim quickly. 
? Individuals who hand deliver their claim insist on picking up their claim check. 
? Threats of legal action if a claim is not paid quickly. 
? Anonymous telephone call inquiries regarding the status of a pending claim. 
? Identical claims for same patient in different months or different years. 
? Dates of service just prior to termination of enrollment or just after enrollment. 
? Services billed that do not appear to agree with the medical records. 
? Billing for services or equipment that are clearly unsuitable for the patient’s needs. 
? Foreign claims listing charges in U.S. dollars when that isn’t the currency of that 
country. 
? Foreign claims giving documentation in English when English is not the primary 
language spoken. 
? Multiple foreign claims for same subscriber. 
? Multiple foreign claims from same physician/hospital. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1231 
Fraud by Medical Institutions 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by institutions and their employees include those commonly 
used by doctors and other providers. However, the more common schemes in which 
hospitals are primarily involved include: 
• Filing of false cost reports. 
• DRG creep. 
• Billing for experimental procedures. 
• Improper contractual and other relationships with physicians. 
• Revenue recovery firms to (knowingly or unknowingly) bill extra charges. 
 
False Cost Reports 
Cost reports sometimes include noncovered items such as golf outings, parties, and exotic 
trips disguised as covered items. For example, an investigation disclosed that a hospital 
recovered silver from the processing of x-ray film, sold it, gave it to the candy stripers, only 
to have it “donated” back to the hospital. Since Medicare doesn’t consider donations as 
revenue, the hospital was able to claim higher expenses, thus more money from Medicare. 
 
Inclusion of Unallowable Items 
• Expenses for tax penalties, late charges, and promotional advertising. 
• Costs incurred from a related-party transaction with a mark-up over the costs incurred 
by the related-party. 
• Expenses that are reimbursed under other programs (e.g., billable medical supplies and 
therapies). 
• Excessive expenses such as hotel, food, travel expenses for recreational events. 
• Luxury items (e.g., lavish furnishings, corporate planes, swimming pools, spas). 
 
DRG Creep 
Diagnostic Related Groupings (DRG) is a reimbursement methodology for the payment of 
institutional claims. It is a patient classification scheme that categorizes patients who are 
medically related with respect to primary and secondary diagnosis, age, and complications. 
Reimbursements are determined by the DRG. For example, a heart bypass operation is 
worth a certain amount of reimbursement and a hernia repair is worth a different amount. 
DRG creep occurs when a hospitalization is coded as a more complex admission than 
occurred. When it becomes a pattern and intent is established, it becomes fraud. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1232                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another type of fraud using DRG codes involves billing for the DRG code and then billing 
again for services that were included in the DRG payment. 
 
Billing for Experimental Procedures 
It is reported that one form of medical fraud that is little known, but apparently widespread, 
is the third-party billing for experiments with new medical devices that have not yet been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Some hospitals are deliberately misleading 
third-party payers by getting them to pay for the manufacturer’s research. Many of the 
doctors involved are alleged to have stock in the manufacturing companies. 
 
Improper Relationships with Physicians 
Certain relationships between hospitals and physicians result in fraud to the insurer. For 
instance, a hospital provides no or token reimbursement to pathologists for Medicare Part A 
services in return for the opportunity to perform and bill Part B services at that hospital. 
 
The following transactions are generally regarded as suspect: 
• Payment of any sort of incentive by the hospital each time a physician refers a patient to 
the hospital. 
• Provision of free or significantly discounted billing, nursing, or other staff services. 
• Free training for a physician’s office staff in areas such as management techniques, CPT 
coding, and laboratory techniques. 
• Guarantees that provide that, if the physician’s income fails to reach a predetermined 
level, the hospital will supplement the remainder up to a certain amount. 
• Low-interest or interest-free loans, or loans that may be forgiven if a physician refers 
patients to the hospital. 
• Payment of the cost of a physician’s travel and expenses for conferences. 
• Payment for a physician’s continuing education courses. 
• Coverage on the hospital’s group health insurance plan at an inappropriate or very  
low cost. 
• Payment for services, such as consultation at the hospital, that require few, if any, 
substantive duties by the physician, or payment for services in excess of the fair market 
value of services rendered. 
 
Revenue Recovery Firms 
Another form of health care fraud involves so-called revenue recovery firms padding 
medical bills. These billing consultants review patients’ bills (months or even years after 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1233 
treatment) looking for charges that were missed. Critics have charged that too often these 
firms pad medical bills by adding on fictitious charges. The more charges that are added 
onto the bill, the more the revenue recovery firm gets paid. In addition, their employees may 
be paid bonuses for piling on extra charges and pressured to meet monthly quotas.  
 
Changing Codes 
One of the most common methods used by revenue recovery firms is to change every 
hospital’s or nursing home’s billing codes. For instance, changing each code for an ordinary 
five-cent bandage so that the provider is charged for a $5 surgical dressing. 
 
Adding Items 
Extra charges are added onto hospital bills by assuming that hospitals used certain items, 
even though there was no evidence of the procedure or service. For instance, if the hospital 
had certain procedures for which they sometimes use a piece of x-ray equipment, the auditor 
reviewing the bill would always assume that the hospital had used the equipment, and they 
would put it on the bill. 
 
Kickbacks 
Often hospitals are unaware (sometimes intentionally) of the extent of the fraud committed 
by revenue recovery firms. In other cases, however, revenue firms report that they will 
contact a hospital or nursing home directly and tell them that if the institution will give them 
their bills, they will split the profit produced by the added charges. 
 
Billing for Expensive Treatments 
Numerous charges for the use of expensive treatments such as laser are added to patients’ 
bills. Charges may be added after the patient had already been billed for the use of the laser. 
 
Altering Records 
In some instances, firms may actually alter medical records. For example, in one case a firm 
added more than $1,300 to a patient’s bill for video equipment that was supposedly used 
during surgery. In order to justify the fraudulent billing, the firm checked a box on the 
surgical record to indicate that the equipment had been used. After the original document 
was obtained, it showed that the box was not checked on the original form completed by the 
surgical staff. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1234                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Donating Organs 
One hospital, which has ceased using a particular firm, reported that the firm regularly 
double billed for services and treatments, and in another instance, outside auditors found 
that the firm had tried to charge for dead patients donating their organs. 
 
Additional Anesthesia Time 
Another common scheme is the charging of additional hours of anesthesia. Patients should 
be billed from when they enter the surgery room to when they leave the surgery room. The 
revenue firm pads the bill by increasing the time billed to include time spent in a recovery 
room, or before the patient went into the operating room. 
 
Rent-a-Patient Schemes 
So called “rent-a-patient” schemes involve paying individuals to undergo unnecessary 
medical procedures that are then billed to the patient’s insurance. Rent-a-patient schemes 
typically begin with the leasing of a sham medical clinic. Past investigations show that these 
clinics tend to be nondescript, often within shopping centers, and in destitute sections of 
town. Almost always, the lessee of the clinic is involved in the criminal organization of the 
scheme. Once a sham clinic is in place, recruiters (a.k.a., “coyotes” or “cappers”) are hired to 
solicit low-income individuals, who speak little English, and offer them money in exchange 
for submitting to “minor” surgical procedures. Recruiters are often former criminals, for it is 
not as dangerous to deal patients, as it is to deal drugs, and can be much more lucrative 
(average $2,000 per willing participant). 
 
EXAMPLE 
A surgery center paid hundreds of dollars to patients who endured largely unnecessary 
operations and then falsely charged the go vernment. One of the operations involved 
collapsing the patient’s lung to snip a nerve that would supposedly control “sweaty palms.” 
The surgery did stop the patient’s not-so-sweaty palms from perspiring; it also caused the 
patient to lose strength in his hands, and sweat profusely on other parts of his body. 
 
Recruiters will scour low-income housing projects, elderly neighborhoods, and factories for 
victims. Once recruiters have convinced an individual to become a willing participant, they 
will request a copy of the individual’s benefit ca rd to confirm benefits prior to subjecting the 
patient to an unnecessary treatment. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1235 
Recruiters will drive the patients, usually across state lines, to small “out of network” sham 
clinics. Along the way, the recruiter will advise each patient to describe particular false and 
embellished symptoms to the health professional at the clinic, such as: “I sweat too much”; 
“My stomach is bothering me”; “My nose hurts.” Such descriptions will later be used by the 
scam clinic to create medical charts, justifying a particular surgical procedure. Following a 
night of fast food and a cheap hotel, the patients are driven to a clinic. The patients then 
wait in line, sign an informed consent form, and promise to give the clinic all the checks 
thereafter received. Following administrative procedures, the patients briefly meet with a 
doctor and undergo the procedures that have been predetermined for them. Later that 
evening or the next day, the recruiter will give the patients a few hundred bucks and drive 
the patients home. 
 
After rendering services, the provider will bill the patients’ insurance company, Medicare, or 
Medicaid for the unnecessary procedures beyond the usual and customary cost (past 
investigations evidence up to 5,000 percent above average market price). The claims will 
likely include fees for surgical supplies and medical equipment that were never used or 
distributed. Some insurers reimburse patients directly for out-of-network claims, thereby 
requiring the patient to pay the facility. However, because the patients targeted in rent-a-
 patient scams are often indigent, and believe they deserve the money for enduring the 
unnecessary procedures, it is common for them to deposit or cash the checks. It is a cycle 
whereby the victims are not only used to perpetrate the fraud, but in the end become 
fraudsters themselves. 
 
Insurance companies have difficulty determining when rent-a-patient schemes are being 
committed because their claims systems can only compare codes, and cannot determine the 
usual and customary cost for a particular procedure. To make matters worse, some states 
have prompt pay laws, requiring claims to be paid within a period of time, such as 45-days. 
Rapid claims turnover inevitably leads to poor oversight regarding fraud-related claims. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1236                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Source: U.S. GAO Report: Health Care Fraud: Schemes to Defraud Medicare, Medicaid, and Private Health Care 
Insurers  (July 2000).  
 
What to Do? 
Consumer education is the front line to battling rent-a-patient schemes. Insurance 
companies must educate their insureds on the prevalence of this type of fraud, and provide 
these individuals with means of communication when it is believed fraud is afoot. 
Disadvantaged populations must also be informed about the negative impacts of 
participating in such schemes (i.e., health risks and criminal liability). 
 
Insurance companies must educate from within. Investigation units should be established to 
include skilled fraud examiners. Fraud detection software programs should be purchased to 
detect irregular claims patterns. An example of progressive movement towards the fight 
against health care fraud is Blue Cross Blue Shield’s establishment of the Anti-Fraud Strike 
Force to bring Blue Plans together when faced with multi-jurisdictional health care fraud 
schemes. The program pools resources, insight, and intellect from around the country to 
circumvent and prosecute rent-a-patient schemes. 
 
Likewise, the federal government has implemen ted several organizations and programs to 
target health care fraud. For example, the Health Care Integrity and Protection Data Bank 
(HIPDB) is a flagging system that alerts federal and state government agencies commence 
with a more thorough review of a practitioner’s, provider’s, or supplier’s past dealings. Not 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1237 
only may federal and state governments review the database for potential red flags, but also 
they must report the following information: health care-related civil judgments and criminal 
convictions in federal or state court; injunctions; administrative actions; participation 
exclusions; and the like. Failure to report such information may subject a health plan to a 
civil penalty of up to $25,000 for each adverse action not reported. 
 
Red Flags of Rent-A-Patient Schemes 
• Large influx of out-of-state patients to a particular clinic; including clusters of patients 
from a particular location. 
• Several non-related procedures on a patient in a short period of time (e.g., a colonoscopy 
and circumcision on one patient within a few days or even weeks). 
• Numerous claims by a particular clinic for the following procedures: colonoscopies, 
endoscopies, septoplasties, circumcisions, and thoracoscopies with sympathectomy 
(a.k.a., “sweaty palms surgery”). 
• Parallel procedures on families (husbands, wives, and children) on the same day. 
• Extremely high staff salaries. 
• Charging beyond the average market price for procedures, medical equipment,  
and devices. 
• Frequent patients with out-of-network coverage. 
 
 
Nursing Homes 
Nursing homes have become a multibillion dollar business in the last few years. As such, 
they have become a common target of fraud. A wide array of providers — including durable 
medical equipment suppliers, laboratories, physicians, optometrists, and psychiatrists — have 
been involved in fraudulent or abusive billing for services and supplies furnished to nursing 
facility patients. Most fraudulent activity in volves billing for unnecessary or undelivered 
services, or misrepresenting a service to obtain reimbursement. 
 
There are several features unique to nursing homes that make them particularly vulnerable  
to fraud: 
• Unscrupulous billers of services can operate their schemes in volume because the 
patients are all located together under one roof. 
• In some instances, nursing homes make patient records available to outside providers 
who are not responsible for the direct care of the patient (contrary to federal 
regulations). 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1238                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Under the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services’ reimbursement procedures, 
providers can bill Medicare directly without the nursing facility or attending physician 
affirming whether the items were necessary or provided as claimed. 
• Scrutiny of the claims at the processor level is inadequate because the automated claims 
systems used do not accumulate data that would timely flag indications of improbably 
high charges or levels of service. 
• Even when abusive practices are detected and prosecuted, repayment is rarely received 
from wrongdoers because they usually go out of business or deplete their resources so 
that they lack any resources to repay the funds. 
• Patient personal funds are controlled by nursing home administration and are an inviting 
target for embezzlement. Individually, patients generally maintain a relatively small 
balance in their personal funds accounts. Collectively, however, these funds generate a 
considerable source of income for an unscrupulous nursing home operator or employee. 
 
Failure of the Nursing Facility to Monitor Outside Providers 
Although nursing homes are required to perform numerous tasks to monitor patients and 
meet their needs, there are no requirements that nursing homes monitor the services or 
supplies provided to their patients. These providers are allowed to bill directly without 
adequate confirmation that the care or items were necessary or were delivered as claimed. 
 
Most nursing facilities do not have the in-house capability to provide all the services and 
supplies their patients need. Accordingly, outside providers market their services and 
supplies to nursing homes to meet the needs of their patients. Typically, provider 
representatives enter the home and offer to handle the entire transaction—from reviewing 
medical records to identify those patients who need their services, to billing—with no 
involvement by the nursing facility. Some homes allow providers or their representatives to 
review patient medical records contrary to federal regulations. By doing so, these providers 
can obtain all the information necessary to order, bill, and be reimbursed for services and 
supplies that are, in many instances, not necessary or even provided. 
 
Excessive Reimbursements 
Although carriers do employ automated controls to prevent fraud, often questionable claims 
and providers are not flagged before excessive reimbursements are paid. In other instances, 
providers bill for quantities of services or supplies that could not possibly have been 
furnished or necessary. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1239 
Psychiatric Hospital Fraud 
Psychiatric hospitals are susceptible to fraud because of the very nature of mental health 
problems and the manner in which they are diagnosed and treated. Unlike the acute care 
field, it is often difficult to determine whether a person is in need of hospitalization for 
psychiatric treatment. 
 
Abuse in the Admissions Process 
Some psychiatric treatment facilities have developed programs for patients who exhibit 
symptoms of both psychiatric illness and substance abuse problems. Fraud occurs when a 
patient is admitted on the basis of a diagnosis that reflects the patient’s insurance coverage 
rather than the patient’s illness. Psychiatric hospitals have been accused of finding something 
wrong with patients when it is discovered that they have insurance coverage. Such patients 
may often be admitted without examination by a physician. 
 
Fraud in the Treatment Process 
The following types of abuses can occur with regard to psychiatric treatment: 
• Extending the length of treatment programs or delaying discharges because patients have 
additional insurance benefits remaining. 
• The use of illegitimate, questionable, non-approved, or dangerous treatment programs 
and forms of therapy, such as brain wave synchronization, magnet therapy, memory 
retrieval/enhancement therapy, and deep sleep therapy 
• Engaging in excessive treatment of psychiatric patients such as thyroid testing, drug tests, 
or psychiatric evaluation tests. 
 
Abusive Marketing Practices 
Many hospitals rely on marketing as a means of encouraging treatment and generating 
referrals. Overly aggressive marketing methods include: 
• Paying bonuses to employees to persuade or pressure prospective patients to undergo a 
psychiatric evaluation and to admit themselves for treatment. 
• Encouraging patients to admit themselves by offering financial incentives such as 
payment of plane fare, child care, COBRA payments, and waivers of patient co-
 payments or deductibles. 
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1240                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Financial Rewards for Referrals 
Many facilities are dependent on outside sources of patient referrals such as physicians or 
other clinicians. This dependence has led some hospitals to develop economic relationships 
in order to obtain referrals: 
• Rewarding clinicians who refer patients by referring patients who need outpatient 
treatment to those clinicians. 
• Allowing allied health professionals who refer patients to provide therapy for their own 
patients at the hospital; while nonreferring allied professionals are not allowed to use  
the hospital. 
• Paying medical directors or other physicians an incentive bonus linked to the overall 
profitability of the hospital. 
• Paying a physician who is under contract to the hospital but who provides no services. 
 
Red Flags for Psychiatric and Substance Abuse Claims 
• Treatment takes place far from patient’s home. 
• Diagnosis becomes alcoholism when state mandate reimburses alcoholism like any  
other illness. 
• Patient is on disability. 
• Provider’s credentials are questionable. 
• Documentation of treatment is lacking. 
• Ancillary services are not treatment oriented. 
 
 
Other Frauds in the Institutional Setting 
 
Write-Off of Patient Accounts 
When a patient account or other type of receivable has been determined to be uncollectible, 
the account is written-off to bad debts. It becomes a fraudulent transaction when the 
account has been written-off prematurely and the balance subsequently collected with the 
proceeds going to the employee. In this scheme, the employee has the opportunity to collect 
the receivable and divert the funds to himself, because companies typically do not keep track 
of old, written-off accounts receivable. 
 
Often old accounts receivable are assigned to a collection agency. These agencies typically 
are paid on a percentage of the collected amounts. Fraud schemes can be perpetrated by 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1241 
these agencies if the company does not monitor the method by which the agency receives 
old accounts and the collection process itself.  
 
The assignor company needs to assure itself that the collection agency is being assigned truly 
old accounts only and not good accounts that can reasonably be expected to pay within the 
normal course of business.  
 
Additionally, the company needs to be sure that the collection agency cannot compromise 
the indebtedness so that collections are not reported. This would allow the collection agency 
to compromise indebtedness for its own collection and not remit amounts owed the 
company. 
 
Credit Balances 
When patients have more than one payer responsible for payment of an admission, 
institutions have been known to collect more than the original amount billed. This may 
occur when the patient has more than one health insurance company, is in a vehicle accident 
where multiple insurance carriers are involved, or where workers’ compensation is 
applicable. In addition, the facility may also collect the deductible and co-payment from the 
patient. If the hospital has a credit balance, the amount paid above the charges should be 
refunded to the applicable parties. However, this does not always occur. Generally the 
refund will be made upon request, but only upon request. 
 
Theft of Pharmaceuticals and Supplies 
Because of the ready market for selling pharmaceuticals and supplies, they have a propensity 
for being stolen. Narcotic drugs, although they are usually tightly controlled, still may be 
stolen and sold on the street. Supplies such as canes, sunglasses after cataract surgery, and 
admission kits are popular items for theft or employee abuse. 
 
 
Managed Care 
The United States’ health care system is moving toward more and different types of 
“managed” care. As the country moves to a different type of health care delivery system, so 
may the types of fraud. 
 
Traditionally, health care has been provided and paid for on a “fee-for-service” basis where 
payments were made either directly to the health care provider as payment for services 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1242                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
rendered to the insured party, or to the insured as reimbursement for medical expenses 
incurred. The premise behind managed care is that the medical practitioner is responsible for 
managing the total needs of the patient. The primary purpose of managed care is to reduce 
cost by promoting the most appropriate and efficient use of medical services.  
 
The most common managed care arrangements are: 
• Modified traditional coverage 
• HMOs 
• PPOs 
 
Modified Traditional Coverage 
Under this type of coverage, the medical practitioner is reimbursed through a fee-for-service 
arrangement. The patient is free to choose a provider and a claim is submitted for 
reimbursement by either the insured or the provider. It is a managed care model in that cost-
 cutting measures are in the form of utilization review, prior authorization, second surgical 
opinions, and hospital pre-authorizations. 
 
HMOs 
HMOs, or Health Maintenance Organizations, have several variations. The HMO may 
employ all of the providers as in a staff-model HMO, or the managed care organization may 
contract with individual physicians or physician groups. The insured selects a primary care 
physician (PCP) who is the gatekeeper. Generally all medical care is initiated through the 
PCP. Payment is made by capitation, that is, the PCP receives a flat fee per month from the 
managed care organization, although some fees still may be paid on a fee-per-service basis 
usually at a reduced rate. Care that cannot be performed by the PCP is done by a specialty 
care physician who is also a member of the HMO network. The patient is severely penalized 
for going outside the HMO network. 
 
PPOs 
PPO, or Preferred Provider Organization, is  a managed care arrangement in which the 
patient chooses a provider from a list of participating providers in the PPO network. Their 
care is not managed by one provider as in the HMO, and they may see any provider in the 
network. The patient is penalized for going outside the network, although not as severely as 
in an HMO network. Providers usually must bill the third-party payer and claims are 
assigned.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1243 
How Managed Care Alters the Potential for Fraud 
In a managed care environment, fraud is not eliminated. Insured fraud may be reduced 
substantially, but provider fraud is still alive and well. In addition to billing fraudulent 
services, managed care has an additional incentive for fraud. Because the providers share in 
the financial risk of a patient, there is the potential to provide less services to a patient since a 
fixed capitation rate allows the patients unlimited visits to a provider. 
 
Types of Managed Care Frauds 
• Inadequate treatment of patients. 
• Referring patients automatically to providers outside the network (perhaps in exchange 
for kickbacks from outside providers). 
• Establishment of inconvenient appointment hours, service locations, etc. to suppress the 
number of patients. 
• Inflating reports of patient traffic and treatment costs to induce payers to increase future 
per patient capitation fees. 
• False claims for services not covered by fixed capitation payments. 
• Falsification of quality of care and/or treatment-outcome data. 
• Providers misrepresenting their credentials or qualifications for admission to a given 
payer’s network of managed care providers. 
• Out-of-network overbilling for substandard services. 
• Employees’ creating claim checks during periods when the plan no longer is doing 
business with the HMO, but treatment of members continues due to existing problems. 
• Providing kickbacks to employees of managed care organizations for putting patients in 
their panel. 
 
Managed care systems also create the opportunity for fraud by the insureds. Some of the 
examples of fraud that may be found in the managed care environment include  
the following: 
• Patients (members) loaning or selling use of card to nonmembers. 
• Enrolling noneligible persons as members for obtaining treatment. 
• Failing to disenroll ex-spouse of family members. 
• Out-of-network falsified emergency trea tment in collusion with providers. 
 
Red Flags 
Some of the red flags for managed care frauds are: 
• Identifying providers who regularly waive co-payments or deductibles. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1244                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Unusual referral patterns—either too high or too low. 
• Unusually high pattern of referrals to pharmacies, laboratories, or specialty  
care physicians. 
• High number of emergency room referrals. 
• Patient complaints about the treatment. 
• A pattern of high number of services that fall outside of the capitated services. 
 
 
Medicaid Fraud 
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Social Security Act, which established 
Medicare and Medicaid. These programs provide medical and health-related services to 
specific groups of people in the United States. Both programs are managed by the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), a federal agency within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.  
 
Although both Medicare and Medicaid provide medical and health-related services, there are 
several differences between the two programs. Medicare, which is funded and governed by 
the federal government, is the federal health insurance program for people age 65 or older 
and most people with certain disabilities; it is financed by Social Security contributions. 
Conversely, Medicaid is a federal- and state-funded program that provides health care 
coverage for low-income families and children, medical and long-term care coverage for 
people with disabilities, and assistance with health and long-term care expenses for low-
 income seniors. Although Medicaid is a federal program, it is operated by the states, and 
each state decides eligibility and the scope of coverage. Medicaid does not require recipients 
to make contributions, and it is financed from general revenues. 
 
According to the federal government, Medicaid fraud involves purposely billing Medicaid for 
services that were never provided or received. 
 
As the number of individuals enrolled in Medi caid increases, the amount of funds being 
expended by these programs leaves the industry at a significant risk for fraudulent claims. 
Medicaid expenditures comprised $216 billion of the 2009 federal budget. The proposed 
fiscal year 2011 budget includes a $1.7 billion allotment to fight fraud and abuse in the 
Medicare and Medicaid systems. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1245 
In response to the enormous increase in Me dicaid fraud, the federal government has 
established departments, programs, statutes, and funds for deterring, investigating, and 
prosecuting such types of fraud.  
 
An Overview of the Medicaid System 
For a state to establish a Medicaid program for its residents, it must comply with specific 
federal guidelines. Each state must: 
• Establish its own eligibility standards;  
• Determine the type, amount, duration, and scope of services;  
• Set the rate of payment for services; and  
• Administer its own program. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1246                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AGENCY RESPONSIBILITY  RELATED ACTIVITIES 
FEDERAL      

CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES
• Assist each state in increasing the 
effectiveness of its Medicaid 
program integrity efforts.  
• Acts as an oversight entity of 
states’ fraud and abuse efforts.  
• Keeps the alliance in working 
order.  
• Oversees state Medicaid agencies. 
• Facilitates communication 
and information sharing 
between the federal 
government and states  
• Establishes a national forum 
for Medicaid fraud and abuse 
issues.  
• Provides ongoing forums and 
training for state officials on 
fraud control.  
HHS (OIG) 
• Oversees state Medicaid Fraud 
Control Units.  
• Investigates federal Medicaid 
fraud cases. 
• Sanctions fraudulent 
providers by imposing 
exclusions and civil monetary 
penalties. 
• Refers investigative findings 
to the DOJ. 
DOJ (U.S. ATTORNEYS)  
• Prosecutes Medicaid fraud cases 
referred by the FBI and OIG.  
• Indicts, negotiates 
settlements, and recovers 
damages. 
DOJ (FBI)  
• Investigates federal fraud cases 
(can’t impose sanctions).  
• Refers investigative findings 
to U.S. Attorneys.  
STATE MEDICAID AGENCY
• Administers state Medicaid 
programs.  
• Conducts pre- and post-payment 
claims reviews. 
• Administers provider 
enrollment processes. 
Program
Integrity Unit 
• Reviews claims data to detect and 
investigates unusual payment 
patterns. 
• Conducts various integrity 
activities. 
• Refers suspected fraud cases 
to the state’s Medicaid Fraud 
Control Unit. 
• Refers civil cases to the state 
Medicaid agency’s collection 
unit. 
MEDICAID FRAUD CONTROL UNIT (MFCU)  
• Investigates and prosecutes cases 
involving Medicaid fraud. 
• Investigates and acts on 
complaints of abuse or neglect of 
patients in facilities receiving 
Medicaid funding. 
• Refers cases that will not be 
prosecuted to the state 
Medicaid agency or other 
authority for administrative 
action.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1247 
Federal Legislation 
The following are some of the most common federal statutes used to prosecute  
Medicaid fraud: 
• The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute 
• The Civil False Claims Act 
• The Stark Law 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
 
State Level Enforcement 
In 1977, Congress devised the Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCU) program, to help 
states counter Medicaid fraud. MFCUs are state law enforcement agencies that investigate 
and prosecute cases involving Medicaid fraud, investigate and act on complaints of abuse or 
neglect of patients in facilities receiving Medica id funding, and refer cases, which will not be 
prosecuted, to the state Medicaid agency or other authority for administrative action. The 
only way a state can keep from establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud 
in their state. 
 
Under MFCU program, each state is to implement its own MFCU. The federal government 
subsidizes each state’s program with 90 percent of the monies necessary to get that state’s 
MFCU up and rolling. Three years thereafter, the federal government provides the state’s 
MFCU with 75 percent of its operating costs. The only way a state can keep from 
establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud in their state. 
 
Federal initiatives such as this have helped states effectively curb Medicaid fraud on state and 
local levels. According to the United States Government Accountability Office, for FY 2008, 
state MFCUs recovered more than $1.3 billion in  legal restitution, obtained more than 1,314 
convictions, and excluded 971 individuals from participating in the Medicaid and Medicare 
programs. 
 
To identify and detect Medicaid fraud at any level, fraud examiners must be apprised of 
various Medicaid fraud schemes because such schemes are, often, more stringently regulated 
at the state level.  
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1248                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Electronic Claims Fraud 
Auditing electronic claims may use the same techniques as auditing any other type of health 
care if the original source documents are used. The difference may be that the audit may use 
the information electronically transmitted rather than the original information. If reliance 
could be placed on the information being submitted, then there wouldn’t be any difference. 
However, history has proved that electronic claims can be a fertile source for fraud. 
 
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) is the exchange of electronic data between computers in 
which there is no human interaction. This technology has advanced companies’ ability to 
conduct business by light-years, but it has also provided would-be fraudsters an increased 
opportunity to commit white-collar crimes. 
 
EDI’s origins arise in the 1960s, when many industry groups began to develop EDI 
standards in areas such as purchasing, transportation, and financial transactions. The next 
major step forward came when the Transportation Data Coordinating Committee and the 
National Association of Credit Management’s Credit Research Foundation developed the 
first standards of electronic data interchange. At this time, they have developed over 300 
different standards for individual industries concerning the transmission of EDI. These 
standards are published by the Data Interchange Standards Association.  
 
Although these standards have been adopted and used worldwide by a multitude of different 
industries, the health care industry has been notoriously slow in adopting the new 
technology. Only now have a handful of large health care providers such as Blue Cross Blue 
Shield announced their endorsements of the health care industry conducting business 
electronically. The reasoning behind the reluctance to convert is that the health care system 
is so complicated that a switch in operation procedure of this magnitude would cause 
considerable headache in the early phases. 
 
EDI can be used internally within a business as a way of communication and data transfer 
and it can also be used for the same purposes between different businesses. In the case of 
the health care industry, EDI enables the different companies to send claims, invoices, and 
other vital data that once was shipped in a paper format via airmail. The fact that EDI allows 
for an immediate exchange of data makes the process of submitting and approving health 
care claims much more efficient for the health care industry.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1249 
The health care transactions that will be affected by the emerging of EDI technologies 
include: 
• Claims payment  
• Enrollments 
• Claims submission 
• Eligibility 
• Claim status 
• Crossover COB 
• Health care service review 
• Patient information record 
• Managed care encounter 
• Capitated payment 
• Interactive claim 
• HMO reporting 
• Provider information 
 
In the current health care system, there are over 1,500 insurance companies that process 
over four billion medical claims every year. Because the health care system uses over 450 
different types of forms, it is estimated that in the past, the health care industry spent as 
much as $100 billion per year to process its paperwork. Thus, EDI has the potential to save 
the health care industry from $8 billion to $20 billion every year. It is very simply a more 
efficient way for the health care industry to do business. However, fraud examiners fear that 
a more efficient system also paves the way for more efficient ways to defraud the health  
care industry. 
 
Solid controls must be established to deal with the health care industry’s conversion to EDI 
or the savings that the more efficient system will produce may be gobbled up by bigger fraud 
losses. The electronic conversion of information completely removes paper-based controls. 
 
EDI eliminates the abilities that fraud examiners have to detect fraud in the health care 
industry in three ways: 
• The automation of claims has erased claims professionals’ ability to detect suspicious-
 looking claims. Because they are used to handling the paperwork of claims, EDI 
hampers the claims professional from getting a good picture of the overall nature of an 
account, instead reducing each transaction to individual claims. 
• Because of the impersonal nature of electronic transactions, EDI raises the temptation 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1250                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of would-be fraudsters to commit white-collar crime. 
• EDI leaves no paper trail, making the process of fraud detection difficult for the  
fraud examiner. 
 
The reasons the health care industry is concerned about EDI’s potential to stimulate 
fraudulent activity include: 
• The lack of tools to detect EDI fraud. 
• The variation of health care services precipitates the potential from a plethora of 
dissimilar frauds. 
• The efficiency of EDI allows for more vendors and thus more claims to account for. 
• The swiftness in which transactions take place allow less time to uncover fraud. 
 
In the past, the health care industry has developed sophisticated methods of detecting fraud 
within the paper-based system. Now that the conversion to EDI is taking place, the health 
care industry must find a way to convert those methods to uncovering fraud in the electronic 
format. These methods will only be as sophisticated as the health care industry chooses to 
make them; the less concern that the industry shows for creating fraud indicators, the more 
opportunity they will be giving fraudsters to “beat the system.”   
 
Fraud examiners should not fear that the conversion to EDI will eliminate any fraud-related 
job opportunities. In fact, that conversion will actually open up many fraud examination 
jobs, as the safeguards and red flag system against fraud has not been effectively established 
at this time. Therefore, fraud examiners need to be aware that their jobs include not only 
investigating fraud, but also to creating systems that will effectively deter fraud. 
 
Many new and complicated legal issues are raised as a result of the health care industry’s 
conversion to EDI. Some of the difficult questions that have been pressed include: 
• How does the insurance company prove that all electronic claims are authentic? 
• Who is responsible for errors in electronic health care claims? 
• How does the fraud examiner prove that the contents of an electronic health care claim 
are false? 
• How does the health care industry ensure that all electronic transmissions are received 
exactly as they are sent? 
• What terms and conditions govern electronic claims? 
• How will fraud examiners determine the actual origin of any electronic submission? 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1251 
Because automated claims are quite easily altered, the health care industry must ensure that 
claims are authentic. Fraud examiners must document that claims have been received in the 
same condition in which they were processed if they are to be admissible as evidence.  
 
Some examples of ways to ensure claims’ authenticity include: 
• Data encryption  
• Digital signatures  
• Message authentication codes  
• Prior claims’ history checkups 
• A variety of field checks 
 
The Effects of Prosecution in an Electronic Environment 
EDI creates another type of legal evidence, but the basic legal principles regarding that 
evidence should remain intact. Therefore, the burden falls on the companies of the health 
care industry to demonstrate that its electronic system has proven safeguards that counteract 
fraud. If the system is proven to be reliable, the company can then show that it has created a 
reliable record of transactions. 
 
The greatest weakness within an EDI system is that in the prosecution, a defendant may 
claim that he did not enter the claim or that the claim was mishandled by the health care 
company. Thus, a health care company must maintain the integrity of its electronic records. 
The health care company must have in place several ways to uncover fraud, from automatic 
red flags to intricate fraud analysis programs that pick up on familiar patterns that may 
ultimately lead to fraud. 
 
A health care company must prove the origin of all electronic communication and the 
original content of the transaction. They must also reduce the possibility that the original 
claim’s content can be intentionally or unintentionally compromised. By doing these things, 
the health care industry can effectively use EDI without substantially raising the possibility 
of fraudulent activity. 
 
 
Health Care Compliance Programs 
Recently the government discovered a widespread “upcoding” scheme, in which numerous 
hospitals across the country routinely and fraudulently coded cases in their billing systems 
under a diagnostic related group (DRG) that caused Medicare to overcompensate the 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1252                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
providers by about 28 percent. These “optimization” programs crossed the line of legitimate 
billing and subsequent criminal and civil investigations followed. In dealing with such a large 
number of hospitals, the government utilized compliance programs, also known as corporate 
integrity agreements, to help minimize future instances of fraud without significantly 
damaging a community’s health care needs by sa nctioning or dismissing medical providers. 
 
The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Inspector General 
(OIG), is increasingly using corporate compliance programs in lieu of sanctions to control 
medical providers and related entities who have defrauded federal health care programs.  
 
The OIG has devised model compliance guidelines for hospitals, clinical laboratories, 
durable medical equipment companies, and home health companies. The entire contents of 
those model plans can be located on the United States Department of Health and Human 
Service’s website at www.hhs.gov. 
 
Compliance programs are simply a set of effective internal controls designed to ensure that 
company operations adhere to the guidelines, regulations, and laws affecting the 
organization. Ideally, these internal controls should complement controls that already are in 
place within the accounting system. This is imperative because many problems OIG 
investigates center around the financial operations of the company, such as billing and 
collections. Compliance efforts are meant to encourage a culture that fosters prevention, 
detection, and resolution of conduct that is outside established company policies. The 
Federal Sentencing Guidelines also encourage compliance programs in order to reduce 
criminal fines and penalties. 
 
The sentencing guidelines and the Department of Health and Human Services model plans 
have some basic characteristics to which a compliance program should adhere. The seven 
basic elements include: 
• Develop and distribute policies that define standards and procedures to be followed by 
the organization’s agents and employees. Specifically, the organization should establish 
standards of conduct that emphasize the organization’s commitment to compliancy in 
areas such as Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) regulations; fraud and 
abuse laws; federal, state, and local laws; and corporate ethical policies, mission, and 
goals. Annually circulate to every employee a standards of conduct statement that 
requires the signatures of all directors, officers, managers, employees, and contractors 
certifying that they have read, understand, and agree to comply with its terms;  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1253 
• Designate or hire a high-level employee who has ultimate responsibility to operate and 
monitor the compliance program and to report directly to the CEO or governing body. 
This employee would be much like the company’s own internal inspector general; 
• Use reasonable care to identify sanctioned providers and remove those individuals from 
any activity that would violate a law or regulation. This can be done by dismissing the 
provider or reassigning him to an area of the company that does not have direct contact 
with patients covered by government insurance, or to an area that is neither directly nor 
indirectly reimbursed by a government program. If a sanctioned party works in the 
supply division, and part of the costs of that division are allocated on the Medicare cost 
report, then this could constitute a violation;  
• Require regular training programs for all employees and contractors. Each entity should 
have some policy for educating managers, executives, and employees about fraud. This 
can be conducted during employee orientation and/or through ongoing training 
programs and other company communication methods. Initial and annual training for all 
staff, especially for those in the marketing, sales, and billing departments, is essential. 
Training should focus on billing policies and procedures, application of federal rules and 
regulations, disciplinary actions for non-compliance, personal responsibility of every 
employee to comply, CMS policies and procedures, and fraud and abuse laws; 
• Use various kinds of monitoring and proactive auditing systems to detect fraud and 
unusual trends to ensure compliance. There are many statistical aberrations that an 
experienced fraud examiner can monitor in a proactive manner to identify potential 
problem areas, such as noticeable variations in billing patterns. For instance, if suddenly 
there is a 200 percent increase in billing for physician consultations, the fraud examiner 
may wish to review those services to determine if simple office visits are being 
characterized fraudulently as more complex — and thus, more lucrative - consultations; 
• Establish and publicize a reporting system in which employees can report criminal 
conduct without fear of retribution (hotline or ombudsman program). Each employee in 
the company should know where to report suspicious, unethical, or illegal behavior. 
Steps should include establishing a self-disclosure policy, which outlines procedures for 
reporting law violations to the appropriate authorities, and a records retention policy, 
which sets standards on how long records should be stored and in what format 
(electronic media, original paper document, etc.). The Office of Inspector General also 
has a Provider Self-disclosure Program (discussed in detail in the Federal Register dated 
Oct. 30, 1998) that offers a cooperative effort in reporting problems; 
• Develop a system to respond to allegations, investigate those allegations, and, if needed, 
carry out the appropriate disciplinary measures. Be consistent and also discipline 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1254                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
individuals who fail to detect the offense due to negligence. The compliance program 
should outline specifically who will investigate suspected irregularities, and to whom 
these irregularities will be reported (i.e., management, internal investigators, law 
enforcement, and/or legal counsel); and 
• Regularly review for systemic weaknesses in company operations and/or policies and 
make changes as needed. 
 
Essentially, what a compliance program is designed to do is provide insurance for the 
provider. By taking every reasonable and prudent step possible, a provider will have 
demonstrated to a prosecutor, judge, or jury that he has taken steps to prevent fraudulent 
activity from pervading his operations. Consequently, the damage to a provider’s reputation, 
pocketbook, and freedom can be controlled and minimized to the fullest extent possible. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Bankruptcy Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1301 



:


health care fraud
accord to the center for medicaid and medicar servic cm total health care
expenditur ar estim to have reach approxim 25 trillion by the end of 2009
and ar project to rise to over 45 trillion by 2019 and compris 193 percent of gross
domest product gdp per person health spend is expect to reach over 8600 by
the end of 2011 and is project to increas to 13400 by the end of 2019
health care spend continu to increas much faster than the overal economi thi gap
between health care spend and the overal economi is on of the main reason that fraud
in the health care industri is so preval accord to the us govern account
offic gao the most common estim of health insur fraud is 10 percent of our
total health care spend howev becaus no on know exactli what the figur is the
figur ha also been estim to be from 310 percent per year health care provid
perpetr the major of thi fraud
law relat to health care fraud
numer crimin and civil feder and state law ar avail in the prosecut of health
care fraud in addit regulatori agenc ar also avail for licensur action
feder crimin law
health insur portabl and account act
as part of the health insur portabl and account act hipaa of 1996
congress made a number of chang to the feder crimin code in fact the promulg
of hipaa wa the first massiv sweep to wipe out health care fraud
the act establish sever crimin statut relat specif to health care fraud under
hipaa there ar five feder crime direct at health care fraud specif hipaa made
it illeg for anyon to knowingli and willfulli
carri out a scheme to defraud ani health care benefit program 18 usc 1347
steal or embezzl ani fund properti or monei of a health care benefit program 18 usc 669
make fals statement relat to health care matter 18 usc 1035
obstruct a crimin investig of a health care offens 18 usc 1518
health care fraud financi transact
11202 2011 fraud examin manual
more specif under section 1347 which establish a feder offens of health care
fraud it is illeg for anyon to
knowingli and willfulli
execut or attempt to execut
a scheme or artific intend to
defraud a health care benefit program or
by fals or fraudul mean obtain monei or properti own by or under the
custodi or control of ani health care benefit program
the term health care benefit program as us in these statut is defin to mean ani public or
privat plan or contract affect commerc under which ani medic benefit item or
servic is provid to ani individu and includ ani individu or entiti who is provid a
medic benefit item or servic for which payment mai be made under the plan
or contract
the act also provid that a judg order a person convict of a feder health care offens
to forfeit ani properti that can be trace from the proce receiv from the offens more
inform concern these statut is set out in the law section
moreov pursuant to it purpos in provid fund to combat health care fraud hipaa
launch the fraud and abus control program which
coordin feder state and local law enforc program to control fraud and
abus as applic to medicaid program
conduct investig audit evalu and inspect as thei relat to deliveri and
payment for medicaid servic
modifi and establish safe harbor provis
issu advisori opinion and special fraud alert and
provid report and disclosur requir of advers action under the health
care fraud and abus data collect program
furthermor as part of the implement of hipaa the secretari of the depart of
health and human servic hh wa direct to creat the health integr and
protect data bank hipdb the hipdb is a report mechan that allow user to
access and review final advers action taken against practition provid and supplier
access to the data bank howev is limit to feder and state govern agenc and
health plan
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11203
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut 42 usc 1320a7bb
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut also known as the feder healthcar
antikickback act mai also be us to combat healthcar fraud thi statut prohibit an
individu from make payment to induc the purchas of healthcar good or servic that
will be paid for by a feder health care program specif the statut prohibit
the know and will
payment or receipt of ani form of remuner includ kickback bribe and
rebat
to induc someon to recommend or to purchas order or recommend ani servic that
mai be paid for under a feder health care program
the statut encompass a veri broad arrai of activ that can be classifi as medicaid
fraud it appli to all feder fund health care program not just medicaid
the statut crimin penal individu who actual receiv as well as those who mere
solicit medicaid remuner so long as the defend intent is know and will and
hi mean of involv includ the receipt or solicit of the kickback the crime is
prosecut but gener it is difficult to determin whether the defend intend to act
knowingli and willfulli and neither knowingli nor willfulli is defin in the statut
thu their interpret ar left for the court to deciph and thi ha inher led to
discrep in determin a defend intent
the follow exampl ar type of activ that typic violat the medicar and
medicaid antikickback statut
payment for medicaid patient referr
payment from a selfreferr joint ventur to investor for medicaid patient referr
involv in a consign agreement wherebi perform under the agreement is
base upon a percentagebas compens scheme
a physician who perform littl or no servic to medicaid patient yet receiv larg
amount of monei for refer those patient to hospit under ostens servic
contract
the stark law physician selfreferr
the stark law also known as the physician self referr law attempt to limit the abil of
physician to profit from their referr by prohibit physician from refer
medicaremedicaid patient for design health servic dh entiti with which the
health care fraud financi transact
11204 2011 fraud examin manual
physician or hi immedi famili member ha a financi relationship the law wa pass in
two phase
stark i wa enact as part of the omnibu budget reconcili act of 1989 it prohibit
a physician from refer a patient to a clinic laboratori with which he or an immedi
famili member ha a financi relationship
stark ii provid addit amend and expand the referr and bill prohibit
to addit design health servic it strengthen stark is prohibit on physician
referr from certain design health servic dh entiti with which the physician or
hi immedi famili member ha a financi relationship
as relat to medicaid stark ii prohibit a physician in exchang for a payment of equiti or
reduct of debt without an except to make
a medicaid referr
a medicaid claim or
compens arrang
in addit to these codifi requir state often supplement the feder requir
with more stringent state requir for exampl in pennsylvania physician ar
prohibit from make ani automat referr whether thei ar enunci in direct or
indirect agreement with other health provid
despit the gener rule that physician cannot profit from their referr there ar sever
except and safe harbor provis to protect physician from make certain referr in
part these except includ referr to and from physician in the same group practic
same inoffic ancillari servic prepaid plan legitim person servic arrang
and physician recruit
although stark ii appear to mimic the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut the
two law ar differ first unlik the antikickback act which appli to all individu
stark ii onli appli to physician and their famili member second where the medicar
and medicaid antikickback statut provid crimin penalti for it violat stark ii is
codifi as a civil statut and therefor onli impos monetari penalti suspens and
termin final under stark ii each medi caid entiti provid item or servic for
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11205
payment must compli with report requir and disclos inform relat to the
entiti ownership invest and compens arrang
violat of stark ii mai subject a defend to 15000 for each servic improperli bill
or claim 100000 for particip in a circumvent arrang or scheme exclus
from particip as a provid in medicaid program andor a penalti of 10000 each dai
report is delinqu
fals claim and statement
though there is a statut specif design to combat fals claim in connect with
health care benefit program the feder fals claim statut mai be us to combat certain
type of health care fraud some exampl of fals claim and statement includ
falsifi contractor qualif
fals certif or assur
fals record or invoic
invoic from nonexist compani
claim made in duplic or alter invoic
bill for fictiti employe
bill for good and servic not provid
inflat cost or substitut of cheaper good
although these statut ar discuss in more detail in the law section of the fraud
examin manual thi discuss will provid a brief overview of the main fals claim and
statement statut us to combat health care fraud includ fals statement under
section 1001 the crimin fals claim act and the civil fals claim act
fals statement 18 usc 1001
although there ar a number of feder statut that prohibit make fals claim and
statement to the feder govern the term fals statement usual refer to the feder
fals statement statut laid out in section 1001 of titl 18 unit state code briefli
state the law prohibit a person from ly to or conceal inform from a feder
offici
under section 1001 a fals statement can be oral written sworn or unsworn sign or
unsign the fals statement howev must be about a materi fact and it must be
health care fraud financi transact
11206 2011 fraud examin manual
capabl of influenc the outcom of the agenc action the element of a typic section
1001 violat ar set forth below
the defend made a fals statement or us a fals document
that wa materi
regard a matter within the jurisdict of ani agenc of the unit state
with knowledg of it falsiti
the crimin fals claim act 18 usc 287
thi statut make it illeg to present or make ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim
against ani agenc or depart of the unit state the crime is complet when the
claim is present and payment of the claim is not an element of the offens
to establish violat of thi statut the govern must establish all of the follow
element
the defend made or present
ani claim that wa fals fictiti or fraudul
the defend knew the claim wa fals fictiti or fraudul
violat of thi statut mai be imprison not more than five year and subject to a fine of
250000
the civil fals claim act 31 usc 3729 et seq
the fals claim act 31 usc 3729 through 3733 is a civil statut that gener
provid liabil for fals statement and represent made to an offic or employe of
the feder govern as the civil counterpart to the crimin fals claim act it provid
a separ civil caus of action that mai be taken in addit to a crimin prosecut
the civil fals claim act provid in part that a person who violat it provis is liabl
to the govern for ani trebl damag it sustain and a civil penalti of 5000 to 10000
per fals claim
the penalti for violat of the act rang from 5000 to 10000 plu up to three time
the amount of the govern damag in addit violat mai be suspend from
particip in medicaid program
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11207
in addit to allow the govern to recov penalti and damag for fals claim
the civil fals claim act allow a privat parti to prosecut a civil action against the
perpetr on behalf of the govern thi is call a qui tam action and is discuss in
further detail below
the most commonli prosecut act under the statut result from the follow
the receipt of fals or fraudul claim paid by the govern
the us of fals or fraudul record or statement to avoid payment to the govern
to bring an action under the civil fals claim act stem from medicaid fraud there
must be a fals statement or represent in connect with either of the follow
the wrong dispos of medicaid asset
solicit or payment of medicaid claim
even if a state medicaid program is admini stere exclus by the state becaus the
program is subsid with feder fund all fals or fraudul claim submit to the
state medicaid program fall within the guis of the civil fals claim act as claim against
the feder govern
the follow exampl ar typic violat under the civil fals claim act
physician bill for servic provid by resid as if the servic were perform by
the physician
bill for upcod medic servic cover by medicaid
market and sell bundl test necessa ry and unnecessari test to refer
physician who then bill medicaid at a higher rate than author
misdiagnos medicaid beneficiari as have medic condit and then bill for
servic that wouldnt otherwis be cover
comput fraud
section 1030 of titl 18 us code mai also be us to combat health care fraud scheme
involv comput under thi section ani scheme that us a comput as the instrument
or vehicl by which fund could be illeg transfer or us a comput to obtain
confidenti inform mai be prosecut
health care fraud financi transact
11208 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
an insur compani employe gener a fals claim in the compani comput make a
fraudul payment to a friend who then share the bounti with the employe
monei launder
the monei launder statut mai also be effect in deter and punish individu
who commit health care fraud section 1956 of titl 18 us code crimin financi
transact involv proce of unlaw activ properti qualifi as the proce of
illeg activ if it is deriv from a specifi unlaw activ which hipaa amend to
includ health care offens
us the feder monei launder statut is benefici becaus thei allow the govern
to seiz properti through civil forfeitur ie the govern mai seiz properti befor
judgment to ensur it will be secur until a hear can be held
the text of the monei launder statut can be found in the law section of the fraud
examin manual
other feder statut
the follow feder law ar also commonli us in the prosecut of health care fraud
case more detail on each of these statut can be found in the law relat to fraud
chapter in the law section of the fraud examin manual
mail and wire fraud titl 18 usc 1341 1343 mail and wire fraud make it a crime
to us the mail or wire commun to perpetr a scheme to defraud a victim of
monei or properti eg present a fals claim to medicar state health plan or privat
insur
conspiraci titl 18 usc 371 titl 18 usc 286 section 286 make it a crime for
two or more peopl to agre or conspir to defraud the unit state by obtain or
aid in obtain payment or allow of ani fals fictiti or fraudul claim
obstruct of feder audit titl 18 usc 1516 thi statut origin pass in 1988
make it a feloni for anyon to influenc obstruct or imped a feder auditor in the
perform of hi offici duti thi statut is relev to health care fraud becaus
audit ar the main tool us by the govern to monitor healthcar provid
perform and ar gener the first step in ani health care fraud investig
racket influenc and corrupt organ rico statut titl 18 usc 19611968
rico outlaw the invest of illgotten gain in anoth busi enterpris the
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11209
acquisit of an interest in an enterpris through certain illeg act and the conduct of
the affair of an enterpris through such act
electron fund transfer act titl 15 usc 1693n section 1693n appli to paperless
monei transfer between account and in gener it attach crimin liabil to the act
of give fals or inaccur inform under the bank law and regul and
fail to provid inform requir under the bank law and regul
civil remedi
there ar mani feder statut that victim of health care fraud can us to obtain relief the
fals claim act and rico both provid for civil remedi in addit to crimin penalti
in addit on of the most effect remedi is avail under the civil monetari
penalti law 42 usc 1320a7a under thi law administr action can be invok
against provid who defraud ani feder fund program by file fals claim or other
improp bill practic ani person includ an organ agenc or other entiti
but exclud a beneficiari who violat the law is subject to civil monetari penalti
violat can be fine up to 10000 for each medic servic that wa fraudul
repres and thei mai be exclud from particip in govern program
state statut
although fraud is illeg in everi state not all state have specif legisl against insur
fraud law such as grand theft scheme to defraud or fraud by decept must be
us to charg offend nineteen state have pass legisl that specif prohibit
insur fraud although the effect vari accord to the provis in each statut
for exampl in some state health insur fraud is illeg but there is no immun to the
insur compani for report fraud
the nation associ of insur commission naic adopt the insur
fraud prevent model act the kei provis includ
mandatori report of fraud
immun from prosecut for report fraud
make insur fraud a feloni under state law
requir a fraud warn on claim form
requir antifraud initi includ mandatori special investig unit
restitut to the victim
health care fraud financi transact
11210 2011 fraud examin manual
regulatori board
sinc most medic practition ar requir to be licens by their state to practic the
regulatori board have jurisdict over the license and can take action when appropri
the regulatori board will take action when the patient health is in jeopardi fraud ha
been commit continu educ requir ar not met or other similar
circumst in most instanc when a license is convict of fraud it is not automat
that hi licens is suspend or revok a separ action and investig must be
complet for that to happen in mani case howev when there is not enough evid
to sustain a crimin convict the licens board mai be abl to take action and offer
relief
run and cap legisl
mani state have enact legisl to prevent attornei from us runner or capper to
solicit busi although state disciplinari rule gener prohibit thi practic veri few
attornei have receiv ani substanti sanction some state such as california have taken
the initi to crimin run and cap
under a california law pass in juli 1993 insur compani now have the right to bring
a lawsuit against ani person who hire runner or capper to procur client or patient to
obtain worker compens benefit in code 19717 thi action need not be brought
in the insur compani name instead the insur compani can act on behalf of the
peopl of the state of california
fraud by the insur compani
fraud commit by insur compani includ some of the follow
submiss of fals document and improp bill
mishandl claim
failur to pai legitim claim
charg unapprov rate
request rate increas base on fraudul data
us illeg or decept tactic to sell insur
failur to give fee break
patient screen
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11211
submiss of fals document
if the insur compani act as an intermediari for the payer such as medicar then the
insur compani commit fraud when it improperli bill the govern or submit fals
cost report or audit
mishandl claim
mishandl claim also aris primarili in the area of an insur compani act as an
intermediari administ the insur program of the payer the insur compani is
under a duti to try to detect fals claim although it is imposs to detect everi fraudul
claim if a compani bypass it own claim verif procedur it can be guilti of fraud
failur to pai legitim claim
the insur compani or carrier is requir to pai ani claim that is properli submit
contain all the requir the inform absent of fraud and ha benefit avail an
insur compani might commit fraud when claim ar consist reject even though
the requir inform ha been submit mani state have regul regard the
amount of time an insur compani ha to pai a clean claim on that ha all the
need inform even if an insur ha commit fraud in the past and for some
reason or anoth is still an insur the insur compani must still adjud a valid
claim
charg unapprov rate
some state requir insur compani to obtain approv on their premium rate until
the approv is receiv the rate cannot be charg to the insur an insur compani
mai improperli begin charg the unapprov rate befor it is allow to
request rate increas base on fraudul data
similar to the abov insur compani or carrier need regulatori approv for rate
increas us cost data to justifi their increas in order to get their rate hike thei mai us
fraudul cost data
decept or illeg sale practic
insur compani mai promot or condon decept or illeg sale practic in order to
increas sale the most common exampl is to disguis an insur polici as a save plan
or invest
health care fraud financi transact
11212 2011 fraud examin manual
failur to give fee break
an insur compani mai be guilti of fraud if it fail to pass on fee break it negoti
with it provid the alleg overcharg occur when an insur compani negoti a
discount on a medic bill if the compani doe not pass along the discount the consum
copay is made on the full price rather than the discount price and the consum
end up pai a higher percentag of their bill than thei should for exampl if a bill is
1000 and a 50 percent discount is negoti the consum 20 percent portion should
equal 100 if the compani doe not pass along the discount the consum pai 20 percent
of the full 1000 or 200
patient screen
in the manag care environ becaus so much emphasi is place on prevent care
some insur compani mai be reduc their risk by limit their insur to onli
healthi patient
detect
detect of fraud commit by an insur compani mai includ the follow
review complaint by insur
compar financi statement data to data us to request rate
compar rate charg with rate approv
compar discount negoti with provid with the amount allow on the claim
and coinsur charg
review reject member to determin if underwrit guidelin were abus
employe claim fraud
employe of insur especi claim examin and custom servic repres can
present addit problem to the fraud examin due to their abil to access claim and
subscrib file the fraud perpetr can be almost limitless
claim fraud us the employe contract
claim fraud us anoth insur contract number
claim payment us a rel contract
claim adjust system
payment for cancel contract or deceas insur
improp paye
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11213
claim fraud us the employe contract
claim employe gener have access to claim data and claim form thei can sometim
adjust claim or pull someon claim chang the claimant contract number and have the
claim process
claim fraud us anoth insur contract number
employe who have access to insur enrol file can locat an insur with a similar
name as the employe from there the employe onli ha to complet a claim form and
submit the claim through the regular process system the employe onli ha to put hi
own address in order to receiv the payment
claim payment us a rel contract
employe can fabric claim and submit them under a rel contract number
claim adjust system
claim that ar legitim paid incorrectli need to be adjust an adjust examin can
adjust a claim for fraudul purpos also
payment for cancel contract or deceas insur
if an adjust ha access to the enrol file he mai run across a deceas insur by
submit or process a claim befor cancel an examin can manipul the claim
system and divert payment to himself
improp paye
a claim approv overrid a claim payment system and pai out claim to improp paye
the claim approv insert her son and daughterinlaw as paye check ar submit to
other than the insur address
detect
the follow step can be us to determin if a compani is deal with an employe who
is defraud the system
pull highdollar claim payment for insur investig all unusu pattern by
verifi servic
review printout for special paye code to search for employe
review printout for a high number of adjust claim per insur
health care fraud financi transact
11214 2011 fraud examin manual
review printout of recent cancel contract for unusu claim activ just prior to
cancel
onc unusu activ ha been identifi follow normal investig procedur
review address chang list for employe name or unusu activ
agent fraud
nearli all insur compani us the servic of a broker or agent extern to the firm
unfortun the best interest of the insur compani ar not alwai serv sever
scheme have been identifi that can be classifi as fraudul
phoni group
agent will set up bogu compani in order to sell health insur to individu at
group rate
phoni or nonexist polici
rather than go to the troubl of set up a bogu compani mani agent will sell a
phoni polici and take the monei and run
medic underwrit fraud
the broker will write a polici know that the client ha preexist condit that would
prevent accept for coverag
elig fraud
a broker mai seek to add inelig famili member girlfriend or associ to a group
polici by repres them as employe
anoth elig fraud is where a broker mai sell a lowcost group polici to an
organ that emploi a small percentag of peopl with seriou health problem a
better rate can be obtain by separ healthi peopl from sick peopl the broker split
off the unhealthi peopl in their own group place the coverag with an insur of last
resort such as a carrier that is given favor tax statu in exchang for issu coverag
to anyon
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11215
erisa fraud
the employe retir incom secur act regul all trust account held by an
employ for the purpos of pai benefit such as retir annuiti or health and life
polici under the act if an insur compani believ that a plan administr is
engag in violat of the act it is requir to report the matter to the us depart
of labor as an exampl a corpor mai us fund collect from employe through
payrol deduct to financ daili oper of the compani
payment induc
these scheme involv broker furnish group coverag to individu who would not
otherwis qualifi for such polici by ad them to legitim group or establish a
fictiti group for the purpos of obtain waiver andor cheaper rate the broker
profit not onli from the normal sale commiss but also from a surcharg or bill
fee that is ad to the publish premium that is collect from the polici holder by the
broker in anoth scenario a broker mai charg a markup for ad employe to a
legitim group
switch polici
thi scheme involv the agent tell the custom that thei ar obtain on polici
take the premium for that polici and then bui a cheaper polici with less coverag
instead the agent then pocket the differ
provid fraud
provid fraud is a fraud perpetr by medic practition medic supplier or medic
facil on patient or custom in order to increas their own incom by illicit mean
the potenti for fraud involv provid ha grown with the increas us of comput
equip in gener bill addition provid possess the knowledg of medic
techniqu procedur and terminolog need to avoid be question by claim
handl personnel more insur compani ar contract directli with provid for
bill arrang leav patient out of the loop in addit patient ar usual
reluct to accus physician of wrongdo becaus thei reli on the provid continu
servic and becaus when provid engag in fraudul practic thei often forgiv ani
outofpocket expens the patient incur
health care fraud financi transact
11216 2011 fraud examin manual
roll lab
a roll lab is a mobil laboratori that solicit insur to particip in health screen test
at no cost to the insur these lab ar usual locat in semitrail park at health
club spa shop center or on vacant properti
patient ar contact by telephon for a free physic exam subsequ to exam the
insur compani is bill for eight to 10 claim total 800010000 for a singl date
of test perform by multipl provid addit claim ar bill for later servic date
even though no more test is done the lab move to anoth locat prior to the patient
receiv the test result to avoid detect
the provid market their servic in mani wai on wai is to rent offic space in a
doctor offic for on dai and then test all of that doctor patient the test equip
itself might arriv in a truck or van and move from on offic to anoth anoth method
involv set up a temporari oper in a shop center roll lab ar also set up at
health spa with all member test at no charg the most common method howev is to
simpli set up a small offic for a temporari period and us telephon solicit
clinic lab
clinic lab have devis fraudul bill practic to encourag physician to order
unnecessari test on patient the scheme caus specif blood test to be includ in a
panel of frequent order test the order physician pai noth or a nomin fee for
the extra test the test ar then unbundl and bill separ by the lab to govern
payer and insur compani
supplier
ambul transport
fraudul bill for ambul transport can includ bill for more mileag than
incur for trip never taken or for noncov trip
infus care
fraud scheme involv infus care treatment includ
servic bill at abnorm high rate in comparison to cost
bill for noncov patient
bill in excess of physician prescript
bill for unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11217
kickback given to the prescrib physician
durabl medic equip supplier
fraud scheme perpetr by supplier of durabl medic equip frequent involv
falsifi prescript
excess suppli
equip not deliv or bill befor deliveri
bill for equip rental after equip wa return
noncov suppliesfor exampl incontin care kit
milk supplement scam
lymphedema pump
scooter scam
home health compani
fraud involv home health care compani gain nation exposur after the feder
govern investig of abc home health care wa releas at the time of the
investig abc wa the largest privat held home health care provid in the unit
state in 1994 abc made some 78 million visit and bill medicar 6159 million
among the type of fraud identifi at abc were
medic record were alter to make it appear that patient continu to need home
health visit
manag direct employe to continu vi site patient who in the employe
opinion did not qualifi for home health care becaus thei were not homebound
a manag direct a nurs to record visit that were never made
a manag forg physician signatur on plan of care
if a care plan wa sign by a physician employe would alter the number of visit
abc reportedli charg medicar for the cost of acquir other home health agenc
by pai owner a small sum up front and the balanc in salari under the form of
employ agreement
manag direct employe to market abc and it servic with the intent of charg
medicar for cost that were not reimburs
pharmaci
fraud scheme stem from pharmaci transact includ
merchandis substitut someth of valu for a prescript drug
bill for brand name drug but dispens gener drug
health care fraud financi transact
11218 2011 fraud examin manual
bill beyond amount prescrib
bill for drug not prescrib
bill for a highpric gener drug but dispens a lowerpr gener drug
packag size differentialbil thirdparti payer for the price of drug purchas in
small packag size when thei were purchas at less cost in larger quantiti
black market purchasingpurchas drug at significantli reduc rate then
dispens at regular price
chiropractor
dishonest chiropractor mai engag in fraud scheme such as
bill for servic never render or unnecessari servic
bill for multipl famili member
purchas individu contract for their patient
bill for physic therapi servic when contract doe not cover chiropractor
bill for excess servic
exampl
while certain treatment by chiropractor ar usual not cover by insur similar
treatment by physician mai be cover to correct thi perceiv inequ some
chiropractor have set up medic corpor and then hire medic doctor as employe
the chiropractor is ceo of the corpor and ha total discret of how the fund ar
disburs the net result of thi setup is that a medic doctor give the stamp of approv
to charg that might not otherwis be paid and the chiropractor reap the profit
chiroshenanigan
patient for life
charg annual fee that exce 5000 practic manag firm teach chiropractor
how to build milliondollar practic in as littl as two year the literatur advis the
chiropractor not to tell patient the result of their initi exam or how long thei will need
treatment until theyv been indoctrin into the benefit of lifelong chiropract care
further thei promot care of infant that will continu for the lifetim of the patient
patient who question the continu of treatment ar given the guilti treatment it a
choic you have to make depend on how import your health is to you
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11219
patient dont seem to be cure until the insur benefit run out when benefit ar
renew in the next calendar year the symptom return and a new seri of treatment
begin until benefit run out again
patient recruit practic
some chiropractor us question recruit practic to lure new patient into their
practic these might includ
coupon for free meal where the benefit of chiropract care ar explain
advertis for free initi care
booth at health fair mall and spa offer free screen
treatment for nonspin condit
at on time chiropractor onli treat spinal problem howev mani chiropractor now
claim that thei can treat ani medic condit includ cancer hernia pneumonia
anemia and heart condit for exampl on chiropract pamphlet state if you ar
suffer from kidnei diseas the logic cours is to visit your chiropractor he will
examin your spine to see where your troubl is
other question chiropract treatment
other type of question chiropract treatment includ
surrog test where the leg of a mother is flex to diagnos her child ill
spinal manipul of newborn babi to get over the trauma of birth
spinal manipul to treat epilepsi asthma bedwet and learn disabl
appli kinesiolog wherebi diseas can be diagnos by test muscl with the help
of particular food or nutrient
analysi of xrai to identifi homicid tendenc
the creation of a treatment plan prior to examin
spinal manipul begun at an earli ag to prevent cancer
iridolog or the examin of patient ey for mark that will indic what
diseas the patient ha or will get
a magnet devic place over the thymu gland to diagnos nutrient defici
red flag
warn sign that a chiropractor mai be engag in dishonest practic includ a
chiropractor who
take full spine or repeat xrai
health care fraud financi transact
11220 2011 fraud examin manual
prescrib treatment befor a medic histori or physic ar taken
solicit famili member
promis to prevent diseas through regular checkup
promis no outofpocket expens for patient
end treatment when their insur benefit ar exhaust but recontact patient for
mainten treatment when their benefit ar renew
podiatrist
like other medic provid uneth podiatrist mai
bill for servic never render
bill for noncov servic
provid kickback to supplier
ophthalmologist
ophthalmol ogist mai engag in fraudul practic such as
bill for servic never render and noncov servic
bill for unnecessari servic
psychiatrist and psychiatr clinic
fraud scheme commit by psychiatrist and psychiatr clinic can includ
bill for servic never render
bill for noncov servic such as weight loss servic or biofeedback
bill for servic under psychiatrist name when the servic wa actual perform by
a noncov but licens provid such as a drug counselor or minist
bill for servic perform by an unlicens employe
admit patient with fals diagnos
anesthesiologist
dishonest anesthesiologist mai bill for more time than wa render
dental fraud
fraud involv dental provid might includ bill for
xrai that were not taken
crown that were not cement
amalgam for teeth that were not fill
teeth that were not extract
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11221
fill for teeth that have previous been extract
more fill than a person can possibl have
allergist
fraud scheme involv allergist can includ bill for
allergi test not perform
unnecessari servic
allergi shot not given
infertil treatment
infertil treatment is gener not a servic cover by insur howev some lessthanhonest
provid will bill such servic as hormon replac therapi in order to
be paid
impostor provid
an impostor provid is a provid who doe not exist but bill fraudul claim a variat
on thi scam involv assum the identifi of a deceas provid and practiceor put
togeth a group of licens providersand fraudul bill under the group provid
identif code
investig tip
to help determin whether a provid is an impost
call the telephon number on the bill to determin if the provid exist howev keep
in mind that a fictiti provid mai actual have rent a locat and establish a
telephon number
contact the applic licens board or state to determin if the alleg provid wa
licens to practic in the area at the time the servic wa allegedli provid
check the provid social secur number or tax identif number if list on
the bill with the applic licens board
visit the provid physic address to determin if it is valid if it is speak to the
superintend to determin the tenant for that address
contact the postal inspector to verifi what mail is be drop at that address
health care fraud financi transact
11222 2011 fraud examin manual
fals diagnos
when a provid know that a servic is not cover he mai us fals diagnos or
procedur code manipul to get a claim for the servic paid exampl of common
servic not cover ar
annual physic examin
school physic
weight loss program
stop smoke program
investig or experiment procedur
cosmet surgeri
in addit physician mai justifi the order of expens xrai or other diagnost
servic by fals purport that a need exist to make such diagnost inquiri the
servic ar render but becaus is the claim for the servic is base on fals inform
and is us to deceiv the insur compani it is consid a fals claim
red flag of provid fraud
warn sign that a provid is engag in fraudul practic includ
pressur for rapid adjud of claim
threat of legal action for delai in make payment
frequent telephon inquiri on claim statu
assert provid who demand samedai claim payment and special handl
charg submit for payment with no support document avail such as x
rai or lab result
us of a po box as return address
insur address on claim form is the same as provid
routin not special treatment for patient live more than 150 mile from
the provid
refer physician and provid of servic in same profession corpor
medic record that have been alter
medic record that have addit informat ion attach that would make an appar
noncov servic now cover
miss page of medic record that would cover the period of time under review
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11223
fraud by the medic staff
employe of provid also have an opportun to steal and cover up theft of cash thei
can submit fraudul claim for patient and divert the payment to themselv if thei ar
cover under insur thei can also us their own contract to submit fraudul claim
for mani employe care render by their employ doctor to them or their famili is
free but claim mai be file and assign not accept
anoth scheme involv the provid offic call in order for unneed prescript
drug to pharmaci onc the drug ar pick up thei can be sold for exampl in a case
involv collus between a medic offic employe and an elderli ladi in a retir
commun the elderli ladi had develop a busi sell the drug purchas from the
employe to her friend and neighbor in her commun if the employe is in collus
with an insur the fraudster can collect not onli from the sale of the drug but also from
the proce of insur claim
kickback in the health care industri
kickback in the health care industri can come from sever sourc the medic
commun is face competit that it ha not face in the past and monetari offer to
prospect patient have been difficult to refus for exampl in on south florida
commun incent such as free transport to medic facil shop center and
refresh ar common
exampl of kickback ar
payment for referr of patient
waiver of deduct and copay
payment for insur contract
payment for vendor contract
payment for referr of patient
provid in an area of high competit will pai from 50 to 500 to capper or runner for
recruit new patient in addit patient mai receiv 50 if thei refer a patient to a
provid the provid make up for the kickback in the unnecessari bill of medic
expens or fals claim in addit provid will pai kickback to other physician for
patient referr
health care fraud financi transact
11224 2011 fraud examin manual
waiver of deduct and copay
most insur contract requir patient to pai a deduct and copay for servic
render on of the reason for have copay is to make insur take an activ part
in the financi respons for their care to attract patient howev provid will
forgiv the patient outofpocket expens but will make up for it in addit servic that
ar bill to the insur compani
payment for insur contract
physician with patient who ar face longterm care or lifetim treatment such as dialysi
for kidnei failur mai purchas contract for their patient thi ensur that the provid
will be paid and the patient ha no outofpocket expens
payment for vendor contract
compani do busi with medic practition will pai a consult fee for refer
busi to them or us their suppli
payment to adjust
in order to get a claim settl quickli an insur or someon oper on hi behalf mai
bribe adjust or other claimshandl personnel to approv or speed up the payment of
a claim
inflat bill
health care bill can be inflat by provid as well as insur the follow ar some
of the most common fraud scheme encount by investig and claim approv
alter claim
ad servic
code manipul
alter claim
alter valid claim can be accomplish us a pen photocopi or scanner comput
and printer common alter ar
amount chang
date of servic chang
name of patient chang
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11225
for exampl a medic bill can be alter by place an addit number in front of the
amount charg the date of servic can be alter so that it becom a cover expens
rather than on that wa incur prior to be elig for coverag the individu
submit a claim can chang the name on the bill from a noncov famili member to
on who is cover under the contract
detect
procedur can help identifi alter claim includ
analyz charg and identifi ani excess claim for prescript or medic
servic abov an accept level
look for ani alter erasur chang of ink or whiteout on the origin bill
prior to pai the claim thi is import in todai environ in which origin
bill check and other document ar destroi as soon as thei ar microfilm to
minim storag space for record keep
train adjust to look for obviou alter when process claim
ad servic
some fraudster add on servic never render to date of actual servic in these case
the verif process is the same as the procedur list under the alter process
code manipul
code manipul is a problem that is face by all health insur each servic is identifi
us the american medic associ uniformli accept code system call the
physician current procedur terminolog cpt medicar and most privat insur have
develop fee schedul that us cpt code and their accompani narr descript
as the basi for pai provid
howev becaus the code system is complic provid and insur often have
difficulti identifi the code that most accur describ the servic provid the
code system is difficult to us becaus it attempt to identifi code for all accept medic
procedur includ code to describ minor procedur that ar compon of more
comprehens procedur payment polici add to the difficulti for exampl the fee for
surgeri often includ the cost of relat servic for the global servic period that is for a
set number of dai befor and after the surgeri to prevent overpay in these case
insur need to identifi when claim for surgeri includ code that repres relat
servic and reduc the payment accordingli
health care fraud financi transact
11226 2011 fraud examin manual
it is difficult for provid and insur to maintain profici in proper code practic
becaus a substanti number of the code ar chang each year these complex can
inadvert lead provid to submit improperli code claim thei also make insur
vulner to abus from provid or bill servic that attempt to maxim
reimburs by intention submit claim contain inappropri combin
of code
unbundl chargesfragment
simpl unbundl occur when a provid charg a comprehens code as well as on or
more compon code for instanc in the exampl illustr below the provid would
be overpaid becaus the fee for the total procedur alreadi includ the valu of it
compon part
procedur
code servic bill correctli bill procedur
58150
58720
49000
44955
58740
total hysterectomi 1300
remov of ovari tube 950
explor of abdomen 671
appendectomi 250
lysi of adhes 550
total charg 3721
total hysterectomi
total payment 1300
29877
29870
knee arthroscopi with debrid
1650
diagnost knee arthroscopi 1625
total charg 3275
knee arthroscopi with debrid
total payment 1650
47610
47600
cholecystectomi with common bile duct
explor 1997
cholecystectomi 705
total charg 2702
cholecystectomi with common bile
duct explor
total payment 1997
unbundl can be detect through the us of a comput program that determin
whether each code submit is a compon of on or more comprehens code
mutual exclus procedur
a variat of unbundl thi scam involv bill for procedur that ar
either imposs to perform togeth or by accept standard should not be
perform togeth
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11227
global servic period violat
some dishonest provid will bill for a major proceduresuch as a surgerya well as
relat procedur when the fee for the major procedur alreadi includ the fee for relat
procedur dure the predefin time period the global servic period thi type of fraud
is possibl becaus most surgeri includ all relat servic for a set number of dai befor
and after the surgeri detect these abus can be difficult becaus the examin must
determin which servic ar relat to the surgeri and which ar not thi difficulti is
compound by the fact that such servic mai be render by more than on provid
upcod
upcod is bill for a higher level of servic than wa render on common form of
upcod involv gener substitutionfil a prescript with a less expens drug
while bill for the more expens form of the drug
misus of new patient code
the cpt code system includ special code for new patient visit which enabl the
physician to be reimburs for the addit work that new patient visit typic requir
consequ physician who want to pad their claim mai bill for visit with establish
patient us new patient code
insur fraud
insur mai attempt to perpetr a fraud by submit fictiti claim form
multipl surgeri
multipl offic visit
foreign claim patient supposedli goe out of the countri and fall ill
noncov depend
doctor shop
excess drug claim for control substanc drug patient shop for control
substanc drug on physician doe not know that the other ha prescrib the drug in
addit the patient mai shop for drug in emerg room complain of soft tissu
injuri sprain and strain
health care fraud financi transact
11228 2011 fraud examin manual
misrepresent on applic
failur by insur to list all prior medic condit or group to list medic condit
of employe
thirdparti fraud
thi categori involv an unauthor us of an insur identif card by anoth
known person or unknown person the insur compani is usual notifi by the insur
onc thei receiv a benefit statement work sheet for servic render
death of insur
the primari insur pass awai howev the beneficiari doe not notifi the insur
carrier and continu to submit fictiti claim on medic expens after the death of the
insur
investig tip
determin how the insur lost hi card if stolen the polic should be contact to
determin if the crime wa report a copi of the polic report should be obtain
obtain an actual descript of the cardhold so that identif can be made of the
impostor who us the card improperli
visit the provid or medic doctor to obtain ani inform to identifi
the perpetr
crimin ring
individu crimin infiltr mailroom and ar abl to obtain copi of legitim bill
submit to provid thei subsequ establish a mail drop point or rent an offic and
begin submit fals claim to insur compani by creat fictiti tax identif
number sinc the claimant ar genuin insur compani will normal pai these bill
collus
collus is the most difficult insur fraud to detect sinc sever peopl ar involv in
commit the fraud usual case of thi natur ar disclos by accid or by a tip
receiv from someon who mai have been involv and ha had a fallingout
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11229
ani time a fraud ar commit by insur there is no question on the part of the
perpetr as to the intent to obtain fund to which thei ar not entitl howev it is
also extrem difficult to detect thi type of fraud
detect
excess bill report mai show that a provid is submit larg amount of
expens in addit the claimant request substanti payment to be made to him
rather than the provid
explan of benefit if submit to the provid will probabl gener some
reaction from the provid if substanti at the time that form 1099 is submit to the
provid there mai also be comment by the provid
period manag should compar the membershipenrol file to the social
secur file to determin if the insur compani is pai claim on deceas
insur the membership file also mai be compar to the file from the vital statist
depart to search for divorc policyhold
divorc
an insur and a cover spous file for divorc but neither parti notifi the insur
compani the exspous who remain at the address of record continu to submit claim
foreign insur
a foreign insur submit phoni inform that the primari insur pass awai for the
last month he wa hospit in a foreign hospit and a sizabl bill wa mail to the
carrier for payment
investig tip
the claim file should be review to determin if the charg ar legitim
determin if the medic languag appear to be proper by compar sampl of bona
fide claim
it mai be necessari to submit a letter to the attend physician to determin if the
charg ar correct
through law enforc contact it mai be necessari to obtain inform regard
the legitimaci of the claim
check the style of the date in mani foreign countri date ar list with the dai first
then the month and year eg 070108 would be 7 januari 2008 if the us style of
date is us monthdayyear it mai indic a fraudul claim
health care fraud financi transact
11230 2011 fraud examin manual
detect of extern fraud
misspel medicaldent terminolog
unusu charg for a given servic
similar handwrit by the claimant and the provid of servic
type not print bill head
bill with irregular column
unassign bill that ar normal assign such as larg hospit or surgic bill
type or handwritten hospit bill
drug receipt from the same pharmaci but on differ color paper
erasur or alter
lack of ani provid signatur on a claim form
absenc of the provid medic degre ie dr john doe instead of john doe
md
an illeg provid signatur on the bill submit or the signatur doe not match the
on on file
surgeri that dont have other relat servic such as hospit charg
physician specialti doe not agre with diagnosi
servic bill do not agre with diagnosi
imposs or unlik servic
photocopi bill
other indic that a claim approv or in vestig should be awar of that could
result in identifi a possibl fraud
pressur by a claimant to pai a claim quickli
individu who hand deliv their claim insist on pick up their claim check
threat of legal action if a claim is not paid quickli
anonym telephon call inquiri regard the statu of a pend claim
ident claim for same patient in differ month or differ year
date of servic just prior to termin of enrol or just after enrol
servic bill that do not appear to agre with the medic record
bill for servic or equip that ar clearli unsuit for the patient need
foreign claim list charg in us dollar when that isnt the currenc of that
countri
foreign claim give document in english when english is not the primari
languag spoken
multipl foreign claim for same subscrib
multipl foreign claim from same physicianhospit
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11231
fraud by medic institut
fraud scheme perpetr by institut and their employe includ those commonli
us by doctor and other provid howev the more common scheme in which
hospit ar primarili involv includ
file of fals cost report
drg creep
bill for experiment procedur
improp contractu and other relationship with physician
revenu recoveri firm to knowingli or unknowingli bill extra charg
fals cost report
cost report sometim includ noncov item such as golf out parti and exot
trip disguis as cover item for exampl an investig disclos that a hospit
recov silver from the process of xrai film sold it gave it to the candi striper onli
to have it donat back to the hospit sinc medicar doesnt consid donat as
revenu the hospit wa abl to claim higher expens thu more monei from medicar
inclus of unallow item
expens for tax penalti late charg and promot advertis
cost incur from a relatedparti transact with a markup over the cost incur
by the relatedparti
expens that ar reimburs under other program eg billabl medic suppli and
therapi
excess expens such as hotel food travel expens for recreat event
luxuri item eg lavish furnish corpor plane swim pool spa
drg creep
diagnost relat group drg is a reimburs methodolog for the payment of
institut claim it is a patient classif scheme that categor patient who ar
medic relat with respect to primari and secondari diagnosi ag and complic
reimburs ar determin by the drg for exampl a heart bypass oper is
worth a certain amount of reimburs and a hernia repair is worth a differ amount
drg creep occur when a hospit is code as a more complex admiss than
occur when it becom a pattern and intent is establish it becom fraud
health care fraud financi transact
11232 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth type of fraud us drg code involv bill for the drg code and then bill
again for servic that were includ in the drg payment
bill for experiment procedur
it is report that on form of medic fraud that is littl known but appar widespread
is the thirdparti bill for experi with new medic devic that have not yet been
approv by the food and drug administr some hospit ar deliber mislead
thirdparti payer by get them to pai for the manufactur research mani of the
doctor involv ar alleg to have stock in the manufactur compani
improp relationship with physician
certain relationship between hospit and physician result in fraud to the insur for
instanc a hospit provid no or token reimburs to pathologist for medicar part a
servic in return for the opportun to perform and bill part b servic at that hospit
the follow transact ar gener regard as suspect
payment of ani sort of incent by the hospit each time a physician refer a patient to
the hospit
provis of free or significantli discount bill nurs or other staff servic
free train for a physician offic staff in area such as manag techniqu cpt
code and laboratori techniqu
guarante that provid that if the physician incom fail to reach a predetermin
level the hospit will supplement the remaind up to a certain amount
lowinterest or interestfre loan or loan that mai be forgiven if a physician refer
patient to the hospit
payment of the cost of a physician travel and expens for confer
payment for a physician continu educ cours
coverag on the hospit group health insur plan at an inappropri or veri
low cost
payment for servic such as consult at the hospit that requir few if ani
substant duti by the physician or payment for servic in excess of the fair market
valu of servic render
revenu recoveri firm
anoth form of health care fraud involv socal revenu recoveri firm pad
medic bill these bill consult review patient bill month or even year after
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11233
treatment look for charg that were miss critic have charg that too often these
firm pad medic bill by ad on fictiti charg the more charg that ar ad
onto the bill the more the revenu recoveri firm get paid in addit their employe mai
be paid bonus for pile on extra charg and pressur to meet monthli quota
chang code
on of the most common method us by revenu recoveri firm is to chang everi
hospit or nurs home bill code for instanc chang each code for an ordinari
fivec bandag so that the provid is charg for a 5 surgic dress
ad item
extra charg ar ad onto hospit bill by assum that hospit us certain item
even though there wa no evid of the procedur or servic for instanc if the hospit
had certain procedur for which thei sometim us a piec of xrai equip the auditor
review the bill would alwai assum that the hospit had us the equip and thei
would put it on the bill
kickback
often hospit ar unawar sometim intention of the extent of the fraud commit
by revenu recoveri firm in other case howev revenu firm report that thei will
contact a hospit or nurs home directli and tell them that if the institut will give them
their bill thei will split the profit produc by the ad charg
bill for expens treatment
numer charg for the us of expens treatment such as laser ar ad to patient
bill charg mai be ad after the patient had alreadi been bill for the us of the laser
alter record
in some instanc firm mai actual alter medic record for exampl in on case a firm
ad more than 1300 to a patient bill for video equip that wa supposedli us
dure surgeri in order to justifi the fraudul bill the firm check a box on the
surgic record to indic that the equip had been us after the origin document
wa obtain it show that the box wa not check on the origin form complet by the
surgic staff
health care fraud financi transact
11234 2011 fraud examin manual
donat organ
on hospit which ha ceas us a particular firm report that the firm regularli
doubl bill for servic and treatment and in anoth instanc outsid auditor found
that the firm had tri to charg for dead patient donat their organ
addit anesthesia time
anoth common scheme is the charg of addit hour of anesthesia patient should
be bill from when thei enter the surgeri room to when thei leav the surgeri room the
revenu firm pad the bill by increas the time bill to includ time spent in a recoveri
room or befor the patient went into the oper room
rentapati scheme
so call rentapati scheme involv pai individu to undergo unnecessari
medic procedur that ar then bill to the patient insur rentapati scheme
typic begin with the leas of a sham medic clinic past investig show that these
clinic tend to be nondescript often within shop center and in destitut section of
town almost alwai the lesse of the clinic is involv in the crimin organ of the
scheme onc a sham clinic is in place recruit aka coyot or capper ar hire to
solicit lowincom individu who speak littl english and offer them monei in exchang
for submit to minor surgic procedur recruit ar often former crimin for it is
not as danger to deal patient as it is to deal drug and can be much more lucr
averag 2000 per will particip
exampl
a surgeri center paid hundr of dollar to patient who endur larg unnecessari
oper and then fals charg the go vernment on of the oper involv
collaps the patient lung to snip a nerv that would supposedli control sweati palm
the surgeri did stop the patient notsosweati palm from perspir it also caus the
patient to lose strength in hi hand and sweat profus on other part of hi bodi
recruit will scour lowincom hous project elderli neighborhood and factori for
victim onc recruit have convinc an individu to becom a will particip thei
will request a copi of the individu benefit ca rd to confirm benefit prior to subject the
patient to an unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11235
recruit will drive the patient usual across state line to small out of network sham
clinic along the wai the recruit will advis each patient to describ particular fals and
embellish symptom to the health profession at the clinic such as i sweat too much
my stomach is bother me my nose hurt such descript will later be us by the
scam clinic to creat medic chart justifi a particular surgic procedur follow a
night of fast food and a cheap hotel the patient ar driven to a clinic the patient then
wait in line sign an inform consent form and promis to give the clinic all the check
thereaft receiv follow administr procedur the patient briefli meet with a
doctor and undergo the procedur that have been predetermin for them later that
even or the next dai the recruit will give the patient a few hundr buck and drive
the patient home
after render servic the provid will bill the patient insur compani medicar or
medicaid for the unnecessari procedur beyond the usual and customari cost past
investig evid up to 5000 percent abov averag market price the claim will
like includ fee for surgic suppli and medic equip that were never us or
distribut some insur reimburs patient directli for outofnetwork claim therebi
requir the patient to pai the facil howev becaus the patient target in renta
patient scam ar often indig and believ thei deserv the monei for endur the
unnecessari procedur it is common for them to deposit or cash the check it is a cycl
wherebi the victim ar not onli us to perpetr the fraud but in the end becom
fraudster themselv
insur compani have difficulti determin when rentapati scheme ar be
commit becaus their claim system can onli compar code and cannot determin the
usual and customari cost for a particular procedur to make matter wors some state
have prompt pai law requir claim to be paid within a period of time such as 45dai
rapid claim turnov inevit lead to poor oversight regard fraudrel claim
health care fraud financi transact
11236 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc us gao report health care fraud scheme to defraud medicar medicaid and privat health care
insur juli 2000
what to do
consum educ is the front line to battl rentapati scheme insur
compani must educ their insur on the preval of thi type of fraud and provid
these individu with mean of commun when it is believ fraud is afoot
disadvantag popul must also be inform about the neg impact of
particip in such scheme ie health risk and crimin liabil
insur compani must educ from within investig unit should be establish to
includ skill fraud examin fraud detect softwar program should be purchas to
detect irregular claim pattern an exampl of progress movement toward the fight
against health care fraud is blue cross blue shield establish of the antifraud strike
forc to bring blue plan togeth when face with multijurisdict health care fraud
scheme the program pool resourc insight and intellect from around the countri to
circumv and prosecut rentapati scheme
likewis the feder govern ha implemen ted sever organ and program to
target health care fraud for exampl the health care integr and protect data bank
hipdb is a flag system that alert feder and state govern agenc commenc
with a more thorough review of a practition provid or supplier past deal not
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11237
onli mai feder and state govern review the databas for potenti red flag but also
thei must report the follow inform health carerel civil judgment and crimin
convict in feder or state court injunct administr action particip
exclus and the like failur to report such inform mai subject a health plan to a
civil penalti of up to 25000 for each advers action not report
red flag of rentapati scheme
larg influx of outofst patient to a particular clinic includ cluster of patient
from a particular locat
sever nonrel procedur on a patient in a short period of time eg a colonoscopi
and circumcis on on patient within a few dai or even week
numer claim by a particular clinic for the follow procedur colonoscopi
endoscopi septoplasti circumcis and thoracoscopi with sympathectomi
aka sweati palm surgeri
parallel procedur on famili husband wive and children on the same dai
extrem high staff salari
charg beyond the averag market price for procedur medic equip
and devic
frequent patient with outofnetwork coverag
nurs home
nurs home have becom a multibillion dollar busi in the last few year as such
thei have becom a common target of fraud a wide arrai of provid includ durabl
medic equip supplier laboratori physician optometrist and psychiatrist have
been involv in fraudul or abus bill for servic and suppli furnish to nurs
facil patient most fraudul activ in volv bill for unnecessari or undeliv
servic or misrepres a servic to obtain reimburs
there ar sever featur uniqu to nurs home that make them particularli vulner
to fraud
unscrupul biller of servic can oper their scheme in volum becaus the
patient ar all locat togeth under on roof
in some instanc nurs home make patient record avail to outsid provid
who ar not respons for the direct care of the patient contrari to feder
regul
health care fraud financi transact
11238 2011 fraud examin manual
under the center for medicar and medicaid servic reimburs procedur
provid can bill medicar directli without the nurs facil or attend physician
affirm whether the item were necessari or provid as claim
scrutini of the claim at the processor level is inadequ becaus the autom claim
system us do not accumul data that would time flag indic of improb
high charg or level of servic
even when abus practic ar detect and prosecut repay is rare receiv
from wrongdoer becaus thei usual go out of busi or deplet their resourc so
that thei lack ani resourc to repai the fund
patient person fund ar control by nurs home administr and ar an invit
target for embezzl individu patient gener maintain a rel small
balanc in their person fund account collect howev these fund gener a
consider sourc of incom for an unscrupul nurs home oper or employe
failur of the nurs facil to monitor outsid provid
although nurs home ar requir to perform numer task to monitor patient and
meet their need there ar no requir that nurs home monitor the servic or
suppli provid to their patient these provid ar allow to bill directli without
adequ confirm that the care or item were necessari or were deliv as claim
most nurs facil do not have the inhous capabl to provid all the servic and
suppli their patient need accordingli outsid provid market their servic and
suppli to nurs home to meet the need of their patient typic provid
repres enter the home and offer to handl the entir transactionfrom review
medic record to identifi those patient who need their servic to billingwith no
involv by the nurs facil some home allow provid or their repres to
review patient medic record contrari to feder regul by do so these provid
can obtain all the inform necessari to order bill and be reimburs for servic and
suppli that ar in mani instanc not necessari or even provid
excess reimburs
although carrier do emploi autom control to prevent fraud often question claim
and provid ar not flag befor excess reimburs ar paid in other instanc
provid bill for quantiti of servic or suppli that could not possibl have been
furnish or necessari
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11239
psychiatr hospit fraud
psychiatr hospit ar suscept to fraud becaus of the veri natur of mental health
problem and the manner in which thei ar diagnos and treat unlik the acut care
field it is often difficult to determin whether a person is in need of hospit for
psychiatr treatment
abus in the admiss process
some psychiatr treatment facil have develop program for patient who exhibit
symptom of both psychiatr ill and substanc abus problem fraud occur when a
patient is admit on the basi of a diagnosi that reflect the patient insur coverag
rather than the patient ill psychiatr hospit have been accus of find someth
wrong with patient when it is discov that thei have insur coverag such patient
mai often be admit without examin by a physician
fraud in the treatment process
the follow type of abus can occur with regard to psychiatr treatment
extend the length of treatment program or delai discharg becaus patient have
addit insur benefit remain
the us of illegitim question nonapprov or danger treatment program
and form of therapi such as brain wave synchron magnet therapi memori
retrievalenhanc therapi and deep sleep therapi
engag in excess treatment of psychiatr patient such as thyroid test drug test
or psychiatr evalu test
abus market practic
mani hospit reli on market as a mean of encourag treatment and gener
referr overli aggress market method includ
pai bonus to employe to persuad or pressur prospect patient to undergo a
psychiatr evalu and to admit themselv for treatment
encourag patient to admit themselv by offer financi incent such as
payment of plane fare child care cobra payment and waiver of patient co
payment or deduct
health care fraud financi transact
11240 2011 fraud examin manual
financi reward for referr
mani facil ar depend on outsid sourc of patient referr such as physician or
other clinician thi depend ha led some hospit to develop econom relationship
in order to obtain referr
reward clinician who refer patient by refer patient who need outpati
treatment to those clinician
allow alli health profession who refer patient to provid therapi for their own
patient at the hospit while nonref alli profession ar not allow to us
the hospit
pai medic director or other physician an incent bonu link to the overal
profit of the hospit
pai a physician who is under contract to the hospit but who provid no servic
red flag for psychiatr and substanc abus claim
treatment take place far from patient home
diagnosi becom alcohol when state mandat reimburs alcohol like ani
other ill
patient is on disabl
provid credenti ar question
document of treatment is lack
ancillari servic ar not treatment orient
other fraud in the institut set
writeoff of patient account
when a patient account or other type of receiv ha been determin to be uncollect
the account is writtenoff to bad debt it becom a fraudul transact when the
account ha been writtenoff prematur and the balanc subsequ collect with the
proce go to the employe in thi scheme the employe ha the opportun to collect
the receiv and divert the fund to himself becaus compani typic do not keep track
of old writtenoff account receiv
often old account receiv ar assign to a collect agenc these agenc typic
ar paid on a percentag of the collect amount fraud scheme can be perpetr by
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11241
these agenc if the compani doe not monitor the method by which the agenc receiv
old account and the collect process itself
the assignor compani need to assur itself that the collect agenc is be assign truli
old account onli and not good account that can reason be expect to pai within the
normal cours of busi
addition the compani need to be sure that the collect agenc cannot compromis
the indebted so that collect ar not report thi would allow the collect agenc
to compromis indebted for it own collect and not remit amount ow the
compani
credit balanc
when patient have more than on payer respons for payment of an admiss
institut have been known to collect more than the origin amount bill thi mai
occur when the patient ha more than on health insur compani is in a vehicl accid
where multipl insur carrier ar involv or where worker compens is
applic in addit the facil mai also collect the deduct and copay from the
patient if the hospit ha a credit balanc the amount paid abov the charg should be
refund to the applic parti howev thi doe not alwai occur gener the
refund will be made upon request but onli upon request
theft of pharmaceut and suppli
becaus of the readi market for sell pharmaceut and suppli thei have a propens
for be stolen narcot drug although thei ar usual tightli control still mai be
stolen and sold on the street suppli such as cane sunglass after cataract surgeri and
admiss kit ar popular item for theft or employe abus
manag care
the unit state health care system is move toward more and differ type of
manag care as the countri move to a differ type of health care deliveri system so
mai the type of fraud
tradition health care ha been provid and paid for on a feeforservic basi where
payment were made either directli to the health care provid as payment for servic
health care fraud financi transact
11242 2011 fraud examin manual
render to the insur parti or to the insur as reimburs for medic expens
incur the premis behind manag care is that the medic practition is respons for
manag the total need of the patient the primari purpos of manag care is to reduc
cost by promot the most appropri and effici us of medic servic
the most common manag care arrang ar
modifi tradit coverag
hmo
ppo
modifi tradit coverag
under thi type of coverag the medic practition is reimburs through a feeforservic
arrang the patient is free to choos a provid and a claim is submit for
reimburs by either the insur or the provid it is a manag care model in that cost
cut measur ar in the form of util review prior author second surgic
opinion and hospit preauthor
hmo
hmo or health mainten organ have sever variat the hmo mai
emploi all of the provid as in a staffmodel hmo or the manag care organ mai
contract with individu physician or physician group the insur select a primari care
physician pcp who is the gatekeep gener all medic care is initi through the
pcp payment is made by capit that is the pcp receiv a flat fee per month from the
manag care organ although some fee still mai be paid on a feeperservic basi
usual at a reduc rate care that cannot be perform by the pcp is done by a specialti
care physician who is also a member of the hmo network the patient is sever penal
for go outsid the hmo network
ppo
ppo or prefer provid organ is a manag care arrang in which the
patient choos a provid from a list of particip provid in the ppo network their
care is not manag by on provid as in the hmo and thei mai see ani provid in the
network the patient is penal for go outsid the network although not as sever as
in an hmo network provid usual must bill the thirdparti payer and claim ar
assign
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11243
how manag care alter the potenti for fraud
in a manag care environ fraud is not elimin insur fraud mai be reduc
substanti but provid fraud is still aliv and well in addit to bill fraudul
servic manag care ha an addit incent for fraud becaus the provid share in
the financi risk of a patient there is the potenti to provid less servic to a patient sinc a
fix capit rate allow the patient unlimit visit to a provid
type of manag care fraud
inadequ treatment of patient
refer patient automat to provid outsid the network perhap in exchang
for kickback from outsid provid
establish of inconveni appoint hour servic locat etc to suppress the
number of patient
inflat report of patient traffic and treatment cost to induc payer to increas futur
per patient capit fee
fals claim for servic not cover by fix capit payment
falsif of qualiti of care andor treatmentoutcom data
provid misrepres their credenti or qualif for admiss to a given
payer network of manag care provid
outofnetwork overbil for substandard servic
employe creat claim check dure period when the plan no longer is do
busi with the hmo but treatment of member continu due to exist problem
provid kickback to employe of manag care organ for put patient in
their panel
manag care system also creat the opportun for fraud by the insur some of the
exampl of fraud that mai be found in the manag care environ includ
the follow
patient member loan or sell us of card to nonmemb
enrol nonelig person as member for obtain treatment
fail to disenrol exspous of famili member
outofnetwork falsifi emerg trea tment in collus with provid
red flag
some of the red flag for manag care fraud ar
identifi provid who regularli waiv copay or deduct
health care fraud financi transact
11244 2011 fraud examin manual
unusu referr patternseith too high or too low
unusu high pattern of referr to pharmaci laboratori or specialti
care physician
high number of emerg room referr
patient complaint about the treatment
a pattern of high number of servic that fall outsid of the capit servic
medicaid fraud
in 1965 presid lyndon b johnson sign the social secur act which establish
medicar and medicaid these program provid medic and healthrel servic to
specif group of peopl in the unit state both program ar manag by the center
for medicar and medicaid servic cm a feder agenc within the us depart of
health and human servic
although both medicar and medicaid provid medic and healthrel servic there ar
sever differ between the two program medicar which is fund and govern by
the feder govern is the feder health insur program for peopl ag 65 or older
and most peopl with certain disabl it is financ by social secur contribut
convers medicaid is a feder and statefund program that provid health care
coverag for lowincom famili and children medic and longterm care coverag for
peopl with disabl and assist with health and longterm care expens for low
incom senior although medicaid is a feder program it is oper by the state and
each state decid elig and the scope of coverag medicaid doe not requir recipi
to make contribut and it is financ from gener revenu
accord to the feder govern medicaid fraud involv purpos bill medicaid for
servic that were never provid or receiv
as the number of individu enrol in medi caid increas the amount of fund be
expend by these program leav the industri at a signific risk for fraudul claim
medicaid expenditur compris 216 billion of the 2009 feder budget the propos
fiscal year 2011 budget includ a 17 billion allot to fight fraud and abus in the
medicar and medicaid system
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11245
in respons to the enorm increas in me dicaid fraud the feder govern ha
establish depart program statut and fund for deter investig and
prosecut such type of fraud
an overview of the medicaid system
for a state to establish a medicaid program for it resid it must compli with specif
feder guidelin each state must
establish it own elig standard
determin the type amount durat and scope of servic
set the rate of payment for servic and
administ it own program
health care fraud financi transact
11246 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc respons relat activ
feder
center for medicar and medicaid servic
assist each state in increas the
effect of it medicaid
program integr effort
act as an oversight entiti of
state fraud and abus effort
keep the allianc in work
order
overse state medicaid agenc
facilit commun
and inform share
between the feder
govern and state
establish a nation forum
for medicaid fraud and abus
issu
provid ongo forum and
train for state offici on
fraud control
hh oig
overse state medicaid fraud
control unit
investig feder medicaid
fraud case
sanction fraudul
provid by impos
exclus and civil monetari
penalti
refer investig find
to the doj
doj us attornei
prosecut medicaid fraud case
refer by the fbi and oig
indict negoti
settlement and recov
damag
doj fbi
investig feder fraud case
cant impos sanction
refer investig find
to us attornei
state medicaid agenc
administ state medicaid
program
conduct pre and postpay
claim review
administ provid
enrol process
program
integr unit
review claim data to detect and
investig unusu payment
pattern
conduct variou integr
activ
refer suspect fraud case
to the state medicaid fraud
control unit
refer civil case to the state
medicaid agenc collect
unit
medicaid fraud control unit mfcu
investig and prosecut case
involv medicaid fraud
investig and act on
complaint of abus or neglect of
patient in facil receiv
medicaid fund
refer case that will not be
prosecut to the state
medicaid agenc or other
author for administr
action
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11247
feder legisl
the follow ar some of the most common feder statut us to prosecut
medicaid fraud
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut
the civil fals claim act
the stark law
health insur portabl and account act hipaa
state level enforc
in 1977 congress devis the medicaid fraud control unit mfcu program to help
state counter medicaid fraud mfcu ar state law enforc agenc that investig
and prosecut case involv medicaid fraud investig and act on complaint of abus or
neglect of patient in facil receiv medica id fund and refer case which will not be
prosecut to the state medicaid agenc or other author for administr action the
onli wai a state can keep from establish an mfcu is by certifi that there is no fraud
in their state
under mfcu program each state is to implement it own mfcu the feder govern
subsid each state program with 90 percent of the moni necessari to get that state
mfcu up and roll three year thereaft the feder govern provid the state
mfcu with 75 percent of it oper cost the onli wai a state can keep from
establish an mfcu is by certifi that there is no fraud in their state
feder initi such as thi have help state effect curb medicaid fraud on state and
local level accord to the unit state govern account offic for fy 2008
state mfcu recov more than 13 billion in legal restitut obtain more than 1314
convict and exclud 971 individu from particip in the medicaid and medicar
program
to identifi and detect medicaid fraud at ani level fraud examin must be appris of
variou medicaid fraud scheme becaus such scheme ar often more stringent regul
at the state level
health care fraud financi transact
11248 2011 fraud examin manual
electron claim fraud
audit electron claim mai us the same techniqu as audit ani other type of health
care if the origin sourc document ar us the differ mai be that the audit mai us
the inform electron transmit rather than the origin inform if relianc
could be place on the inform be submit then there wouldnt be ani differ
howev histori ha prove that electron claim can be a fertil sourc for fraud
electron data interchang edi is the exchang of electron data between comput in
which there is no human interact thi technolog ha advanc compani abil to
conduct busi by lightyear but it ha also provid wouldb fraudster an increas
opportun to commit whitecollar crime
edi origin aris in the 1960 when mani industri group began to develop edi
standard in area such as purchas transport and financi transact the next
major step forward came when the transport data coordin committe and the
nation associ of credit manag credit research foundat develop the
first standard of electron data interchang at thi time thei have develop over 300
differ standard for individu industri concern the transmiss of edi these
standard ar publish by the data interchang standard associ
although these standard have been adopt and us worldwid by a multitud of differ
industri the health care industri ha been notori slow in adopt the new
technolog onli now have a hand of larg health care provid such as blue cross blue
shield announc their endors of the health care industri conduct busi
electron the reason behind the reluct to convert is that the health care system
is so complic that a switch in oper procedur of thi magnitud would caus
consider headach in the earli phase
edi can be us intern within a busi as a wai of commun and data transfer
and it can also be us for the same purpos between differ busi in the case of
the health care industri edi enabl the differ compani to send claim invoic and
other vital data that onc wa ship in a paper format via airmail the fact that edi allow
for an immedi exchang of data make the process of submit and approv health
care claim much more effici for the health care industri
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11249
the health care transact that will be affect by the emerg of edi technolog
includ
claim payment
enrol
claim submiss
elig
claim statu
crossov cob
health care servic review
patient inform record
manag care encount
capit payment
interact claim
hmo report
provid inform
in the current health care system there ar over 1500 insur compani that process
over four billion medic claim everi year becaus the health care system us over 450
differ type of form it is estim that in the past the health care industri spent as
much as 100 billion per year to process it paperwork thu edi ha the potenti to save
the health care industri from 8 billion to 20 billion everi year it is veri simpli a more
effici wai for the health care industri to do busi howev fraud examin fear that
a more effici system also pave the wai for more effici wai to defraud the health
care industri
solid control must be establish to deal with the health care industri convers to edi
or the save that the more effici system will produc mai be gobbl up by bigger fraud
loss the electron convers of inform complet remov paperbas control
edi elimin the abil that fraud examin have to detect fraud in the health care
industri in three wai
the autom of claim ha eras claim profession abil to detect suspici
look claim becaus thei ar us to handl the paperwork of claim edi
hamper the claim profession from get a good pictur of the overal natur of an
account instead reduc each transact to individu claim
becaus of the imperson natur of electron transact edi rais the temptat
health care fraud financi transact
11250 2011 fraud examin manual
of wouldb fraudster to commit whitecollar crime
edi leav no paper trail make the process of fraud detect difficult for the
fraud examin
the reason the health care industri is concern about edi potenti to stimul
fraudul activ includ
the lack of tool to detect edi fraud
the variat of health care servic precipit the potenti from a plethora of
dissimilar fraud
the effici of edi allow for more vendor and thu more claim to account for
the swift in which transact take place allow less time to uncov fraud
in the past the health care industri ha develop sophist method of detect fraud
within the paperbas system now that the convers to edi is take place the health
care industri must find a wai to convert those method to uncov fraud in the electron
format these method will onli be as sophist as the health care industri choos to
make them the less concern that the industri show for creat fraud indic the more
opportun thei will be give fraudster to beat the system
fraud examin should not fear that the convers to edi will elimin ani fraudrel
job opportun in fact that convers will actual open up mani fraud examin
job as the safeguard and red flag system against fraud ha not been effect establish
at thi time therefor fraud examin need to be awar that their job includ not onli
investig fraud but also to creat system that will effect deter fraud
mani new and complic legal issu ar rais as a result of the health care industri
convers to edi some of the difficult question that have been press includ
how doe the insur compani prove that all electron claim ar authent
who is respons for error in electron health care claim
how doe the fraud examin prove that the content of an electron health care claim
ar fals
how doe the health care industri ensur that all electron transmiss ar receiv
exactli as thei ar sent
what term and condit govern electron claim
how will fraud examin determin the actual origin of ani electron submiss
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11251
becaus autom claim ar quit easili alter the health care industri must ensur that
claim ar authent fraud examin must document that claim have been receiv in the
same condit in which thei were process if thei ar to be admiss as evid
some exampl of wai to ensur claim authent includ
data encrypt
digit signatur
messag authent code
prior claim histori checkup
a varieti of field check
the effect of prosecut in an electron environ
edi creat anoth type of legal evid but the basic legal principl regard that
evid should remain intact therefor the burden fall on the compani of the health
care industri to demonstr that it electron system ha proven safeguard that counteract
fraud if the system is proven to be reliabl the compani can then show that it ha creat a
reliabl record of transact
the greatest weak within an edi system is that in the prosecut a defend mai
claim that he did not enter the claim or that the claim wa mishandl by the health care
compani thu a health care compani must maintain the integr of it electron record
the health care compani must have in place sever wai to uncov fraud from automat
red flag to intric fraud analysi program that pick up on familiar pattern that mai
ultim lead to fraud
a health care compani must prove the origin of all electron commun and the
origin content of the transact thei must also reduc the possibl that the origin
claim content can be intention or unintention compromis by do these thing
the health care industri can effect us edi without substanti rais the possibl
of fraudul activ
health care complianc program
recent the govern discov a widespread upcod scheme in which numer
hospit across the countri routin and fraudul code case in their bill system
under a diagnost relat group drg that caus medicar to overcompens the
health care fraud financi transact
11252 2011 fraud examin manual
provid by about 28 percent these optim program cross the line of legitim
bill and subsequ crimin and civil investig follow in deal with such a larg
number of hospit the govern util complianc program also known as corpor
integr agreement to help minim futur instanc of fraud without significantli
damag a commun health care need by sa nction or dismiss medic provid
the us depart of health and human servic offic of the inspector gener
oig is increasingli us corpor complianc program in lieu of sanction to control
medic provid and relat entiti who have defraud feder health care program
the oig ha devis model complianc guidelin for hospit clinic laboratori
durabl medic equip compani and home health compani the entir content of
those model plan can be locat on the unit state depart of health and human
servic websit at wwwhhsgov
complianc program ar simpli a set of effect intern control design to ensur that
compani oper adher to the guidelin regul and law affect the
organ ideal these intern control should complement control that alreadi ar in
place within the account system thi is imper becaus mani problem oig
investig center around the financi oper of the compani such as bill and
collect complianc effort ar meant to encourag a cultur that foster prevent
detect and resolut of conduct that is outsid establish compani polici the
feder sentenc guidelin also encourag complianc program in order to reduc
crimin fine and penalti
the sentenc guidelin and the depart of health and human servic model plan
have some basic characterist to which a complianc program should adher the seven
basic element includ
develop and distribut polici that defin standard and procedur to be follow by
the organ agent and employe specif the organ should establish
standard of conduct that emphas the organ commit to complianc in
area such as center for medicar and medicaid servic cm regul fraud and
abus law feder state and local law and corpor ethic polici mission and
goal annual circul to everi employe a standard of conduct statement that
requir the signatur of all director offic manag employe and contractor
certifi that thei have read understand and agre to compli with it term
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11253
design or hire a highlevel employe who ha ultim respons to oper and
monitor the complianc program and to report directli to the ceo or govern bodi
thi employe would be much like the compani own intern inspector gener
us reason care to identifi sanction provid and remov those individu from
ani activ that would violat a law or regul thi can be done by dismiss the
provid or reassign him to an area of the compani that doe not have direct contact
with patient cover by govern insur or to an area that is neither directli nor
indirectli reimburs by a govern program if a sanction parti work in the
suppli divis and part of the cost of that divis ar alloc on the medicar cost
report then thi could constitut a violat
requir regular train program for all employe and contractor each entiti should
have some polici for educ manag execut and employe about fraud thi
can be conduct dure employe orient andor through ongo train
program and other compani commun method initi and annual train for all
staff especi for those in the market sale and bill depart is essenti
train should focu on bill polici and procedur applic of feder rule and
regul disciplinari action for noncompli person respons of everi
employe to compli cm polici and procedur and fraud and abus law
us variou kind of monitor and proactiv audit system to detect fraud and
unusu trend to ensur complianc there ar mani statist aberr that an
experienc fraud examin can monitor in a proactiv manner to identifi potenti
problem area such as notic variat in bill pattern for instanc if suddenli
there is a 200 percent increas in bill for physician consult the fraud examin
mai wish to review those servic to determin if simpl offic visit ar be
character fraudul as more complex and thu more lucr consult
establish and public a report system in which employe can report crimin
conduct without fear of retribut hotlin or ombudsman program each employe in
the compani should know where to report suspici uneth or illeg behavior
step should includ establish a selfdisclosur polici which outlin procedur for
report law violat to the appropri author and a record retent polici
which set standard on how long record should be store and in what format
electron media origin paper document etc the offic of inspector gener also
ha a provid selfdisclosur program discuss in detail in the feder regist date
oct 30 1998 that offer a cooper effort in report problem
develop a system to respond to alleg investig those alleg and if need
carri out the appropri disciplinari measur be consist and also disciplin
health care fraud financi transact
11254 2011 fraud examin manual
individu who fail to detect the offens due to neglig the complianc program
should outlin specif who will investig suspect irregular and to whom
these irregular will be report ie manag intern investig law
enforc andor legal counsel and
regularli review for system weak in compani oper andor polici and
make chang as need
essenti what a complianc program is design to do is provid insur for the
provid by take everi reason and prudent step possibl a provid will have
demonstr to a prosecutor judg or juri that he ha taken step to prevent fraudul
activ from pervad hi oper consequ the damag to a provid reput
pocketbook and freedom can be control and minim to the fullest extent possibl
financi transact bankruptci fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11301
