2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Fraud by the Insurance Company


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Fraud by the Insurance Company 
Frauds committed by insurance companies include some of the following: 
• Submission of false documentation and improper billing 
• Mishandling claims 
• Failure to pay legitimate claims 
• Charging unapproved rates 
• Requesting rate increases based on fraudulent data 
• Using illegal or deceptive tactics to sell insurance 
• Failure to give “fee breaks”  
• Patient screening 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1211 
Submission of False Documents 
If the insurance company acts as an intermediary for the payer, such as Medicare, then the 
insurance company commits fraud when it improperly bills the government or submits false 
cost reports or audits. 
 
Mishandling Claims 
Mishandling claims also arises primarily in the area of an insurance company acting as an 
intermediary administering the insurance program of the payer. The insurance company is 
under a duty to try to detect false claims. Although it is impossible to detect every fraudulent 
claim, if a company bypasses its own claims verification procedures, it can be guilty of fraud. 
 
Failure to Pay Legitimate Claims 
The insurance company or carrier is required to pay any claim that is properly submitted, 
contains all the required the information, absent of fraud, and has benefits available. An 
insurance company might commit fraud when claims are consistently rejected even though 
the required information has been submitted. Many states have regulations regarding the 
amount of time an insurance company has to pay a “clean” claim — one that has all the 
needed information. Even if an insured has committed fraud in the past, and for some 
reason or another is still an insured, the insurance company must still adjudicate a valid 
claim. 
 
Charging Unapproved Rates 
Some states require insurance companies to obtain approval on their premium rates. Until 
the approval is received, the rates cannot be charged to the insured. An insurance company 
may improperly begin charging the unapproved rate before it is allowed to. 
 
Requesting Rate Increases Based on Fraudulent Data 
Similar to the above, insurance companies or carriers needing regulatory approval for rate 
increases use cost data to justify their increases. In order to get their rate hike, they may use 
fraudulent cost data.  
 
Deceptive or Illegal Sales Practices 
Insurance companies may promote or condone deceptive or illegal sales practices in order to 
increase sales. The most common example is to disguise an insurance policy as a savings plan 
or investment. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1212                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Failure to Give “Fee Breaks” 
An insurance company may be guilty of fraud if it fails to pass on fee breaks it negotiates 
with its providers. The alleged overcharging occurs when an insurance company negotiates a 
discount on a medical bill. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer’s 
co-payment is made on the full price rather than the discounted price, and the consumer 
ends up paying a higher percentage of their bill than they should. For example, if a bill is 
$1,000 and a 50 percent discount is negotiated, the consumer’s 20 percent portion should 
equal $100. If the company does not pass along the discount, the consumer pays 20 percent 
of the full $1,000, or $200.  
 
Patient Screening 
In the managed care environment, because so much emphasis is placed on preventive care, 
some insurance companies may be reducing their risk by limiting their insured to only 
healthy patients. 
 
Detection 
Detection of fraud committed by an insurance company may include the following: 
• Review complaints by insureds. 
• Compare financial statement data to data used to request rates. 
• Compare rates charged with rates approved. 
• Compare discounts negotiated with providers with the amounts allowed on the claims 
and coinsurance charged. 
• Review rejected members to determine if underwriting guidelines were abused. 
 
 



:


fraud by the insur compani
fraud commit by insur compani includ some of the follow
submiss of fals document and improp bill
mishandl claim
failur to pai legitim claim
charg unapprov rate
request rate increas base on fraudul data
us illeg or decept tactic to sell insur
failur to give fee break
patient screen
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11211
submiss of fals document
if the insur compani act as an intermediari for the payer such as medicar then the
insur compani commit fraud when it improperli bill the govern or submit fals
cost report or audit
mishandl claim
mishandl claim also aris primarili in the area of an insur compani act as an
intermediari administ the insur program of the payer the insur compani is
under a duti to try to detect fals claim although it is imposs to detect everi fraudul
claim if a compani bypass it own claim verif procedur it can be guilti of fraud
failur to pai legitim claim
the insur compani or carrier is requir to pai ani claim that is properli submit
contain all the requir the inform absent of fraud and ha benefit avail an
insur compani might commit fraud when claim ar consist reject even though
the requir inform ha been submit mani state have regul regard the
amount of time an insur compani ha to pai a clean claim on that ha all the
need inform even if an insur ha commit fraud in the past and for some
reason or anoth is still an insur the insur compani must still adjud a valid
claim
charg unapprov rate
some state requir insur compani to obtain approv on their premium rate until
the approv is receiv the rate cannot be charg to the insur an insur compani
mai improperli begin charg the unapprov rate befor it is allow to
request rate increas base on fraudul data
similar to the abov insur compani or carrier need regulatori approv for rate
increas us cost data to justifi their increas in order to get their rate hike thei mai us
fraudul cost data
decept or illeg sale practic
insur compani mai promot or condon decept or illeg sale practic in order to
increas sale the most common exampl is to disguis an insur polici as a save plan
or invest
health care fraud financi transact
11212 2011 fraud examin manual
failur to give fee break
an insur compani mai be guilti of fraud if it fail to pass on fee break it negoti
with it provid the alleg overcharg occur when an insur compani negoti a
discount on a medic bill if the compani doe not pass along the discount the consum
copay is made on the full price rather than the discount price and the consum
end up pai a higher percentag of their bill than thei should for exampl if a bill is
1000 and a 50 percent discount is negoti the consum 20 percent portion should
equal 100 if the compani doe not pass along the discount the consum pai 20 percent
of the full 1000 or 200
patient screen
in the manag care environ becaus so much emphasi is place on prevent care
some insur compani mai be reduc their risk by limit their insur to onli
healthi patient
detect
detect of fraud commit by an insur compani mai includ the follow
review complaint by insur
compar financi statement data to data us to request rate
compar rate charg with rate approv
compar discount negoti with provid with the amount allow on the claim
and coinsur charg
review reject member to determin if underwrit guidelin were abus
