2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Employee Claims Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Employee Claims Fraud 
Employees of insurers, especially claims examiners and customer service representatives, can 
present additional problems to the fraud examiner. Due to their ability to access claims and 
subscriber files, the frauds perpetrated can be almost limitless. 
• Claims fraud using the employee’s contract  
• Claims fraud using another insured’s contract number 
• Claims payment using a relative’s contract 
• Claims adjustment system 
• Payment for canceled contracts or deceased insureds 
• Improper payee  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1213 
Claims Fraud Using the Employee’s Contract  
Claims employees generally have access to claims data and claim forms. They can sometimes 
adjust claims or pull someone’s claim, change the claimant’s contract number, and have the 
claim processed.  
 
Claims Fraud Using Another Insured’s Contract Number  
Employees who have access to insureds enrollment file can locate an insured with a similar 
name as the employee. From there, the employee only has to complete a claim form and 
submit the claims through the regular processing system. The employee only has to put his 
own address in order to receive the payment. 
 
Claims Payment Using a Relative’s Contract 
Employees can fabricate claims and submit them under a relative’s contract number. 
 
Claims Adjustment System  
Claims that are legitimately paid incorrectly need to be adjusted. An adjustment examiner can 
adjust a claim for fraudulent purposes also. 
 
Payment for Canceled Contracts or Deceased Insureds   
If an adjuster has access to the enrollment files, he may run across a deceased insured. By 
submitting or processing a claim before cancellation, an examiner can manipulate the claims 
system and divert payment to himself. 
 
Improper Payee  
A claim approver overrides a claim payment system and pays out claims to improper payees. 
The claim approver inserts her son and daughter-in-law as payee. Checks are submitted to 
other than the insured’s address. 
 
Detection 
The following steps can be used to determine if a company is dealing with an employee who 
is defrauding the system: 
• Pull high-dollar claim payments for insureds. Investigate all unusual patterns by  
verifying services. 
• Review printouts for special payee codes to search for employees. 
• Review printouts for a high number of adjusted claims per insured. 
  
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1214                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Review printouts of recently canceled contracts for unusual claims activity just prior to 
cancellation. 
• Once unusual activity has been identified, follow normal investigative procedures. 
• Review address change lists for employee names or unusual activity. 
 
 



:


employe claim fraud
employe of insur especi claim examin and custom servic repres can
present addit problem to the fraud examin due to their abil to access claim and
subscrib file the fraud perpetr can be almost limitless
claim fraud us the employe contract
claim fraud us anoth insur contract number
claim payment us a rel contract
claim adjust system
payment for cancel contract or deceas insur
improp paye
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11213
claim fraud us the employe contract
claim employe gener have access to claim data and claim form thei can sometim
adjust claim or pull someon claim chang the claimant contract number and have the
claim process
claim fraud us anoth insur contract number
employe who have access to insur enrol file can locat an insur with a similar
name as the employe from there the employe onli ha to complet a claim form and
submit the claim through the regular process system the employe onli ha to put hi
own address in order to receiv the payment
claim payment us a rel contract
employe can fabric claim and submit them under a rel contract number
claim adjust system
claim that ar legitim paid incorrectli need to be adjust an adjust examin can
adjust a claim for fraudul purpos also
payment for cancel contract or deceas insur
if an adjust ha access to the enrol file he mai run across a deceas insur by
submit or process a claim befor cancel an examin can manipul the claim
system and divert payment to himself
improp paye
a claim approv overrid a claim payment system and pai out claim to improp paye
the claim approv insert her son and daughterinlaw as paye check ar submit to
other than the insur address
detect
the follow step can be us to determin if a compani is deal with an employe who
is defraud the system
pull highdollar claim payment for insur investig all unusu pattern by
verifi servic
review printout for special paye code to search for employe
review printout for a high number of adjust claim per insur
health care fraud financi transact
11214 2011 fraud examin manual
review printout of recent cancel contract for unusu claim activ just prior to
cancel
onc unusu activ ha been identifi follow normal investig procedur
review address chang list for employe name or unusu activ
