2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Agent Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Agent Fraud 
Nearly all insurance companies use the services of a broker or agent external to the firm. 
Unfortunately, the best interests of the insurance company are not always served. Several 
schemes have been identified that can be classified as fraudulent. 
 
Phony Groups 
Agents will set up bogus companies in order to sell health insurance to individuals at  
group rates. 
 
Phony or Nonexistent Policies 
Rather than going to the trouble of setting up a bogus company, many agents will sell a 
phony policy, and take the money and run. 
 
Medical Underwriting Fraud 
The broker will write a policy knowing that the client has pre-existing conditions that would 
prevent acceptance for coverage. 
 
Eligibility Fraud 
A broker may seek to add ineligible family members, girlfriends, or associates to a group 
policy by representing them as employees.  
 
Another eligibility fraud is where a broker may sell a low-cost group policy to an 
organization that employs a small percentage of people with serious health problems. A 
better rate can be obtained by separating healthy people from sick people. The broker splits 
off the unhealthy people in their own group, placing the coverage with an insurer of last 
resort such as a carrier that is given favorable tax status in exchange for issuing coverage  
to anyone. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1215 
ERISA Fraud 
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act regulates all trust accounts held by an 
employer for the purpose of paying benefits such as retirement annuities or health and life 
policies. Under the Act, if an insurance company believes that a plan administrator is 
engaging in violations of the Act, it is required to report the matter to the U.S. Department 
of Labor. As an example, a corporation may use funds collected from employees through 
payroll deduction to finance daily operations of the company.  
 
Payment Inducements 
These schemes involve brokers furnishing group coverage to individuals who would not 
otherwise qualify for such policies by adding them to legitimate groups or establishing a 
fictitious group for the purpose of obtaining waivers and/or cheaper rates. The broker 
profits not only from the normal sales commission, but also from a “surcharge” or billing 
fee that is added to the published premium that is collected from the policy holder by the 
broker. In another scenario, a broker may charge a markup for adding employees to a 
legitimate group.  
 
Switching Policies 
This scheme involves the agents telling the customers that they are obtaining one policy, 
taking the premium for that policy, and then buying a cheaper policy with less coverage 
instead. The agents then pocket the difference. 
 
 



:


agent fraud
nearli all insur compani us the servic of a broker or agent extern to the firm
unfortun the best interest of the insur compani ar not alwai serv sever
scheme have been identifi that can be classifi as fraudul
phoni group
agent will set up bogu compani in order to sell health insur to individu at
group rate
phoni or nonexist polici
rather than go to the troubl of set up a bogu compani mani agent will sell a
phoni polici and take the monei and run
medic underwrit fraud
the broker will write a polici know that the client ha preexist condit that would
prevent accept for coverag
elig fraud
a broker mai seek to add inelig famili member girlfriend or associ to a group
polici by repres them as employe
anoth elig fraud is where a broker mai sell a lowcost group polici to an
organ that emploi a small percentag of peopl with seriou health problem a
better rate can be obtain by separ healthi peopl from sick peopl the broker split
off the unhealthi peopl in their own group place the coverag with an insur of last
resort such as a carrier that is given favor tax statu in exchang for issu coverag
to anyon
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11215
erisa fraud
the employe retir incom secur act regul all trust account held by an
employ for the purpos of pai benefit such as retir annuiti or health and life
polici under the act if an insur compani believ that a plan administr is
engag in violat of the act it is requir to report the matter to the us depart
of labor as an exampl a corpor mai us fund collect from employe through
payrol deduct to financ daili oper of the compani
payment induc
these scheme involv broker furnish group coverag to individu who would not
otherwis qualifi for such polici by ad them to legitim group or establish a
fictiti group for the purpos of obtain waiver andor cheaper rate the broker
profit not onli from the normal sale commiss but also from a surcharg or bill
fee that is ad to the publish premium that is collect from the polici holder by the
broker in anoth scenario a broker mai charg a markup for ad employe to a
legitim group
switch polici
thi scheme involv the agent tell the custom that thei ar obtain on polici
take the premium for that polici and then bui a cheaper polici with less coverag
instead the agent then pocket the differ
