2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Provider Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Provider Fraud 
Provider fraud is a fraud perpetrated by medical practitioners, medical suppliers, or medical 
facilities on patients or customers in order to increase their own income by illicit means. 
 
The potential for fraud involving providers has grown with the increased use of computer 
equipment in generating bills. Additionally, providers possess the knowledge of medical 
techniques, procedures, and terminology needed to avoid being questioned by claim-
 handling personnel. More insurance companies are contracting directly with providers for 
billing arrangements, leaving patients out of the loop. In addition, patients are usually 
reluctant to accuse physicians of wrongdoing because they rely on the provider’s continued 
services and because, when providers engage in fraudulent practices, they often forgive any 
out-of-pocket expenses the patient incurs. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1216                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rolling Labs 
A rolling lab is a mobile laboratory that solicits insureds to participate in health screening tests 
at no cost to the insured. These labs are usually located in semi-trailers parked at health 
clubs, spas, shopping centers, or on vacant property. 
 
Patients are contacted by telephone for a free physical exam. Subsequent to exam, the 
insurance company is billed for eight to 10 claims totaling $8,000–$10,000 for a single date 
of testing performed by multiple providers. Additional claims are billed for later service dates 
even though no more testing is done. The lab moves to another location prior to the patient 
receiving the test results to avoid detection. 
 
The providers market their services in many ways. One way is to rent office space in a 
doctor’s office for one day and then test all of that doctor’s patients. The testing equipment 
itself might arrive in a truck or van and moves from one office to another. Another method 
involves setting up a temporary operation in a shopping center. Rolling labs are also set up at 
health spas, with all members tested at no charge. The most common method, however, is to 
simply set up a small office for a temporary period and use telephone solicitations. 
 
Clinical Labs 
Clinical labs have devised fraudulent billing practices to encourage physicians to order 
unnecessary tests on patients. The schemes caused specific blood tests to be included in a 
panel of frequently ordered tests. The ordering physician pays nothing or a nominal fee for 
the extra tests. The tests are then unbundled and billed separately by the lab to government 
payers and insurance companies.  
 
Suppliers 
Ambulance Transportation 
Fraudulent billing for ambulance transportation can include bills for more mileage than 
incurred, for trips never taken, or for noncovered trips. 
 
Infusion Care 
Fraud schemes involving infusion care treatment include: 
• Services billed at abnormally high rates in comparison to cost. 
• Bills for noncovered patients. 
• Bills in excess of physician’s prescription. 
• Bills for unnecessary treatment. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1217 
• Kickbacks given to the prescribing physician. 
 
Durable Medical Equipment Suppliers 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by suppliers of durable medical equipment frequently involve: 
• Falsified prescriptions. 
• Excessive supplies. 
• Equipment not delivered or billed before delivery. 
• Billing for equipment rental after equipment was returned. 
• Noncovered supplies,(for example, incontinent care kits). 
• Milk supplement scam. 
• Lymphedema pumps. 
• Scooter scam. 
 
Home Health Companies 
Fraud involving home health care companies gained national exposure after the federal 
government’s investigation of ABC Home Health  Care was released. At the time of the 
investigation, ABC was the largest privately held home health care provider in the United 
States. In 1994, ABC made some 7.8 million visits and billed Medicare $615.9 million. 
Among the types of fraud identified at ABC were: 
• Medical records were altered to make it appear that patients continued to need home 
health visits. 
• Managers directed employees to continue vi siting patients who, in the employee’s 
opinion, did not qualify for home health care because they were not homebound. 
• A manager directed a nurse to record visits that were never made. 
• A manager forged physicians’ signatures on plans of care. 
• If a care plan was signed by a physician, employees would alter the number of visits.  
• ABC reportedly charged Medicare for the cost  of acquiring other home health agencies 
by paying owners a small sum up front and the balance in salary under the form of 
employment agreements. 
• Managers directed employees to market ABC and its services with the intent of charging 
Medicare for costs that were not reimbursable. 
 
Pharmacy 
Fraud schemes stemming from pharmacy transactions include: 
• Merchandising — substituting something of value for a prescription drug. 
• Billing for brand name drugs but dispensing generic drugs. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1218                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Billing beyond amount prescribed. 
• Billing for drugs not prescribed. 
• Billing for a high-priced generic drug but dispensing a lower-priced generic drug. 
• Package size differential—billing third-party payers for the price of drugs purchased in 
small package sizes when they were purchased at less cost in larger quantities. 
• Black market purchasing—purchasing drugs at significantly reduced rates then 
dispensing at regular prices. 
 
Chiropractors 
Dishonest chiropractors may engage in fraud schemes, such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered or unnecessary services. 
• Billing for multiple family members. 
• Purchasing individual contracts for their patients. 
• Billing for physical therapy services when contract does not cover chiropractors. 
• Billing for excessive services. 
 
EXAMPLE 
While certain treatments by chiropractors are usually not covered by insurance, similar 
treatments by physicians may be covered. To correct this perceived inequity, some 
chiropractors have set up medical corporations and then hired medical doctors as employees. 
The chiropractor is CEO of the corporation and has total discretion of how the funds are 
disbursed. The net result of this set-up is that a medical doctor gives the stamp of approval 
to charges that might not otherwise be paid, and the chiropractor reaps the profits. 
 
Chiro-Shenanigans 
PATIENTS FOR LIFE 
Charging annual fees that exceed $5,000, practice management firms teach chiropractors 
how to build million-dollar practices in as little as two years. The literature advises the 
chiropractors not to tell patients the results of their initial exam or how long they will need 
treatment until they’ve been indoctrinated into the benefits of lifelong chiropractic care. 
 
Further, they promote care of infants that will continue for the lifetime of the patient. 
Patients who question the continuation of treatment are given the guilty treatment: “It’s a 
choice you have to make depending on how important your health is to you.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1219 
Patients don’t seem to be cured until the insurance benefits run out. When benefits are 
renewed in the next calendar year, the symptoms return, and a new series of treatment 
begins until benefits run out again.  
 
PATIENT RECRUITING PRACTICES 
Some chiropractors use questionable recruiting practices to lure new patients into their 
practices. These might include: 
• Coupons for free meals where the benefits of chiropractic care are explained. 
• Advertising for free initial care. 
• Booths at health fairs, malls, and spas offering free screenings. 
 
TREATMENT FOR NONSPINAL CONDITIONS 
At one time chiropractors only treated spinal problems; however, many chiropractors now 
claim that they can treat any medical condition, including cancer, hernias, pneumonia, 
anemia, and heart conditions. For example, one chiropractic pamphlet stated, “If you are 
suffering from kidney disease, the logical course is to visit your chiropractor. He will 
examine your spine to see where your trouble is.” 
 
OTHER QUESTIONABLE CHIROPRACTIC TREATMENT 
Other types of questionable chiropractic treatment include: 
• Surrogate testing where the leg of a mother is flexed to diagnose her child’s illness. 
• Spinal manipulation of newborn babies to get over the trauma of birth. 
• Spinal manipulation to treat epilepsy, asthma, bedwetting, and learning disabilities. 
• Applied kinesiology whereby diseases can be diagnosed by testing muscles with the help 
of particular food or nutrients. 
• Analysis of x-rays to identify homicidal tendencies. 
• The creation of a treatment plan prior to examination. 
• Spinal manipulations begun at an early age to prevent cancer.  
• Iridology or the examination of patients’ eyes for markings that will indicate what 
diseases the patient has or will get. 
• A magnetic device placed over the thymus gland to diagnose nutrient deficiencies. 
 
Red Flags 
Warning signs that a chiropractor may be engaging in dishonest practices include a 
chiropractor who: 
• Takes full spine or repeated x-rays. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1220                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Prescribes treatments before a medical history or physical are taken. 
• Solicits family members. 
• Promises to prevent disease through regular check-ups. 
• Promises no out-of-pocket expenses for patients. 
• Ends treatment when their insurance benefits are exhausted, but recontacts patients for 
maintenance treatment when their benefits are renewed. 
 
Podiatrists 
Like other medical providers, unethical podiatrists may: 
• Bill for services never rendered. 
• Bill for noncovered services. 
• Provide kickbacks to suppliers. 
 
Ophthalmologists 
Ophthalmol ogists may engage in fraudulent practices such as: 
• Billing for services never rendered and noncovered services. 
• Billing for unnecessary services. 
 
Psychiatrists and Psychiatric Clinics 
Fraud schemes committed by psychiatrists and psychiatric clinics can include: 
• Billing for services never rendered. 
• Billing for noncovered services, such as weight loss services or biofeedback. 
• Billing for services under psychiatrist’s name when the service was actually performed by 
a noncovered but licensed provider, such as a drug counselor or minister. 
• Billing for services performed by an unlicensed employee. 
• Admitting patients with false diagnoses. 
 
Anesthesiologists
Dishonest anesthesiologists may bills for more time than was rendered. 
 
Dental Fraud 
Fraud involving dental providers might include bills for: 
• X-rays that were not taken. 
• Crowns that were not cemented. 
• Amalgams for teeth that were not filled. 
• Teeth that were not extracted. 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1221 
• Fillings for teeth that have previously been extracted. 
• More fillings than a person can possibly have. 
 
Allergists 
Fraud schemes involving allergists can include bills for: 
• Allergy testing not performed 
• Unnecessary services 
• Allergy shots not given. 
 
Infertility Treatment 
Infertility treatment is generally not a service covered by insurance. However, some less-than-honest 
providers will bill such services as hormonal replacement therapy in order to  
be paid. 
 
Impostor Provider 
An impostor provider is a provider who does not exist but bills fraudulent claims. A variation 
on this scam involves assuming the identify of a deceased provider and practice—or putting 
together a group of licensed providers—and fraudulently billing under the group’s provider 
identification code. 
 
Investigation Tips 
To help determine whether a provider is an imposter: 
• Call the telephone number on the bill to determine if the provider exists; however, keep 
in mind that a fictitious provider may actually have rented a location and established a 
telephone number. 
• Contact the applicable licensing board or state to determine if the alleged provider was 
licensed to practice in the area at the time the service was allegedly provided. 
• Check the provider’s Social Security number or Tax Identification number (if listed on 
the bill) with the applicable licensing board. 
• Visit the provider’s physical address to determine if it is valid; if it is, speak to the 
superintendent to determine the tenant for that address. 
• Contact the Postal Inspector to verify what mail is being dropped at that address. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1222                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Diagnoses 
When a provider knows that a service is not covered, he may use false diagnoses or 
procedure code manipulation to get a claim for the service paid. Examples of common 
services not covered are: 
• Annual physical examination. 
• School physicals. 
• Weight loss programs. 
• Stop smoking programs. 
• Investigational or experimental procedures. 
• Cosmetic surgery. 
 
In addition, physicians may justify the ordering of expensive x-rays or other diagnostic 
services by falsely purporting that a need exists to make such diagnostic inquiries. The 
services are rendered, but because is the claim for the services is based on false information 
and is used to deceive the insurance company, it is considered a false claim. 
 
Red Flags of Provider Fraud 
Warning signs that a provider is engaging in fraudulent practices include: 
• Pressure for rapid adjudication of claims. 
• Threats of legal action for delay in making payments. 
• Frequent telephone inquiries on claim status. 
• Assertive providers who demand same-day claim payment and special handling. 
• Charges submitted for payment with no supporting documentation available (such as x-
 rays or lab results). 
• Use of a P.O. box as return addresses. 
• Insured’s address on claim form is the same as provider. 
• Routine (not specialized) treatment for patients living more than 150 miles from  
the provider. 
• Referring physician and provider of service in same professional corporation. 
• Medical records that have been altered. 
• Medical records that have additional informat ion attached that would make an apparent 
noncovered service now covered. 
• Missing pages of medical records that would cover the period of time under review. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1223 



:


provid fraud
provid fraud is a fraud perpetr by medic practition medic supplier or medic
facil on patient or custom in order to increas their own incom by illicit mean
the potenti for fraud involv provid ha grown with the increas us of comput
equip in gener bill addition provid possess the knowledg of medic
techniqu procedur and terminolog need to avoid be question by claim
handl personnel more insur compani ar contract directli with provid for
bill arrang leav patient out of the loop in addit patient ar usual
reluct to accus physician of wrongdo becaus thei reli on the provid continu
servic and becaus when provid engag in fraudul practic thei often forgiv ani
outofpocket expens the patient incur
health care fraud financi transact
11216 2011 fraud examin manual
roll lab
a roll lab is a mobil laboratori that solicit insur to particip in health screen test
at no cost to the insur these lab ar usual locat in semitrail park at health
club spa shop center or on vacant properti
patient ar contact by telephon for a free physic exam subsequ to exam the
insur compani is bill for eight to 10 claim total 800010000 for a singl date
of test perform by multipl provid addit claim ar bill for later servic date
even though no more test is done the lab move to anoth locat prior to the patient
receiv the test result to avoid detect
the provid market their servic in mani wai on wai is to rent offic space in a
doctor offic for on dai and then test all of that doctor patient the test equip
itself might arriv in a truck or van and move from on offic to anoth anoth method
involv set up a temporari oper in a shop center roll lab ar also set up at
health spa with all member test at no charg the most common method howev is to
simpli set up a small offic for a temporari period and us telephon solicit
clinic lab
clinic lab have devis fraudul bill practic to encourag physician to order
unnecessari test on patient the scheme caus specif blood test to be includ in a
panel of frequent order test the order physician pai noth or a nomin fee for
the extra test the test ar then unbundl and bill separ by the lab to govern
payer and insur compani
supplier
ambul transport
fraudul bill for ambul transport can includ bill for more mileag than
incur for trip never taken or for noncov trip
infus care
fraud scheme involv infus care treatment includ
servic bill at abnorm high rate in comparison to cost
bill for noncov patient
bill in excess of physician prescript
bill for unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11217
kickback given to the prescrib physician
durabl medic equip supplier
fraud scheme perpetr by supplier of durabl medic equip frequent involv
falsifi prescript
excess suppli
equip not deliv or bill befor deliveri
bill for equip rental after equip wa return
noncov suppliesfor exampl incontin care kit
milk supplement scam
lymphedema pump
scooter scam
home health compani
fraud involv home health care compani gain nation exposur after the feder
govern investig of abc home health care wa releas at the time of the
investig abc wa the largest privat held home health care provid in the unit
state in 1994 abc made some 78 million visit and bill medicar 6159 million
among the type of fraud identifi at abc were
medic record were alter to make it appear that patient continu to need home
health visit
manag direct employe to continu vi site patient who in the employe
opinion did not qualifi for home health care becaus thei were not homebound
a manag direct a nurs to record visit that were never made
a manag forg physician signatur on plan of care
if a care plan wa sign by a physician employe would alter the number of visit
abc reportedli charg medicar for the cost of acquir other home health agenc
by pai owner a small sum up front and the balanc in salari under the form of
employ agreement
manag direct employe to market abc and it servic with the intent of charg
medicar for cost that were not reimburs
pharmaci
fraud scheme stem from pharmaci transact includ
merchandis substitut someth of valu for a prescript drug
bill for brand name drug but dispens gener drug
health care fraud financi transact
11218 2011 fraud examin manual
bill beyond amount prescrib
bill for drug not prescrib
bill for a highpric gener drug but dispens a lowerpr gener drug
packag size differentialbil thirdparti payer for the price of drug purchas in
small packag size when thei were purchas at less cost in larger quantiti
black market purchasingpurchas drug at significantli reduc rate then
dispens at regular price
chiropractor
dishonest chiropractor mai engag in fraud scheme such as
bill for servic never render or unnecessari servic
bill for multipl famili member
purchas individu contract for their patient
bill for physic therapi servic when contract doe not cover chiropractor
bill for excess servic
exampl
while certain treatment by chiropractor ar usual not cover by insur similar
treatment by physician mai be cover to correct thi perceiv inequ some
chiropractor have set up medic corpor and then hire medic doctor as employe
the chiropractor is ceo of the corpor and ha total discret of how the fund ar
disburs the net result of thi setup is that a medic doctor give the stamp of approv
to charg that might not otherwis be paid and the chiropractor reap the profit
chiroshenanigan
patient for life
charg annual fee that exce 5000 practic manag firm teach chiropractor
how to build milliondollar practic in as littl as two year the literatur advis the
chiropractor not to tell patient the result of their initi exam or how long thei will need
treatment until theyv been indoctrin into the benefit of lifelong chiropract care
further thei promot care of infant that will continu for the lifetim of the patient
patient who question the continu of treatment ar given the guilti treatment it a
choic you have to make depend on how import your health is to you
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11219
patient dont seem to be cure until the insur benefit run out when benefit ar
renew in the next calendar year the symptom return and a new seri of treatment
begin until benefit run out again
patient recruit practic
some chiropractor us question recruit practic to lure new patient into their
practic these might includ
coupon for free meal where the benefit of chiropract care ar explain
advertis for free initi care
booth at health fair mall and spa offer free screen
treatment for nonspin condit
at on time chiropractor onli treat spinal problem howev mani chiropractor now
claim that thei can treat ani medic condit includ cancer hernia pneumonia
anemia and heart condit for exampl on chiropract pamphlet state if you ar
suffer from kidnei diseas the logic cours is to visit your chiropractor he will
examin your spine to see where your troubl is
other question chiropract treatment
other type of question chiropract treatment includ
surrog test where the leg of a mother is flex to diagnos her child ill
spinal manipul of newborn babi to get over the trauma of birth
spinal manipul to treat epilepsi asthma bedwet and learn disabl
appli kinesiolog wherebi diseas can be diagnos by test muscl with the help
of particular food or nutrient
analysi of xrai to identifi homicid tendenc
the creation of a treatment plan prior to examin
spinal manipul begun at an earli ag to prevent cancer
iridolog or the examin of patient ey for mark that will indic what
diseas the patient ha or will get
a magnet devic place over the thymu gland to diagnos nutrient defici
red flag
warn sign that a chiropractor mai be engag in dishonest practic includ a
chiropractor who
take full spine or repeat xrai
health care fraud financi transact
11220 2011 fraud examin manual
prescrib treatment befor a medic histori or physic ar taken
solicit famili member
promis to prevent diseas through regular checkup
promis no outofpocket expens for patient
end treatment when their insur benefit ar exhaust but recontact patient for
mainten treatment when their benefit ar renew
podiatrist
like other medic provid uneth podiatrist mai
bill for servic never render
bill for noncov servic
provid kickback to supplier
ophthalmologist
ophthalmol ogist mai engag in fraudul practic such as
bill for servic never render and noncov servic
bill for unnecessari servic
psychiatrist and psychiatr clinic
fraud scheme commit by psychiatrist and psychiatr clinic can includ
bill for servic never render
bill for noncov servic such as weight loss servic or biofeedback
bill for servic under psychiatrist name when the servic wa actual perform by
a noncov but licens provid such as a drug counselor or minist
bill for servic perform by an unlicens employe
admit patient with fals diagnos
anesthesiologist
dishonest anesthesiologist mai bill for more time than wa render
dental fraud
fraud involv dental provid might includ bill for
xrai that were not taken
crown that were not cement
amalgam for teeth that were not fill
teeth that were not extract
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11221
fill for teeth that have previous been extract
more fill than a person can possibl have
allergist
fraud scheme involv allergist can includ bill for
allergi test not perform
unnecessari servic
allergi shot not given
infertil treatment
infertil treatment is gener not a servic cover by insur howev some lessthanhonest
provid will bill such servic as hormon replac therapi in order to
be paid
impostor provid
an impostor provid is a provid who doe not exist but bill fraudul claim a variat
on thi scam involv assum the identifi of a deceas provid and practiceor put
togeth a group of licens providersand fraudul bill under the group provid
identif code
investig tip
to help determin whether a provid is an impost
call the telephon number on the bill to determin if the provid exist howev keep
in mind that a fictiti provid mai actual have rent a locat and establish a
telephon number
contact the applic licens board or state to determin if the alleg provid wa
licens to practic in the area at the time the servic wa allegedli provid
check the provid social secur number or tax identif number if list on
the bill with the applic licens board
visit the provid physic address to determin if it is valid if it is speak to the
superintend to determin the tenant for that address
contact the postal inspector to verifi what mail is be drop at that address
health care fraud financi transact
11222 2011 fraud examin manual
fals diagnos
when a provid know that a servic is not cover he mai us fals diagnos or
procedur code manipul to get a claim for the servic paid exampl of common
servic not cover ar
annual physic examin
school physic
weight loss program
stop smoke program
investig or experiment procedur
cosmet surgeri
in addit physician mai justifi the order of expens xrai or other diagnost
servic by fals purport that a need exist to make such diagnost inquiri the
servic ar render but becaus is the claim for the servic is base on fals inform
and is us to deceiv the insur compani it is consid a fals claim
red flag of provid fraud
warn sign that a provid is engag in fraudul practic includ
pressur for rapid adjud of claim
threat of legal action for delai in make payment
frequent telephon inquiri on claim statu
assert provid who demand samedai claim payment and special handl
charg submit for payment with no support document avail such as x
rai or lab result
us of a po box as return address
insur address on claim form is the same as provid
routin not special treatment for patient live more than 150 mile from
the provid
refer physician and provid of servic in same profession corpor
medic record that have been alter
medic record that have addit informat ion attach that would make an appar
noncov servic now cover
miss page of medic record that would cover the period of time under review
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11223
