2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Provider Fraud/Rolling Labs


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Rolling Labs 
A rolling lab is a mobile laboratory that solicits insureds to participate in health screening tests 
at no cost to the insured. These labs are usually located in semi-trailers parked at health 
clubs, spas, shopping centers, or on vacant property. 
 
Patients are contacted by telephone for a free physical exam. Subsequent to exam, the 
insurance company is billed for eight to 10 claims totaling $8,000–$10,000 for a single date 
of testing performed by multiple providers. Additional claims are billed for later service dates 
even though no more testing is done. The lab moves to another location prior to the patient 
receiving the test results to avoid detection. 
 
The providers market their services in many ways. One way is to rent office space in a 
doctor’s office for one day and then test all of that doctor’s patients. The testing equipment 
itself might arrive in a truck or van and moves from one office to another. Another method 
involves setting up a temporary operation in a shopping center. Rolling labs are also set up at 
health spas, with all members tested at no charge. The most common method, however, is to 
simply set up a small office for a temporary period and use telephone solicitations. 
 



:


roll lab
a roll lab is a mobil laboratori that solicit insur to particip in health screen test
at no cost to the insur these lab ar usual locat in semitrail park at health
club spa shop center or on vacant properti
patient ar contact by telephon for a free physic exam subsequ to exam the
insur compani is bill for eight to 10 claim total 800010000 for a singl date
of test perform by multipl provid addit claim ar bill for later servic date
even though no more test is done the lab move to anoth locat prior to the patient
receiv the test result to avoid detect
the provid market their servic in mani wai on wai is to rent offic space in a
doctor offic for on dai and then test all of that doctor patient the test equip
itself might arriv in a truck or van and move from on offic to anoth anoth method
involv set up a temporari oper in a shop center roll lab ar also set up at
health spa with all member test at no charg the most common method howev is to
simpli set up a small offic for a temporari period and us telephon solicit
