2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Provider Fraud/Chiro-Shenanigans


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Chiro-Shenanigans 
PATIENTS FOR LIFE 
Charging annual fees that exceed $5,000, practice management firms teach chiropractors 
how to build million-dollar practices in as little as two years. The literature advises the 
chiropractors not to tell patients the results of their initial exam or how long they will need 
treatment until they’ve been indoctrinated into the benefits of lifelong chiropractic care. 
 
Further, they promote care of infants that will continue for the lifetime of the patient. 
Patients who question the continuation of treatment are given the guilty treatment: “It’s a 
choice you have to make depending on how important your health is to you.” 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1219 
Patients don’t seem to be cured until the insurance benefits run out. When benefits are 
renewed in the next calendar year, the symptoms return, and a new series of treatment 
begins until benefits run out again.  
 
PATIENT RECRUITING PRACTICES 
Some chiropractors use questionable recruiting practices to lure new patients into their 
practices. These might include: 
• Coupons for free meals where the benefits of chiropractic care are explained. 
• Advertising for free initial care. 
• Booths at health fairs, malls, and spas offering free screenings. 
 
TREATMENT FOR NONSPINAL CONDITIONS 
At one time chiropractors only treated spinal problems; however, many chiropractors now 
claim that they can treat any medical condition, including cancer, hernias, pneumonia, 
anemia, and heart conditions. For example, one chiropractic pamphlet stated, “If you are 
suffering from kidney disease, the logical course is to visit your chiropractor. He will 
examine your spine to see where your trouble is.” 
 
OTHER QUESTIONABLE CHIROPRACTIC TREATMENT 
Other types of questionable chiropractic treatment include: 
• Surrogate testing where the leg of a mother is flexed to diagnose her child’s illness. 
• Spinal manipulation of newborn babies to get over the trauma of birth. 
• Spinal manipulation to treat epilepsy, asthma, bedwetting, and learning disabilities. 
• Applied kinesiology whereby diseases can be diagnosed by testing muscles with the help 
of particular food or nutrients. 
• Analysis of x-rays to identify homicidal tendencies. 
• The creation of a treatment plan prior to examination. 
• Spinal manipulations begun at an early age to prevent cancer.  
• Iridology or the examination of patients’ eyes for markings that will indicate what 
diseases the patient has or will get. 
• A magnetic device placed over the thymus gland to diagnose nutrient deficiencies. 
 



:


chiroshenanigan
patient for life
charg annual fee that exce 5000 practic manag firm teach chiropractor
how to build milliondollar practic in as littl as two year the literatur advis the
chiropractor not to tell patient the result of their initi exam or how long thei will need
treatment until theyv been indoctrin into the benefit of lifelong chiropract care
further thei promot care of infant that will continu for the lifetim of the patient
patient who question the continu of treatment ar given the guilti treatment it a
choic you have to make depend on how import your health is to you
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11219
patient dont seem to be cure until the insur benefit run out when benefit ar
renew in the next calendar year the symptom return and a new seri of treatment
begin until benefit run out again
patient recruit practic
some chiropractor us question recruit practic to lure new patient into their
practic these might includ
coupon for free meal where the benefit of chiropract care ar explain
advertis for free initi care
booth at health fair mall and spa offer free screen
treatment for nonspin condit
at on time chiropractor onli treat spinal problem howev mani chiropractor now
claim that thei can treat ani medic condit includ cancer hernia pneumonia
anemia and heart condit for exampl on chiropract pamphlet state if you ar
suffer from kidnei diseas the logic cours is to visit your chiropractor he will
examin your spine to see where your troubl is
other question chiropract treatment
other type of question chiropract treatment includ
surrog test where the leg of a mother is flex to diagnos her child ill
spinal manipul of newborn babi to get over the trauma of birth
spinal manipul to treat epilepsi asthma bedwet and learn disabl
appli kinesiolog wherebi diseas can be diagnos by test muscl with the help
of particular food or nutrient
analysi of xrai to identifi homicid tendenc
the creation of a treatment plan prior to examin
spinal manipul begun at an earli ag to prevent cancer
iridolog or the examin of patient ey for mark that will indic what
diseas the patient ha or will get
a magnet devic place over the thymu gland to diagnos nutrient defici
