2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Kickbacks in the Health Care Industry


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Kickbacks in the Health Care Industry 
Kickbacks in the health care industry can come from several sources. The medical 
community is facing competition that it has not faced in the past, and monetary offers to 
prospective patients have been difficult to refuse. For example, in one South Florida 
community, incentives such as free transportation to medical facilities, shopping centers, and 
refreshments are common. 
 
Examples of kickbacks are: 
• Payment for referral of patients 
• Waiver of deductible and co-payments 
• Payment for insurance contracts 
• Payment for vendor contracts 
 
Payment for Referral of Patients 
Providers in an area of high competition will pay from $50 to $500 to cappers or runners  for 
recruiting new patients. In addition, patients may receive $50 if they refer a patient to a 
provider. The provider makes up for the kickback in the unnecessary billing of medical 
expenses or false claims. In addition, providers will pay kickbacks to other physicians for 
patient referrals. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1224                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Waiver of Deductibles and Co-payments 
Most insurance contracts require patients to pay a deductible and co-payment for services 
rendered. One of the reasons for having co-payments is to make insureds take an active part 
in the financial responsibility for their care. To attract patients, however, providers will 
forgive the patient’s out-of-pocket expense, but will make up for it in additional services that 
are billed to the insurance company. 
 
Payment for Insurance Contracts 
Physicians with patients who are facing long-term care or lifetime treatment, such as dialysis 
for kidney failure, may purchase contracts for their patients. This ensures that the provider 
will be paid, and the patient has no out-of-pocket expense. 
 
Payment for Vendor Contracts 
Companies doing business with medical practitioners will pay a “consulting” fee for referring 
business to them or using their supplies. 
 
Payments to Adjusters 
In order to get a claim settled quickly, an insured, or someone operating on his behalf, may 
bribe adjusters or other claims-handling personnel to approve or speed up the payment of  
a claim. 
 
 



:


kickback in the health care industri
kickback in the health care industri can come from sever sourc the medic
commun is face competit that it ha not face in the past and monetari offer to
prospect patient have been difficult to refus for exampl in on south florida
commun incent such as free transport to medic facil shop center and
refresh ar common
exampl of kickback ar
payment for referr of patient
waiver of deduct and copay
payment for insur contract
payment for vendor contract
payment for referr of patient
provid in an area of high competit will pai from 50 to 500 to capper or runner for
recruit new patient in addit patient mai receiv 50 if thei refer a patient to a
provid the provid make up for the kickback in the unnecessari bill of medic
expens or fals claim in addit provid will pai kickback to other physician for
patient referr
health care fraud financi transact
11224 2011 fraud examin manual
waiver of deduct and copay
most insur contract requir patient to pai a deduct and copay for servic
render on of the reason for have copay is to make insur take an activ part
in the financi respons for their care to attract patient howev provid will
forgiv the patient outofpocket expens but will make up for it in addit servic that
ar bill to the insur compani
payment for insur contract
physician with patient who ar face longterm care or lifetim treatment such as dialysi
for kidnei failur mai purchas contract for their patient thi ensur that the provid
will be paid and the patient ha no outofpocket expens
payment for vendor contract
compani do busi with medic practition will pai a consult fee for refer
busi to them or us their suppli
payment to adjust
in order to get a claim settl quickli an insur or someon oper on hi behalf mai
bribe adjust or other claimshandl personnel to approv or speed up the payment of
a claim
