2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Insured Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Insured Fraud 
Insureds may attempt to perpetrate a fraud by submitting fictitious claims forms: 
• Multiple surgeries. 
• Multiple office visits. 
• Foreign claims — Patient supposedly goes out of the country and falls ill. 
• Noncovered dependents. 
 
Doctor/ER Shopping 
Excessive drug claims for controlled substance drugs. Patient “shops” for controlled 
substance drugs. One physician does not know that the other has prescribed the drug. In 
addition, the patient may shop for drugs in emergency rooms complaining of soft tissue 
injuries, sprains, and strains. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1228                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Misrepresentation on Application 
Failure by insured to list all prior medical conditions or group to list medical conditions  
of employees. 
 
Third-Party Fraud 
This category involves an unauthorized use of an insured’s identification card by another  
known person or unknown person. The insurance company is usually notified by the insured 
once they receive a benefit statement work sheet for services rendered. 
 
Death of Insured 
The primary insured passes away; however, the beneficiary does not notify the insurance 
carrier and continues to submit fictitious claims on medical expenses after the death of the 
insured. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• Determine how the insured lost his card. If stolen, the police should be contacted to 
determine if the crime was reported. A copy of the police report should be obtained. 
• Obtain an actual description of the cardholder so that identification can be made of the 
impostor who used the card improperly. 
• Visit the providers or medical doctors to obtain any information to identify  
the perpetrator. 
 
 



:


insur fraud
insur mai attempt to perpetr a fraud by submit fictiti claim form
multipl surgeri
multipl offic visit
foreign claim patient supposedli goe out of the countri and fall ill
noncov depend
doctor shop
excess drug claim for control substanc drug patient shop for control
substanc drug on physician doe not know that the other ha prescrib the drug in
addit the patient mai shop for drug in emerg room complain of soft tissu
injuri sprain and strain
health care fraud financi transact
11228 2011 fraud examin manual
misrepresent on applic
failur by insur to list all prior medic condit or group to list medic condit
of employe
thirdparti fraud
thi categori involv an unauthor us of an insur identif card by anoth
known person or unknown person the insur compani is usual notifi by the insur
onc thei receiv a benefit statement work sheet for servic render
death of insur
the primari insur pass awai howev the beneficiari doe not notifi the insur
carrier and continu to submit fictiti claim on medic expens after the death of the
insur
investig tip
determin how the insur lost hi card if stolen the polic should be contact to
determin if the crime wa report a copi of the polic report should be obtain
obtain an actual descript of the cardhold so that identif can be made of the
impostor who us the card improperli
visit the provid or medic doctor to obtain ani inform to identifi
the perpetr
