2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Collusion


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Collusion 
Collusion  is the most difficult insurance fraud to detect since several people are involved in 
committing the fraud. Usually cases of this nature are disclosed by accident or by a tip 
received from someone who may have been involved and has had a falling-out. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1229 
Any time a frauds are committed by insureds, there is no question on the part of the 
perpetrators as to the intent to obtain funds to which they are not entitled. However, it is 
also extremely difficult to detect this type of fraud. 
 
Detection 
• Excessive billings report may show that a provider is submitting large amounts of 
expenses. In addition, the claimant requests substantial payments to be made to him 
rather than the provider. 
• Explanation of benefits, if submitted to the provider, will probably generate some 
reaction from the provider. If substantial, at the time that Form 1099 is submitted to the 
provider, there may also be comments by the provider. 
• Periodically, management should compare the membership/enrollment file to the Social 
Security file to determine if the insurance company is paying claims on deceased 
insureds. The membership file also may be compared to the file from the vital statistics 
department to search for divorced policyholders. 
 
Divorce 
An insured and a covered spouse file for divorce, but neither party notifies the insurance 
company. The ex-spouse, who remains at the address of record, continues to submit claims. 
 
Foreign Insured 
A foreign insured submits phony information that the primary insured passed away. For the 
last month he was hospitalized in a foreign hospital and a sizable bill was mailed to the 
carrier for payment. 
 
Investigation Tips 
• The claim file should be reviewed to determine if the charges are legitimate. 
• Determine if the medical language appears to be proper by comparing samples of bona 
fide claims. 
• It may be necessary to submit a letter to the attending physician to determine if the 
charges are correct. 
• Through law enforcement contacts, it may be necessary to obtain information regarding 
the legitimacy of the claim. 
• Check the style of the date. In many foreign countries, dates are listed with the day first, 
then the month and year, e.g., 07/01/08 would be 7 January 2008. If the U.S. style of 
dating is used (month/day/year), it may indicate a fraudulent claim. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1230                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


collus
collus is the most difficult insur fraud to detect sinc sever peopl ar involv in
commit the fraud usual case of thi natur ar disclos by accid or by a tip
receiv from someon who mai have been involv and ha had a fallingout
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11229
ani time a fraud ar commit by insur there is no question on the part of the
perpetr as to the intent to obtain fund to which thei ar not entitl howev it is
also extrem difficult to detect thi type of fraud
detect
excess bill report mai show that a provid is submit larg amount of
expens in addit the claimant request substanti payment to be made to him
rather than the provid
explan of benefit if submit to the provid will probabl gener some
reaction from the provid if substanti at the time that form 1099 is submit to the
provid there mai also be comment by the provid
period manag should compar the membershipenrol file to the social
secur file to determin if the insur compani is pai claim on deceas
insur the membership file also mai be compar to the file from the vital statist
depart to search for divorc policyhold
divorc
an insur and a cover spous file for divorc but neither parti notifi the insur
compani the exspous who remain at the address of record continu to submit claim
foreign insur
a foreign insur submit phoni inform that the primari insur pass awai for the
last month he wa hospit in a foreign hospit and a sizabl bill wa mail to the
carrier for payment
investig tip
the claim file should be review to determin if the charg ar legitim
determin if the medic languag appear to be proper by compar sampl of bona
fide claim
it mai be necessari to submit a letter to the attend physician to determin if the
charg ar correct
through law enforc contact it mai be necessari to obtain inform regard
the legitimaci of the claim
check the style of the date in mani foreign countri date ar list with the dai first
then the month and year eg 070108 would be 7 januari 2008 if the us style of
date is us monthdayyear it mai indic a fraudul claim
health care fraud financi transact
11230 2011 fraud examin manual
