2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Fraud by Medical Institutions


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Fraud by Medical Institutions 
Fraud schemes perpetrated by institutions and their employees include those commonly 
used by doctors and other providers. However, the more common schemes in which 
hospitals are primarily involved include: 
• Filing of false cost reports. 
• DRG creep. 
• Billing for experimental procedures. 
• Improper contractual and other relationships with physicians. 
• Revenue recovery firms to (knowingly or unknowingly) bill extra charges. 
 
False Cost Reports 
Cost reports sometimes include noncovered items such as golf outings, parties, and exotic 
trips disguised as covered items. For example, an investigation disclosed that a hospital 
recovered silver from the processing of x-ray film, sold it, gave it to the candy stripers, only 
to have it “donated” back to the hospital. Since Medicare doesn’t consider donations as 
revenue, the hospital was able to claim higher expenses, thus more money from Medicare. 
 
Inclusion of Unallowable Items 
• Expenses for tax penalties, late charges, and promotional advertising. 
• Costs incurred from a related-party transaction with a mark-up over the costs incurred 
by the related-party. 
• Expenses that are reimbursed under other programs (e.g., billable medical supplies and 
therapies). 
• Excessive expenses such as hotel, food, travel expenses for recreational events. 
• Luxury items (e.g., lavish furnishings, corporate planes, swimming pools, spas). 
 
DRG Creep 
Diagnostic Related Groupings (DRG) is a reimbursement methodology for the payment of 
institutional claims. It is a patient classification scheme that categorizes patients who are 
medically related with respect to primary and secondary diagnosis, age, and complications. 
Reimbursements are determined by the DRG. For example, a heart bypass operation is 
worth a certain amount of reimbursement and a hernia repair is worth a different amount. 
DRG creep occurs when a hospitalization is coded as a more complex admission than 
occurred. When it becomes a pattern and intent is established, it becomes fraud. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1232                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Another type of fraud using DRG codes involves billing for the DRG code and then billing 
again for services that were included in the DRG payment. 
 
Billing for Experimental Procedures 
It is reported that one form of medical fraud that is little known, but apparently widespread, 
is the third-party billing for experiments with new medical devices that have not yet been 
approved by the Food and Drug Administration. Some hospitals are deliberately misleading 
third-party payers by getting them to pay for the manufacturer’s research. Many of the 
doctors involved are alleged to have stock in the manufacturing companies. 
 
Improper Relationships with Physicians 
Certain relationships between hospitals and physicians result in fraud to the insurer. For 
instance, a hospital provides no or token reimbursement to pathologists for Medicare Part A 
services in return for the opportunity to perform and bill Part B services at that hospital. 
 
The following transactions are generally regarded as suspect: 
• Payment of any sort of incentive by the hospital each time a physician refers a patient to 
the hospital. 
• Provision of free or significantly discounted billing, nursing, or other staff services. 
• Free training for a physician’s office staff in areas such as management techniques, CPT 
coding, and laboratory techniques. 
• Guarantees that provide that, if the physician’s income fails to reach a predetermined 
level, the hospital will supplement the remainder up to a certain amount. 
• Low-interest or interest-free loans, or loans that may be forgiven if a physician refers 
patients to the hospital. 
• Payment of the cost of a physician’s travel and expenses for conferences. 
• Payment for a physician’s continuing education courses. 
• Coverage on the hospital’s group health insurance plan at an inappropriate or very  
low cost. 
• Payment for services, such as consultation at the hospital, that require few, if any, 
substantive duties by the physician, or payment for services in excess of the fair market 
value of services rendered. 
 
Revenue Recovery Firms 
Another form of health care fraud involves so-called revenue recovery firms padding 
medical bills. These billing consultants review patients’ bills (months or even years after 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1233 
treatment) looking for charges that were missed. Critics have charged that too often these 
firms pad medical bills by adding on fictitious charges. The more charges that are added 
onto the bill, the more the revenue recovery firm gets paid. In addition, their employees may 
be paid bonuses for piling on extra charges and pressured to meet monthly quotas.  
 
Changing Codes 
One of the most common methods used by revenue recovery firms is to change every 
hospital’s or nursing home’s billing codes. For instance, changing each code for an ordinary 
five-cent bandage so that the provider is charged for a $5 surgical dressing. 
 
Adding Items 
Extra charges are added onto hospital bills by assuming that hospitals used certain items, 
even though there was no evidence of the procedure or service. For instance, if the hospital 
had certain procedures for which they sometimes use a piece of x-ray equipment, the auditor 
reviewing the bill would always assume that the hospital had used the equipment, and they 
would put it on the bill. 
 
Kickbacks 
Often hospitals are unaware (sometimes intentionally) of the extent of the fraud committed 
by revenue recovery firms. In other cases, however, revenue firms report that they will 
contact a hospital or nursing home directly and tell them that if the institution will give them 
their bills, they will split the profit produced by the added charges. 
 
Billing for Expensive Treatments 
Numerous charges for the use of expensive treatments such as laser are added to patients’ 
bills. Charges may be added after the patient had already been billed for the use of the laser. 
 
Altering Records 
In some instances, firms may actually alter medical records. For example, in one case a firm 
added more than $1,300 to a patient’s bill for video equipment that was supposedly used 
during surgery. In order to justify the fraudulent billing, the firm checked a box on the 
surgical record to indicate that the equipment had been used. After the original document 
was obtained, it showed that the box was not checked on the original form completed by the 
surgical staff. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1234                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Donating Organs 
One hospital, which has ceased using a particular firm, reported that the firm regularly 
double billed for services and treatments, and in another instance, outside auditors found 
that the firm had tried to charge for dead patients donating their organs. 
 
Additional Anesthesia Time 
Another common scheme is the charging of additional hours of anesthesia. Patients should 
be billed from when they enter the surgery room to when they leave the surgery room. The 
revenue firm pads the bill by increasing the time billed to include time spent in a recovery 
room, or before the patient went into the operating room. 
 
Rent-a-Patient Schemes 
So called “rent-a-patient” schemes involve paying individuals to undergo unnecessary 
medical procedures that are then billed to the patient’s insurance. Rent-a-patient schemes 
typically begin with the leasing of a sham medical clinic. Past investigations show that these 
clinics tend to be nondescript, often within shopping centers, and in destitute sections of 
town. Almost always, the lessee of the clinic is involved in the criminal organization of the 
scheme. Once a sham clinic is in place, recruiters (a.k.a., “coyotes” or “cappers”) are hired to 
solicit low-income individuals, who speak little English, and offer them money in exchange 
for submitting to “minor” surgical procedures. Recruiters are often former criminals, for it is 
not as dangerous to deal patients, as it is to deal drugs, and can be much more lucrative 
(average $2,000 per willing participant). 
 
EXAMPLE 
A surgery center paid hundreds of dollars to patients who endured largely unnecessary 
operations and then falsely charged the go vernment. One of the operations involved 
collapsing the patient’s lung to snip a nerve that would supposedly control “sweaty palms.” 
The surgery did stop the patient’s not-so-sweaty palms from perspiring; it also caused the 
patient to lose strength in his hands, and sweat profusely on other parts of his body. 
 
Recruiters will scour low-income housing projects, elderly neighborhoods, and factories for 
victims. Once recruiters have convinced an individual to become a willing participant, they 
will request a copy of the individual’s benefit ca rd to confirm benefits prior to subjecting the 
patient to an unnecessary treatment. 
 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1235 
Recruiters will drive the patients, usually across state lines, to small “out of network” sham 
clinics. Along the way, the recruiter will advise each patient to describe particular false and 
embellished symptoms to the health professional at the clinic, such as: “I sweat too much”; 
“My stomach is bothering me”; “My nose hurts.” Such descriptions will later be used by the 
scam clinic to create medical charts, justifying a particular surgical procedure. Following a 
night of fast food and a cheap hotel, the patients are driven to a clinic. The patients then 
wait in line, sign an informed consent form, and promise to give the clinic all the checks 
thereafter received. Following administrative procedures, the patients briefly meet with a 
doctor and undergo the procedures that have been predetermined for them. Later that 
evening or the next day, the recruiter will give the patients a few hundred bucks and drive 
the patients home. 
 
After rendering services, the provider will bill the patients’ insurance company, Medicare, or 
Medicaid for the unnecessary procedures beyond the usual and customary cost (past 
investigations evidence up to 5,000 percent above average market price). The claims will 
likely include fees for surgical supplies and medical equipment that were never used or 
distributed. Some insurers reimburse patients directly for out-of-network claims, thereby 
requiring the patient to pay the facility. However, because the patients targeted in rent-a-
 patient scams are often indigent, and believe they deserve the money for enduring the 
unnecessary procedures, it is common for them to deposit or cash the checks. It is a cycle 
whereby the victims are not only used to perpetrate the fraud, but in the end become 
fraudsters themselves. 
 
Insurance companies have difficulty determining when rent-a-patient schemes are being 
committed because their claims systems can only compare codes, and cannot determine the 
usual and customary cost for a particular procedure. To make matters worse, some states 
have prompt pay laws, requiring claims to be paid within a period of time, such as 45-days. 
Rapid claims turnover inevitably leads to poor oversight regarding fraud-related claims. 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1236                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Source: U.S. GAO Report: Health Care Fraud: Schemes to Defraud Medicare, Medicaid, and Private Health Care 
Insurers  (July 2000).  
 
What to Do? 
Consumer education is the front line to battling rent-a-patient schemes. Insurance 
companies must educate their insureds on the prevalence of this type of fraud, and provide 
these individuals with means of communication when it is believed fraud is afoot. 
Disadvantaged populations must also be informed about the negative impacts of 
participating in such schemes (i.e., health risks and criminal liability). 
 
Insurance companies must educate from within. Investigation units should be established to 
include skilled fraud examiners. Fraud detection software programs should be purchased to 
detect irregular claims patterns. An example of progressive movement towards the fight 
against health care fraud is Blue Cross Blue Shield’s establishment of the Anti-Fraud Strike 
Force to bring Blue Plans together when faced with multi-jurisdictional health care fraud 
schemes. The program pools resources, insight, and intellect from around the country to 
circumvent and prosecute rent-a-patient schemes. 
 
Likewise, the federal government has implemen ted several organizations and programs to 
target health care fraud. For example, the Health Care Integrity and Protection Data Bank 
(HIPDB) is a flagging system that alerts federal and state government agencies commence 
with a more thorough review of a practitioner’s, provider’s, or supplier’s past dealings. Not 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1237 
only may federal and state governments review the database for potential red flags, but also 
they must report the following information: health care-related civil judgments and criminal 
convictions in federal or state court; injunctions; administrative actions; participation 
exclusions; and the like. Failure to report such information may subject a health plan to a 
civil penalty of up to $25,000 for each adverse action not reported. 
 
Red Flags of Rent-A-Patient Schemes 
• Large influx of out-of-state patients to a particular clinic; including clusters of patients 
from a particular location. 
• Several non-related procedures on a patient in a short period of time (e.g., a colonoscopy 
and circumcision on one patient within a few days or even weeks). 
• Numerous claims by a particular clinic for the following procedures: colonoscopies, 
endoscopies, septoplasties, circumcisions, and thoracoscopies with sympathectomy 
(a.k.a., “sweaty palms surgery”). 
• Parallel procedures on families (husbands, wives, and children) on the same day. 
• Extremely high staff salaries. 
• Charging beyond the average market price for procedures, medical equipment,  
and devices. 
• Frequent patients with out-of-network coverage. 
 
 



:


fraud by medic institut
fraud scheme perpetr by institut and their employe includ those commonli
us by doctor and other provid howev the more common scheme in which
hospit ar primarili involv includ
file of fals cost report
drg creep
bill for experiment procedur
improp contractu and other relationship with physician
revenu recoveri firm to knowingli or unknowingli bill extra charg
fals cost report
cost report sometim includ noncov item such as golf out parti and exot
trip disguis as cover item for exampl an investig disclos that a hospit
recov silver from the process of xrai film sold it gave it to the candi striper onli
to have it donat back to the hospit sinc medicar doesnt consid donat as
revenu the hospit wa abl to claim higher expens thu more monei from medicar
inclus of unallow item
expens for tax penalti late charg and promot advertis
cost incur from a relatedparti transact with a markup over the cost incur
by the relatedparti
expens that ar reimburs under other program eg billabl medic suppli and
therapi
excess expens such as hotel food travel expens for recreat event
luxuri item eg lavish furnish corpor plane swim pool spa
drg creep
diagnost relat group drg is a reimburs methodolog for the payment of
institut claim it is a patient classif scheme that categor patient who ar
medic relat with respect to primari and secondari diagnosi ag and complic
reimburs ar determin by the drg for exampl a heart bypass oper is
worth a certain amount of reimburs and a hernia repair is worth a differ amount
drg creep occur when a hospit is code as a more complex admiss than
occur when it becom a pattern and intent is establish it becom fraud
health care fraud financi transact
11232 2011 fraud examin manual
anoth type of fraud us drg code involv bill for the drg code and then bill
again for servic that were includ in the drg payment
bill for experiment procedur
it is report that on form of medic fraud that is littl known but appar widespread
is the thirdparti bill for experi with new medic devic that have not yet been
approv by the food and drug administr some hospit ar deliber mislead
thirdparti payer by get them to pai for the manufactur research mani of the
doctor involv ar alleg to have stock in the manufactur compani
improp relationship with physician
certain relationship between hospit and physician result in fraud to the insur for
instanc a hospit provid no or token reimburs to pathologist for medicar part a
servic in return for the opportun to perform and bill part b servic at that hospit
the follow transact ar gener regard as suspect
payment of ani sort of incent by the hospit each time a physician refer a patient to
the hospit
provis of free or significantli discount bill nurs or other staff servic
free train for a physician offic staff in area such as manag techniqu cpt
code and laboratori techniqu
guarante that provid that if the physician incom fail to reach a predetermin
level the hospit will supplement the remaind up to a certain amount
lowinterest or interestfre loan or loan that mai be forgiven if a physician refer
patient to the hospit
payment of the cost of a physician travel and expens for confer
payment for a physician continu educ cours
coverag on the hospit group health insur plan at an inappropri or veri
low cost
payment for servic such as consult at the hospit that requir few if ani
substant duti by the physician or payment for servic in excess of the fair market
valu of servic render
revenu recoveri firm
anoth form of health care fraud involv socal revenu recoveri firm pad
medic bill these bill consult review patient bill month or even year after
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11233
treatment look for charg that were miss critic have charg that too often these
firm pad medic bill by ad on fictiti charg the more charg that ar ad
onto the bill the more the revenu recoveri firm get paid in addit their employe mai
be paid bonus for pile on extra charg and pressur to meet monthli quota
chang code
on of the most common method us by revenu recoveri firm is to chang everi
hospit or nurs home bill code for instanc chang each code for an ordinari
fivec bandag so that the provid is charg for a 5 surgic dress
ad item
extra charg ar ad onto hospit bill by assum that hospit us certain item
even though there wa no evid of the procedur or servic for instanc if the hospit
had certain procedur for which thei sometim us a piec of xrai equip the auditor
review the bill would alwai assum that the hospit had us the equip and thei
would put it on the bill
kickback
often hospit ar unawar sometim intention of the extent of the fraud commit
by revenu recoveri firm in other case howev revenu firm report that thei will
contact a hospit or nurs home directli and tell them that if the institut will give them
their bill thei will split the profit produc by the ad charg
bill for expens treatment
numer charg for the us of expens treatment such as laser ar ad to patient
bill charg mai be ad after the patient had alreadi been bill for the us of the laser
alter record
in some instanc firm mai actual alter medic record for exampl in on case a firm
ad more than 1300 to a patient bill for video equip that wa supposedli us
dure surgeri in order to justifi the fraudul bill the firm check a box on the
surgic record to indic that the equip had been us after the origin document
wa obtain it show that the box wa not check on the origin form complet by the
surgic staff
health care fraud financi transact
11234 2011 fraud examin manual
donat organ
on hospit which ha ceas us a particular firm report that the firm regularli
doubl bill for servic and treatment and in anoth instanc outsid auditor found
that the firm had tri to charg for dead patient donat their organ
addit anesthesia time
anoth common scheme is the charg of addit hour of anesthesia patient should
be bill from when thei enter the surgeri room to when thei leav the surgeri room the
revenu firm pad the bill by increas the time bill to includ time spent in a recoveri
room or befor the patient went into the oper room
rentapati scheme
so call rentapati scheme involv pai individu to undergo unnecessari
medic procedur that ar then bill to the patient insur rentapati scheme
typic begin with the leas of a sham medic clinic past investig show that these
clinic tend to be nondescript often within shop center and in destitut section of
town almost alwai the lesse of the clinic is involv in the crimin organ of the
scheme onc a sham clinic is in place recruit aka coyot or capper ar hire to
solicit lowincom individu who speak littl english and offer them monei in exchang
for submit to minor surgic procedur recruit ar often former crimin for it is
not as danger to deal patient as it is to deal drug and can be much more lucr
averag 2000 per will particip
exampl
a surgeri center paid hundr of dollar to patient who endur larg unnecessari
oper and then fals charg the go vernment on of the oper involv
collaps the patient lung to snip a nerv that would supposedli control sweati palm
the surgeri did stop the patient notsosweati palm from perspir it also caus the
patient to lose strength in hi hand and sweat profus on other part of hi bodi
recruit will scour lowincom hous project elderli neighborhood and factori for
victim onc recruit have convinc an individu to becom a will particip thei
will request a copi of the individu benefit ca rd to confirm benefit prior to subject the
patient to an unnecessari treatment
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11235
recruit will drive the patient usual across state line to small out of network sham
clinic along the wai the recruit will advis each patient to describ particular fals and
embellish symptom to the health profession at the clinic such as i sweat too much
my stomach is bother me my nose hurt such descript will later be us by the
scam clinic to creat medic chart justifi a particular surgic procedur follow a
night of fast food and a cheap hotel the patient ar driven to a clinic the patient then
wait in line sign an inform consent form and promis to give the clinic all the check
thereaft receiv follow administr procedur the patient briefli meet with a
doctor and undergo the procedur that have been predetermin for them later that
even or the next dai the recruit will give the patient a few hundr buck and drive
the patient home
after render servic the provid will bill the patient insur compani medicar or
medicaid for the unnecessari procedur beyond the usual and customari cost past
investig evid up to 5000 percent abov averag market price the claim will
like includ fee for surgic suppli and medic equip that were never us or
distribut some insur reimburs patient directli for outofnetwork claim therebi
requir the patient to pai the facil howev becaus the patient target in renta
patient scam ar often indig and believ thei deserv the monei for endur the
unnecessari procedur it is common for them to deposit or cash the check it is a cycl
wherebi the victim ar not onli us to perpetr the fraud but in the end becom
fraudster themselv
insur compani have difficulti determin when rentapati scheme ar be
commit becaus their claim system can onli compar code and cannot determin the
usual and customari cost for a particular procedur to make matter wors some state
have prompt pai law requir claim to be paid within a period of time such as 45dai
rapid claim turnov inevit lead to poor oversight regard fraudrel claim
health care fraud financi transact
11236 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc us gao report health care fraud scheme to defraud medicar medicaid and privat health care
insur juli 2000
what to do
consum educ is the front line to battl rentapati scheme insur
compani must educ their insur on the preval of thi type of fraud and provid
these individu with mean of commun when it is believ fraud is afoot
disadvantag popul must also be inform about the neg impact of
particip in such scheme ie health risk and crimin liabil
insur compani must educ from within investig unit should be establish to
includ skill fraud examin fraud detect softwar program should be purchas to
detect irregular claim pattern an exampl of progress movement toward the fight
against health care fraud is blue cross blue shield establish of the antifraud strike
forc to bring blue plan togeth when face with multijurisdict health care fraud
scheme the program pool resourc insight and intellect from around the countri to
circumv and prosecut rentapati scheme
likewis the feder govern ha implemen ted sever organ and program to
target health care fraud for exampl the health care integr and protect data bank
hipdb is a flag system that alert feder and state govern agenc commenc
with a more thorough review of a practition provid or supplier past deal not
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11237
onli mai feder and state govern review the databas for potenti red flag but also
thei must report the follow inform health carerel civil judgment and crimin
convict in feder or state court injunct administr action particip
exclus and the like failur to report such inform mai subject a health plan to a
civil penalti of up to 25000 for each advers action not report
red flag of rentapati scheme
larg influx of outofst patient to a particular clinic includ cluster of patient
from a particular locat
sever nonrel procedur on a patient in a short period of time eg a colonoscopi
and circumcis on on patient within a few dai or even week
numer claim by a particular clinic for the follow procedur colonoscopi
endoscopi septoplasti circumcis and thoracoscopi with sympathectomi
aka sweati palm surgeri
parallel procedur on famili husband wive and children on the same dai
extrem high staff salari
charg beyond the averag market price for procedur medic equip
and devic
frequent patient with outofnetwork coverag
