2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Psychiatric Hospital Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Psychiatric Hospital Fraud 
Psychiatric hospitals are susceptible to fraud because of the very nature of mental health 
problems and the manner in which they are diagnosed and treated. Unlike the acute care 
field, it is often difficult to determine whether a person is in need of hospitalization for 
psychiatric treatment. 
 
Abuse in the Admissions Process 
Some psychiatric treatment facilities have developed programs for patients who exhibit 
symptoms of both psychiatric illness and substance abuse problems. Fraud occurs when a 
patient is admitted on the basis of a diagnosis that reflects the patient’s insurance coverage 
rather than the patient’s illness. Psychiatric hospitals have been accused of finding something 
wrong with patients when it is discovered that they have insurance coverage. Such patients 
may often be admitted without examination by a physician. 
 
Fraud in the Treatment Process 
The following types of abuses can occur with regard to psychiatric treatment: 
• Extending the length of treatment programs or delaying discharges because patients have 
additional insurance benefits remaining. 
• The use of illegitimate, questionable, non-approved, or dangerous treatment programs 
and forms of therapy, such as brain wave synchronization, magnet therapy, memory 
retrieval/enhancement therapy, and deep sleep therapy 
• Engaging in excessive treatment of psychiatric patients such as thyroid testing, drug tests, 
or psychiatric evaluation tests. 
 
Abusive Marketing Practices 
Many hospitals rely on marketing as a means of encouraging treatment and generating 
referrals. Overly aggressive marketing methods include: 
• Paying bonuses to employees to persuade or pressure prospective patients to undergo a 
psychiatric evaluation and to admit themselves for treatment. 
• Encouraging patients to admit themselves by offering financial incentives such as 
payment of plane fare, child care, COBRA payments, and waivers of patient co-
 payments or deductibles. 
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1240                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Financial Rewards for Referrals 
Many facilities are dependent on outside sources of patient referrals such as physicians or 
other clinicians. This dependence has led some hospitals to develop economic relationships 
in order to obtain referrals: 
• Rewarding clinicians who refer patients by referring patients who need outpatient 
treatment to those clinicians. 
• Allowing allied health professionals who refer patients to provide therapy for their own 
patients at the hospital; while nonreferring allied professionals are not allowed to use  
the hospital. 
• Paying medical directors or other physicians an incentive bonus linked to the overall 
profitability of the hospital. 
• Paying a physician who is under contract to the hospital but who provides no services. 
 
Red Flags for Psychiatric and Substance Abuse Claims 
• Treatment takes place far from patient’s home. 
• Diagnosis becomes alcoholism when state mandate reimburses alcoholism like any  
other illness. 
• Patient is on disability. 
• Provider’s credentials are questionable. 
• Documentation of treatment is lacking. 
• Ancillary services are not treatment oriented. 
 
 



:


psychiatr hospit fraud
psychiatr hospit ar suscept to fraud becaus of the veri natur of mental health
problem and the manner in which thei ar diagnos and treat unlik the acut care
field it is often difficult to determin whether a person is in need of hospit for
psychiatr treatment
abus in the admiss process
some psychiatr treatment facil have develop program for patient who exhibit
symptom of both psychiatr ill and substanc abus problem fraud occur when a
patient is admit on the basi of a diagnosi that reflect the patient insur coverag
rather than the patient ill psychiatr hospit have been accus of find someth
wrong with patient when it is discov that thei have insur coverag such patient
mai often be admit without examin by a physician
fraud in the treatment process
the follow type of abus can occur with regard to psychiatr treatment
extend the length of treatment program or delai discharg becaus patient have
addit insur benefit remain
the us of illegitim question nonapprov or danger treatment program
and form of therapi such as brain wave synchron magnet therapi memori
retrievalenhanc therapi and deep sleep therapi
engag in excess treatment of psychiatr patient such as thyroid test drug test
or psychiatr evalu test
abus market practic
mani hospit reli on market as a mean of encourag treatment and gener
referr overli aggress market method includ
pai bonus to employe to persuad or pressur prospect patient to undergo a
psychiatr evalu and to admit themselv for treatment
encourag patient to admit themselv by offer financi incent such as
payment of plane fare child care cobra payment and waiver of patient co
payment or deduct
health care fraud financi transact
11240 2011 fraud examin manual
financi reward for referr
mani facil ar depend on outsid sourc of patient referr such as physician or
other clinician thi depend ha led some hospit to develop econom relationship
in order to obtain referr
reward clinician who refer patient by refer patient who need outpati
treatment to those clinician
allow alli health profession who refer patient to provid therapi for their own
patient at the hospit while nonref alli profession ar not allow to us
the hospit
pai medic director or other physician an incent bonu link to the overal
profit of the hospit
pai a physician who is under contract to the hospit but who provid no servic
red flag for psychiatr and substanc abus claim
treatment take place far from patient home
diagnosi becom alcohol when state mandat reimburs alcohol like ani
other ill
patient is on disabl
provid credenti ar question
document of treatment is lack
ancillari servic ar not treatment orient
