2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Other Frauds in the Institutional Setting


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Other Frauds in the Institutional Setting 
 
Write-Off of Patient Accounts 
When a patient account or other type of receivable has been determined to be uncollectible, 
the account is written-off to bad debts. It becomes a fraudulent transaction when the 
account has been written-off prematurely and the balance subsequently collected with the 
proceeds going to the employee. In this scheme, the employee has the opportunity to collect 
the receivable and divert the funds to himself, because companies typically do not keep track 
of old, written-off accounts receivable. 
 
Often old accounts receivable are assigned to a collection agency. These agencies typically 
are paid on a percentage of the collected amounts. Fraud schemes can be perpetrated by 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1241 
these agencies if the company does not monitor the method by which the agency receives 
old accounts and the collection process itself.  
 
The assignor company needs to assure itself that the collection agency is being assigned truly 
old accounts only and not good accounts that can reasonably be expected to pay within the 
normal course of business.  
 
Additionally, the company needs to be sure that the collection agency cannot compromise 
the indebtedness so that collections are not reported. This would allow the collection agency 
to compromise indebtedness for its own collection and not remit amounts owed the 
company. 
 
Credit Balances 
When patients have more than one payer responsible for payment of an admission, 
institutions have been known to collect more than the original amount billed. This may 
occur when the patient has more than one health insurance company, is in a vehicle accident 
where multiple insurance carriers are involved, or where workers’ compensation is 
applicable. In addition, the facility may also collect the deductible and co-payment from the 
patient. If the hospital has a credit balance, the amount paid above the charges should be 
refunded to the applicable parties. However, this does not always occur. Generally the 
refund will be made upon request, but only upon request. 
 
Theft of Pharmaceuticals and Supplies 
Because of the ready market for selling pharmaceuticals and supplies, they have a propensity 
for being stolen. Narcotic drugs, although they are usually tightly controlled, still may be 
stolen and sold on the street. Supplies such as canes, sunglasses after cataract surgery, and 
admission kits are popular items for theft or employee abuse. 
 
 



:


other fraud in the institut set
writeoff of patient account
when a patient account or other type of receiv ha been determin to be uncollect
the account is writtenoff to bad debt it becom a fraudul transact when the
account ha been writtenoff prematur and the balanc subsequ collect with the
proce go to the employe in thi scheme the employe ha the opportun to collect
the receiv and divert the fund to himself becaus compani typic do not keep track
of old writtenoff account receiv
often old account receiv ar assign to a collect agenc these agenc typic
ar paid on a percentag of the collect amount fraud scheme can be perpetr by
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11241
these agenc if the compani doe not monitor the method by which the agenc receiv
old account and the collect process itself
the assignor compani need to assur itself that the collect agenc is be assign truli
old account onli and not good account that can reason be expect to pai within the
normal cours of busi
addition the compani need to be sure that the collect agenc cannot compromis
the indebted so that collect ar not report thi would allow the collect agenc
to compromis indebted for it own collect and not remit amount ow the
compani
credit balanc
when patient have more than on payer respons for payment of an admiss
institut have been known to collect more than the origin amount bill thi mai
occur when the patient ha more than on health insur compani is in a vehicl accid
where multipl insur carrier ar involv or where worker compens is
applic in addit the facil mai also collect the deduct and copay from the
patient if the hospit ha a credit balanc the amount paid abov the charg should be
refund to the applic parti howev thi doe not alwai occur gener the
refund will be made upon request but onli upon request
theft of pharmaceut and suppli
becaus of the readi market for sell pharmaceut and suppli thei have a propens
for be stolen narcot drug although thei ar usual tightli control still mai be
stolen and sold on the street suppli such as cane sunglass after cataract surgeri and
admiss kit ar popular item for theft or employe abus
