2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Managed Care


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Managed Care 
The United States’ health care system is moving toward more and different types of 
“managed” care. As the country moves to a different type of health care delivery system, so 
may the types of fraud. 
 
Traditionally, health care has been provided and paid for on a “fee-for-service” basis where 
payments were made either directly to the health care provider as payment for services 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1242                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
rendered to the insured party, or to the insured as reimbursement for medical expenses 
incurred. The premise behind managed care is that the medical practitioner is responsible for 
managing the total needs of the patient. The primary purpose of managed care is to reduce 
cost by promoting the most appropriate and efficient use of medical services.  
 
The most common managed care arrangements are: 
• Modified traditional coverage 
• HMOs 
• PPOs 
 
Modified Traditional Coverage 
Under this type of coverage, the medical practitioner is reimbursed through a fee-for-service 
arrangement. The patient is free to choose a provider and a claim is submitted for 
reimbursement by either the insured or the provider. It is a managed care model in that cost-
 cutting measures are in the form of utilization review, prior authorization, second surgical 
opinions, and hospital pre-authorizations. 
 
HMOs 
HMOs, or Health Maintenance Organizations, have several variations. The HMO may 
employ all of the providers as in a staff-model HMO, or the managed care organization may 
contract with individual physicians or physician groups. The insured selects a primary care 
physician (PCP) who is the gatekeeper. Generally all medical care is initiated through the 
PCP. Payment is made by capitation, that is, the PCP receives a flat fee per month from the 
managed care organization, although some fees still may be paid on a fee-per-service basis 
usually at a reduced rate. Care that cannot be performed by the PCP is done by a specialty 
care physician who is also a member of the HMO network. The patient is severely penalized 
for going outside the HMO network. 
 
PPOs 
PPO, or Preferred Provider Organization, is  a managed care arrangement in which the 
patient chooses a provider from a list of participating providers in the PPO network. Their 
care is not managed by one provider as in the HMO, and they may see any provider in the 
network. The patient is penalized for going outside the network, although not as severely as 
in an HMO network. Providers usually must bill the third-party payer and claims are 
assigned.  
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1243 
How Managed Care Alters the Potential for Fraud 
In a managed care environment, fraud is not eliminated. Insured fraud may be reduced 
substantially, but provider fraud is still alive and well. In addition to billing fraudulent 
services, managed care has an additional incentive for fraud. Because the providers share in 
the financial risk of a patient, there is the potential to provide less services to a patient since a 
fixed capitation rate allows the patients unlimited visits to a provider. 
 
Types of Managed Care Frauds 
• Inadequate treatment of patients. 
• Referring patients automatically to providers outside the network (perhaps in exchange 
for kickbacks from outside providers). 
• Establishment of inconvenient appointment hours, service locations, etc. to suppress the 
number of patients. 
• Inflating reports of patient traffic and treatment costs to induce payers to increase future 
per patient capitation fees. 
• False claims for services not covered by fixed capitation payments. 
• Falsification of quality of care and/or treatment-outcome data. 
• Providers misrepresenting their credentials or qualifications for admission to a given 
payer’s network of managed care providers. 
• Out-of-network overbilling for substandard services. 
• Employees’ creating claim checks during periods when the plan no longer is doing 
business with the HMO, but treatment of members continues due to existing problems. 
• Providing kickbacks to employees of managed care organizations for putting patients in 
their panel. 
 
Managed care systems also create the opportunity for fraud by the insureds. Some of the 
examples of fraud that may be found in the managed care environment include  
the following: 
• Patients (members) loaning or selling use of card to nonmembers. 
• Enrolling noneligible persons as members for obtaining treatment. 
• Failing to disenroll ex-spouse of family members. 
• Out-of-network falsified emergency trea tment in collusion with providers. 
 
Red Flags 
Some of the red flags for managed care frauds are: 
• Identifying providers who regularly waive co-payments or deductibles. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1244                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Unusual referral patterns—either too high or too low. 
• Unusually high pattern of referrals to pharmacies, laboratories, or specialty  
care physicians. 
• High number of emergency room referrals. 
• Patient complaints about the treatment. 
• A pattern of high number of services that fall outside of the capitated services. 
 
 



:


manag care
the unit state health care system is move toward more and differ type of
manag care as the countri move to a differ type of health care deliveri system so
mai the type of fraud
tradition health care ha been provid and paid for on a feeforservic basi where
payment were made either directli to the health care provid as payment for servic
health care fraud financi transact
11242 2011 fraud examin manual
render to the insur parti or to the insur as reimburs for medic expens
incur the premis behind manag care is that the medic practition is respons for
manag the total need of the patient the primari purpos of manag care is to reduc
cost by promot the most appropri and effici us of medic servic
the most common manag care arrang ar
modifi tradit coverag
hmo
ppo
modifi tradit coverag
under thi type of coverag the medic practition is reimburs through a feeforservic
arrang the patient is free to choos a provid and a claim is submit for
reimburs by either the insur or the provid it is a manag care model in that cost
cut measur ar in the form of util review prior author second surgic
opinion and hospit preauthor
hmo
hmo or health mainten organ have sever variat the hmo mai
emploi all of the provid as in a staffmodel hmo or the manag care organ mai
contract with individu physician or physician group the insur select a primari care
physician pcp who is the gatekeep gener all medic care is initi through the
pcp payment is made by capit that is the pcp receiv a flat fee per month from the
manag care organ although some fee still mai be paid on a feeperservic basi
usual at a reduc rate care that cannot be perform by the pcp is done by a specialti
care physician who is also a member of the hmo network the patient is sever penal
for go outsid the hmo network
ppo
ppo or prefer provid organ is a manag care arrang in which the
patient choos a provid from a list of particip provid in the ppo network their
care is not manag by on provid as in the hmo and thei mai see ani provid in the
network the patient is penal for go outsid the network although not as sever as
in an hmo network provid usual must bill the thirdparti payer and claim ar
assign
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11243
how manag care alter the potenti for fraud
in a manag care environ fraud is not elimin insur fraud mai be reduc
substanti but provid fraud is still aliv and well in addit to bill fraudul
servic manag care ha an addit incent for fraud becaus the provid share in
the financi risk of a patient there is the potenti to provid less servic to a patient sinc a
fix capit rate allow the patient unlimit visit to a provid
type of manag care fraud
inadequ treatment of patient
refer patient automat to provid outsid the network perhap in exchang
for kickback from outsid provid
establish of inconveni appoint hour servic locat etc to suppress the
number of patient
inflat report of patient traffic and treatment cost to induc payer to increas futur
per patient capit fee
fals claim for servic not cover by fix capit payment
falsif of qualiti of care andor treatmentoutcom data
provid misrepres their credenti or qualif for admiss to a given
payer network of manag care provid
outofnetwork overbil for substandard servic
employe creat claim check dure period when the plan no longer is do
busi with the hmo but treatment of member continu due to exist problem
provid kickback to employe of manag care organ for put patient in
their panel
manag care system also creat the opportun for fraud by the insur some of the
exampl of fraud that mai be found in the manag care environ includ
the follow
patient member loan or sell us of card to nonmemb
enrol nonelig person as member for obtain treatment
fail to disenrol exspous of famili member
outofnetwork falsifi emerg trea tment in collus with provid
red flag
some of the red flag for manag care fraud ar
identifi provid who regularli waiv copay or deduct
health care fraud financi transact
11244 2011 fraud examin manual
unusu referr patternseith too high or too low
unusu high pattern of referr to pharmaci laboratori or specialti
care physician
high number of emerg room referr
patient complaint about the treatment
a pattern of high number of servic that fall outsid of the capit servic
