2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/HEALTH CARE FRAUD/Medicaid Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Health Care Fraud


:


Medicaid Fraud 
In 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Social Security Act, which established 
Medicare and Medicaid. These programs provide medical and health-related services to 
specific groups of people in the United States. Both programs are managed by the Centers 
for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), a federal agency within the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.  
 
Although both Medicare and Medicaid provide medical and health-related services, there are 
several differences between the two programs. Medicare, which is funded and governed by 
the federal government, is the federal health insurance program for people age 65 or older 
and most people with certain disabilities; it is financed by Social Security contributions. 
Conversely, Medicaid is a federal- and state-funded program that provides health care 
coverage for low-income families and children, medical and long-term care coverage for 
people with disabilities, and assistance with health and long-term care expenses for low-
 income seniors. Although Medicaid is a federal program, it is operated by the states, and 
each state decides eligibility and the scope of coverage. Medicaid does not require recipients 
to make contributions, and it is financed from general revenues. 
 
According to the federal government, Medicaid fraud involves purposely billing Medicaid for 
services that were never provided or received. 
 
As the number of individuals enrolled in Medi caid increases, the amount of funds being 
expended by these programs leaves the industry at a significant risk for fraudulent claims. 
Medicaid expenditures comprised $216 billion of the 2009 federal budget. The proposed 
fiscal year 2011 budget includes a $1.7 billion allotment to fight fraud and abuse in the 
Medicare and Medicaid systems. 
 
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1245 
In response to the enormous increase in Me dicaid fraud, the federal government has 
established departments, programs, statutes, and funds for deterring, investigating, and 
prosecuting such types of fraud.  
 
An Overview of the Medicaid System 
For a state to establish a Medicaid program for its residents, it must comply with specific 
federal guidelines. Each state must: 
• Establish its own eligibility standards;  
• Determine the type, amount, duration, and scope of services;  
• Set the rate of payment for services; and  
• Administer its own program. 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1246                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
AGENCY RESPONSIBILITY  RELATED ACTIVITIES 
FEDERAL      

CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES
• Assist each state in increasing the 
effectiveness of its Medicaid 
program integrity efforts.  
• Acts as an oversight entity of 
states’ fraud and abuse efforts.  
• Keeps the alliance in working 
order.  
• Oversees state Medicaid agencies. 
• Facilitates communication 
and information sharing 
between the federal 
government and states  
• Establishes a national forum 
for Medicaid fraud and abuse 
issues.  
• Provides ongoing forums and 
training for state officials on 
fraud control.  
HHS (OIG) 
• Oversees state Medicaid Fraud 
Control Units.  
• Investigates federal Medicaid 
fraud cases. 
• Sanctions fraudulent 
providers by imposing 
exclusions and civil monetary 
penalties. 
• Refers investigative findings 
to the DOJ. 
DOJ (U.S. ATTORNEYS)  
• Prosecutes Medicaid fraud cases 
referred by the FBI and OIG.  
• Indicts, negotiates 
settlements, and recovers 
damages. 
DOJ (FBI)  
• Investigates federal fraud cases 
(can’t impose sanctions).  
• Refers investigative findings 
to U.S. Attorneys.  
STATE MEDICAID AGENCY
• Administers state Medicaid 
programs.  
• Conducts pre- and post-payment 
claims reviews. 
• Administers provider 
enrollment processes. 
Program
Integrity Unit 
• Reviews claims data to detect and 
investigates unusual payment 
patterns. 
• Conducts various integrity 
activities. 
• Refers suspected fraud cases 
to the state’s Medicaid Fraud 
Control Unit. 
• Refers civil cases to the state 
Medicaid agency’s collection 
unit. 
MEDICAID FRAUD CONTROL UNIT (MFCU)  
• Investigates and prosecutes cases 
involving Medicaid fraud. 
• Investigates and acts on 
complaints of abuse or neglect of 
patients in facilities receiving 
Medicaid funding. 
• Refers cases that will not be 
prosecuted to the state 
Medicaid agency or other 
authority for administrative 
action.  
 
  
Financial Transactions  Health Care Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1247 
Federal Legislation 
The following are some of the most common federal statutes used to prosecute  
Medicaid fraud: 
• The Medicare and Medicaid Anti-Kickback Statute 
• The Civil False Claims Act 
• The Stark Law 
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) 
 
State Level Enforcement 
In 1977, Congress devised the Medicaid Fraud Control Units (MFCU) program, to help 
states counter Medicaid fraud. MFCUs are state law enforcement agencies that investigate 
and prosecute cases involving Medicaid fraud, investigate and act on complaints of abuse or 
neglect of patients in facilities receiving Medica id funding, and refer cases, which will not be 
prosecuted, to the state Medicaid agency or other authority for administrative action. The 
only way a state can keep from establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud 
in their state. 
 
Under MFCU program, each state is to implement its own MFCU. The federal government 
subsidizes each state’s program with 90 percent of the monies necessary to get that state’s 
MFCU up and rolling. Three years thereafter, the federal government provides the state’s 
MFCU with 75 percent of its operating costs. The only way a state can keep from 
establishing an MFCU is by certifying that there is no fraud in their state. 
 
Federal initiatives such as this have helped states effectively curb Medicaid fraud on state and 
local levels. According to the United States Government Accountability Office, for FY 2008, 
state MFCUs recovered more than $1.3 billion in  legal restitution, obtained more than 1,314 
convictions, and excluded 971 individuals from participating in the Medicaid and Medicare 
programs. 
 
To identify and detect Medicaid fraud at any level, fraud examiners must be apprised of 
various Medicaid fraud schemes because such schemes are, often, more stringently regulated 
at the state level.  
 
 
Health Care Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1248                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


medicaid fraud
in 1965 presid lyndon b johnson sign the social secur act which establish
medicar and medicaid these program provid medic and healthrel servic to
specif group of peopl in the unit state both program ar manag by the center
for medicar and medicaid servic cm a feder agenc within the us depart of
health and human servic
although both medicar and medicaid provid medic and healthrel servic there ar
sever differ between the two program medicar which is fund and govern by
the feder govern is the feder health insur program for peopl ag 65 or older
and most peopl with certain disabl it is financ by social secur contribut
convers medicaid is a feder and statefund program that provid health care
coverag for lowincom famili and children medic and longterm care coverag for
peopl with disabl and assist with health and longterm care expens for low
incom senior although medicaid is a feder program it is oper by the state and
each state decid elig and the scope of coverag medicaid doe not requir recipi
to make contribut and it is financ from gener revenu
accord to the feder govern medicaid fraud involv purpos bill medicaid for
servic that were never provid or receiv
as the number of individu enrol in medi caid increas the amount of fund be
expend by these program leav the industri at a signific risk for fraudul claim
medicaid expenditur compris 216 billion of the 2009 feder budget the propos
fiscal year 2011 budget includ a 17 billion allot to fight fraud and abus in the
medicar and medicaid system
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11245
in respons to the enorm increas in me dicaid fraud the feder govern ha
establish depart program statut and fund for deter investig and
prosecut such type of fraud
an overview of the medicaid system
for a state to establish a medicaid program for it resid it must compli with specif
feder guidelin each state must
establish it own elig standard
determin the type amount durat and scope of servic
set the rate of payment for servic and
administ it own program
health care fraud financi transact
11246 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc respons relat activ
feder
center for medicar and medicaid servic
assist each state in increas the
effect of it medicaid
program integr effort
act as an oversight entiti of
state fraud and abus effort
keep the allianc in work
order
overse state medicaid agenc
facilit commun
and inform share
between the feder
govern and state
establish a nation forum
for medicaid fraud and abus
issu
provid ongo forum and
train for state offici on
fraud control
hh oig
overse state medicaid fraud
control unit
investig feder medicaid
fraud case
sanction fraudul
provid by impos
exclus and civil monetari
penalti
refer investig find
to the doj
doj us attornei
prosecut medicaid fraud case
refer by the fbi and oig
indict negoti
settlement and recov
damag
doj fbi
investig feder fraud case
cant impos sanction
refer investig find
to us attornei
state medicaid agenc
administ state medicaid
program
conduct pre and postpay
claim review
administ provid
enrol process
program
integr unit
review claim data to detect and
investig unusu payment
pattern
conduct variou integr
activ
refer suspect fraud case
to the state medicaid fraud
control unit
refer civil case to the state
medicaid agenc collect
unit
medicaid fraud control unit mfcu
investig and prosecut case
involv medicaid fraud
investig and act on
complaint of abus or neglect of
patient in facil receiv
medicaid fund
refer case that will not be
prosecut to the state
medicaid agenc or other
author for administr
action
financi transact health care fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11247
feder legisl
the follow ar some of the most common feder statut us to prosecut
medicaid fraud
the medicar and medicaid antikickback statut
the civil fals claim act
the stark law
health insur portabl and account act hipaa
state level enforc
in 1977 congress devis the medicaid fraud control unit mfcu program to help
state counter medicaid fraud mfcu ar state law enforc agenc that investig
and prosecut case involv medicaid fraud investig and act on complaint of abus or
neglect of patient in facil receiv medica id fund and refer case which will not be
prosecut to the state medicaid agenc or other author for administr action the
onli wai a state can keep from establish an mfcu is by certifi that there is no fraud
in their state
under mfcu program each state is to implement it own mfcu the feder govern
subsid each state program with 90 percent of the moni necessari to get that state
mfcu up and roll three year thereaft the feder govern provid the state
mfcu with 75 percent of it oper cost the onli wai a state can keep from
establish an mfcu is by certifi that there is no fraud in their state
feder initi such as thi have help state effect curb medicaid fraud on state and
local level accord to the unit state govern account offic for fy 2008
state mfcu recov more than 13 billion in legal restitut obtain more than 1314
convict and exclud 971 individu from particip in the medicaid and medicar
program
to identifi and detect medicaid fraud at ani level fraud examin must be appris of
variou medicaid fraud scheme becaus such scheme ar often more stringent regul
at the state level
health care fraud financi transact
11248 2011 fraud examin manual
