2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD 
 
Financial institutions include banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and other federally 
insured repositories. Financial institution fraud is also known by the more generic term of 
bank fraud. Check fraud and credit card fraud as it applies to both merchants and financial 
institutions is discussed in a separate chapter. 
 
A bank is defined as an organization engaged in any or all of many financial functions, such 
as receiving, collecting, transferring, paying, lending, investing, dealing, exchanging, and 
servicing (via safe deposit, custodianship, agency, or trusteeship) money and claims to 
money, both domestically and internationally. This broad concept applies to institutions such 
as central banks for cooperatives, export-import banks, federal intermediate credit banks, 
federal land banks, investment banks, and mortgage lenders.  
 
 
Embezzlement Schemes 
Embezzlement  is defined as the wrongful taking or conversion of the property of another for 
the wrongdoer’s benefit. Misapplication often accompanies embezzlement, but is a separate 
and distinct offense. Misapplication is the  wrongful taking or conversion of another’s 
property for the benefit of someone else. 
 
Types of Embezzlement Schemes 
There are various embezzlement schemes that have been utilized over time. The following 
examples are not an exhaustive list, but are rather a summary of the more commonly 
employed schemes. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.902                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Accounting Entries 
Employees debit the general ledger to credit their own accounts or cover up customer 
account thefts. 
 
Unauthorized Withdrawals 
Employees make unauthorized withdrawals from customer accounts. 
 
Unauthorized Disbursement of Funds to Outsiders 
Employees cash stolen/counterfeit items for outside accomplices. 
 
Paying Personal Expenses from Bank Funds  
An officer or employee causes the bank to pay personal bills, then causes amounts to be 
charged to bank expense accounts. 
 
Theft of Physical Property 
Employees or contractors remove office equipment, building materials, and furnishings from 
bank premises. 
 
Moving Money from Customers’ Dormant or Inactive Accounts 
Persons with apparent authority create journal entries or transfer orders not initiated by 
customers to move money among accounts. Dormant or inactive accounts are those that show 
little or no activity. Often contact with the account holder by confirmation, letter, or 
telephone contact is not possible. Such accounts are to be transferred to dual control and 
recorded in an inactive accounts ledger. State statutes usually provide for escheat or 
forfeiture to the state after a period of years. 
 
Unauthorized, Unrecorded Cash Payments 
A director, officer, or employee causes cash to be disbursed directly to self or accomplices 
and does not record the disbursements. 
 
Theft and Other Unauthorized Use of Collateral 
Custodians steal, sell, or use collateral or repossessed property for themselves or 
accomplices. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.903 
Detection Methods 
There are several methods by which embezzlement can be detected. Generally, if the dollar 
amount of the embezzlement scheme is small enough such that the financial statements will 
not be materially affected, embezzlement fraud can be most effectively detected through the 
review of source documents.  
 
If the scheme is so large that the financial statements of the institution are affected, then a 
review of the source documents will serve to confirm or refute an allegation that an 
embezzlement scheme has occurred, or is occurring. Generally, for large embezzlements, the 
most efficient method of detection is an analysis of the financial statements (which is also a 
review of documents).  
 
 
Loan Fraud 
Loan fraud is a multifaceted activity that includ es several types of criminal activities. Larger 
loan fraud schemes often involve real estate lending and collusion between insiders and 
outsiders. Loan fraud represents the highest risk  area for financial institutions. Although the 
number of occurrences might be small, the dollar amount per occurrence tends to be large. 
 
Financial Institution Failures as a Result of Real Estate Loan Fraud 
Losses reported by financial institutions across the globe are in the billions of dollars. Most 
financial institutions invest heavily in real estate transactions; a substantial portion of these 
losses relate to real estate loans. 
 
Common Loan Fraud Schemes 
Loans to Nonexistent Borrowers 
False applications, perhaps with inaccurate financial statements, are knowingly or 
unknowingly accepted by loan officers as the basis for loans. These types of loan fraud can 
be perpetrated by people either external to the lending institution (“external fraud”) or by 
officers, directors, or employees of the victim institution (“internal fraud”). 
 
Sham Loans with Kickbacks and Diversion 
Loan officers will sometimes make loans to acco mplices who then share all or part of the 
proceeds with the lending officer. In some instances, the loans are charged off as bad debts; 
in other instances, the bogus loans are paid off with the proceeds of new fraudulent loans. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.904                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Double-Pledging Collateral 
Borrowers pledge the same collateral with different lenders before liens are recorded and 
without telling the lenders. 
 
Reciprocal Loan Arrangements  
Insiders in different banks cause their banks to lend funds to the others, or sell loans to 
other banks with agreements to buy their loans—all for the purpose of concealing loans  
and sales. 
 
Swapping Bad Loans—Daisy Chains 
In a daisy chain, a bank buys, sells, and swaps its bad loans for the bad loans of another 
bank, creating new documentation in the process. Its purpose is to mask or hide bad loans 
by making them look like they are recent and good. 
 
Linked Financing 
Large deposits are offered to a bank (usually br okered deposits) on the condition that loans 
are made to particular persons affiliated with the deposit broker. High returns are promised, 
but the loans are longer term than the deposits (hot money). Sometimes kickbacks are paid 
to the broker or banker. 
 
False Applications with False Credit Information 
Sometimes loan applicants provide false information about their credit situation, and/or 
overstate their assets.  
 
Single-Family Housing Loan Fraud 
In this scheme, unqualified borrowers misrepresent personal creditworthiness, overstate 
ability to pay, and misrepresent characteristics of the housing unit. Such acts may include 
reporting inflated income, moving debt into a dependent’s name, reporting inflated square 
footage of the collateral, or even bribing an appraiser to value the home at a higher amount 
than the market value. 
 
Construction Loans 
Construction lending has different vulnerabilities than other permanent or interim lending. 
More risks are associated with constructi on projects than with already-built projects. 
Construction fraud schemes are numerous; the more common are related to estimates of 
costs to complete, developer overhead, draw requests, and retainage schemes. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.905 
ESTIMATES OF COSTS TO COMPLETE 
When borrowers approach a lending institution for construction financing they typically 
have a development plan, complete with an engineering report, appraisal, and budget for 
construction costs. The construction cost budget is, by definition, an estimate. As the project 
is built out, the budget will be revised to reflect actual expenses. Budgets are delineated by 
specific line item, such as slab, exterior glass, grading, landscaping, and tenant 
improvements. As the project proceeds, certain over- and underbudget costs are incurred. 
These costs should be represented by a change order. 
 
If the loan agreement has been properly documented and enforced, no material 
differentiation from the budget should occur without the lender’s knowledge and consent. 
However, the developer/borrower might misrepresent the true nature of the under- or 
overbudget amount to mislead the lender. The architect/engineer and the lender’s inspector 
should examine all budget changes. The impact of change orders might result in the loan 
becoming out of balance (cost to complete exceeds available loan and equity funds). 
Generally, developers hide or conceal their overbudget construction costs in two common 
places. The first place is contingency and the second is to remove allocations from tenant 
improvements and apply them to shell construction. 
 
Most budgets contain a contingency line item in  the event actual costs exceed the budgeted 
amounts. Unfortunately, many developers and lenders do not monitor the total impact on 
removing allocations from the contingency budget. In addition, savings are not allocated to 
the contingency line item when underbudget costs are realized. It is also common to rob one 
account to make up for a shortfall in another account. Generally, tenant finish is estimated at 
a particular dollar amount per square foot. This allows the developer considerable latitude in 
negotiating with tenants. 
 
However, before the entire space has been leased, and the construction costs have been 
incurred, the amount allocated to tenant improvements remains budgetary. If the developer 
is allowed to reallocate amounts from this budget line to shell construction, then when it 
comes time to negotiate leases and finish out the space, the developer might be short of 
available funds. If the tenant finish is treated as a hold-back and not to be reallocated or 
disbursed except for its intended purpose, then there is a greater chance of the loan not 
becoming over-disbursed (cost to complete exceeding the available financing). 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.906                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DEVELOPER OVERHEAD 
It is not uncommon in construction financing to have a budget line item for developer 
overhead (also called general conditions ). This is a ripe area for abuse. The purpose of developer 
overhead is to supply the developer with operating capital while the project is under 
construction. This overhead allocation should not include a profit percentage, as the 
developer realizes profit upon completion. 
 
In essence, the overhead budget is as if the lender is making two types of loans: a real estate 
loan and a working capital loan for the overhead. Unfortunately, there is seldom, if ever, any 
separate underwriting for the overhead portion. The overhead is merely added as a 
construction cost, whose ultimate collateral is the property and not some other short-term 
collateral. Historically, troubled construction loans or foreclosures due to fraud have been 
totally disbursed in the developer overhead category.  
 
DRAW REQUESTS 
Construction loan advances are generally supported by draw requests. A draw request is the 
documentation substantiating that a developer has incurred the appropriate construction 
expenses and is now seeking reimbursement or direct payment. A typical fraud scheme in 
this area involves requesting advances on the loan for inappropriate costs, such as personal 
expenses and/or construction costs for an unrelated project. Draw requests provide the 
greatest opportunity for a developer to commit fraud against the lender because the lender 
relies upon the developer’s documentation. 
 
Generally, a draw request or pay application is made once a month and is submitted on a 
standard form such as the one promulgated by the American Institute of Architects (AIA). 
The request should be accompanied by the following documents: 
• Paid invoices for raw materials 
• Lien releases from each subcontractor 
• Inspection reports 
• Canceled checks from previous draw requests 
• Bank reconciliation for construction draw account for previous month 
• Loan balancing form, demonstrating that the loan remains in balance 
• Change orders, if applicable 
• Wiring instructions, if applicable 
• Proof of developer contribution, if applicable 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.907 
The documentation required as support for each draw request will vary depending on the 
payment method (such as direct, dual payment, disbursing agent, wire transfer, or 
reimbursement). Any missing or altered documentation is a red flag that something is amiss 
with the draw request. All advances on the loan should be adequately documented. 
 
Some or all of the following steps should be performed before advancing funds on a 
construction loan. These steps are not represented as being all-inclusive, but rather the 
preliminary disbursement questions that the disbursing party should address. 
• Examine the draw and determine if sufficient supporting documentation has been 
submitted. 
• Reconcile the amounts requested with the approved budget. Account for any 
differences. 
• Determine that the amounts requested have been properly inspected and approved. 
• Determine if the proper lien releases have been submitted for work performed. 
• Reconcile any change orders with the approved budget. Determine if the change orders 
have been approved. 
• Prove the clerical accuracy of the documentation submitted. 
• Ensure that work completed has been inspected by the lender’s architect/engineer. 
• Determine if there are any requests for soft (nonconstruction) costs and whether they 
are appropriate. 
• Determine if there are any budget changes. If so, what are they for? Have they been 
approved? 
• Prepare a cost to complete estimate to determine that the loan remains in balance. 
• If tenant improvement funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed lease 
on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the lease? Has the 
lease been approved? 
• If homeowner option funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed 
purchase contract on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the 
contract? Has the contract/purchaser been approved? 
• Examine payment requests and determine if there are new or previously undisclosed 
subcontractors. If so, determine why. 
• Ensure that the title update has been received. 
 
RETAINAGE 
The final area of major concern in construction lending is retainage. Retainage is the amount 
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construction is complete and the lien 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.908                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
period has expired. There are at least two reasons why construction loans contain a retainage 
provision. The first reason is to keep the contractor’s interest in the project until all the work 
has been completed and accepted by the owner. The amount of the retainage represents 
part, if not all, of the contractor’s profit. Therefore, if the profit is not paid until the project 
has been completed, then presumably the contractor will complete the assignment on time 
and on budget. 
 
The second reason for the retainage is to ensure that the work of subcontractors is 
completed and that the general contractor pays the subcontractor so that no liens are filed. If 
the general contractor fails to pay the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probably file 
a lien on the project. If the retainage will not be released until such time as the lien period 
has expired, then there are at least some funds available to defray the cost of fighting the lien 
or making a duplicate payment because the general contractor might have embezzled the 
first payment without paying the subcontractor. 
 
Red Flags of Loan Fraud 
There are several red flags of loan fraud. Many times the sch emes are perpetrated in tandem 
with other schemes, so what appears to be a red flag for one scheme, might in fact lead the 
fraud examiner to one or more schemes. 
 
Nonperforming Loans 
Although this information might not be available to all, a nonperforming loan is not 
performing for some reason. One of those reasons might be that a fraud scheme has or is 
occurring.  
 
Fraud schemes resulting in a nonperforming loan include: 
• Fraudulent appraisals — The cash flow cannot support an inflated loan and, therefore, debt 
amount. 
• False statements — The loan was made on false or fraudulently presented assumptions. 
• Equity skimming — There was never any intention to make the underlying loan payments. 
• Construction overbudget items — The overbudget amount might be a concealment method for 
other schemes such as embezzlement, misappropriation, or false statements. 
• Bribery — The loan was made because the lender received a bribe or a kickback from the 
borrower. 
• Land flips — The purpose of the loan was to finance the seller out of a property that has 
an artificially inflated value.  
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.909 
• Disguised transactions — Transactions that are sham transactions, without substance, made 
to conceal other ills. 
 
High Turnover in Developer’s Personnel 
One of the first signs to look for, particularly  in construction lending, is whether or not the 
real estate developer is experiencing a higher-than-normal employee turnover. Typically, 
when a developer experiences a high degree of turnover, something is wrong with the 
internal operation. This is often a preamble for other problems to come. 
 
High Turnover in Tenant Mix 
If the tenant mix in a commercial project (such as a retail center or an office building) is 
suddenly undergoing a major change, there might be some problem with the management of 
the project or with the method of allocating the pass-through expenses, such as utilities or 
maintenance. In addition, a decline in the tenant mix might be an indication that the deferred 
maintenance for the project is not being properly attended to. 
 
Increased Change Orders 
An increase in the number of change orders or amounts on change orders might be an 
indication that construction changes have taken place that would alter the originally planned 
project to such an extent as to render the underwriting inappropriate. Change orders can 
have the same impact on a project as altering the original documents. As with anything that 
is contracted for on a bid basis, change orders could also be an indication of collusive 
bidding. Change orders might be an indication that the original project was not feasible and 
short cuts are shoring up other problem areas. Change orders should be approved by the 
architect and engineer on the project in addition to the lender’s inspector.  
 
Missing Documentation 
Missing or altered documentation is a red flag for any type of fraud scheme. Because 
concealment is a key fraud element, missing documents are a definite giveaway. Missing 
documents are of particular concern in construction lending. Experience has shown that 
seldom is a complete draw request submitted without some missing document. 
 
LOAN FILE 
Missing documents in the loan file are another indication that things might be amiss. It is 
important to determine if missing documents have been misplaced or were never received. A 
waiver of certain documents is one common way for lenders to conceal fraud schemes. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.910                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Documentation for real estate loans is fairly standard. Listed below are some of the more 
important documents that should be present in the loan files. 
• Appraisal 
• Architect’s or engineer’s report 
• Assignment of leases and rents 
• Assignment of limited partnership notes 
• Assignment of take-out commitment 
• Attorney opinion letter 
• Availability of utilities (water, sewer, gas, and electric) 
• Budget 
• Completion schedule 
• Copies of leases (existing or if project is preleased, commitment letters) 
• Disburser’s notice, if required 
• Easements 
• Environmental impact study 
• Ingress and egress 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector) 
• Insurance binder (lender should be loss payee) 
• Letters of credit, if applicable 
• List of general and subcontractors 
• Loan agreement 
• Plans and specifications 
• Promissory notes from limited partners to partnership, if applicable 
• Road dedications 
• Soils report 
• Subscription agreements, similar to limited partnership notes, if applicable 
• Survey 
• Take-out commitment, if applicable 
• Title policy, including instruction letter from closing 
• Zoning 
 
DISBURSEMENT FILE 
• Copies of all checks issued at closing 
• Lien releases issued at closing (architect, engineers, etc.) 
• Loan closing statement 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.911 
DRAW REQUESTS 
• Draw request form (AIA Form or its equivalent). 
• Bank reconciliation (general contractor disbursement account). 
• Canceled checks (if general contractor pays subcontractors, copies of the canceled 
checks should be included in the following draw). 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector). 
• Lien releases for each subcontractor for the previous draw 
• Loan balancing form (the lender should prepare some form of reconciliation to ensure 
that with each draw the loan remains in balance. Items of particular concern are interest, 
tenant finish, and retainage.) 
• Receipts (for all items submitted on the draw request form). 
• Title updates from the title company. 
• Wire transfer instructions (from the lender to the general contractor’s disbursement 
account. 
 
In addition to the normal loan files, the lender should require a continuing report from the 
borrower. For example, the borrower could be required to report annual financial condition 
coupled with a tax return. Missing documents in  these follow-up files might indicate that the 
project or the borrower is having difficulty that might be the result of a fraud scheme. 
 
Loan Increases or Extensions, Replacement Loans 
A loan being continually extended and loan increases being made simultaneously might 
indicate that the real estate project cannot support the debt service. Typically, the loan 
increases are to pay for the interest and extension fee. This red flag might also indicate that 
the loan was made to a related-party or made as a loan to hasten a sale or other transaction. 
In other words, the loan was not properly underwritten. 
If the loan is increased and extended several times, it might indicate that higher appraisals are 
being obtained on a “made-as-instructed” basis. Loan increases and extensions might be the 
method used by the lender to conceal a nonperforming loan. 
 
However, according to William T. Thornhill, CFE, a consultant in the field of financial 
institution fraud, fraud perpetrators tend to write a new loan or credit facility to replace  an 
existing or old loan because they are aware of the fact that a rewrite may attract loan review, 
loan administration, or internal audit attention. Accordingly, replacement loans are now 
increasingly used rather than a simple rewrite of a loan. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.912                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Cash Flow Deficiencies 
The actual cash flow of a commercial project is a very telling red flag. If the project is 
experiencing an unexplained cash flow deficiency, then an internal fraud scheme might be 
the cause. The project cash flow might reflect any of the above schemes. 
 
Change in Ownership Makeup 
A change in the ownership makeup, commonly referred to as business divorce, might 
indicate fraudulent activity. It is not uncommon to have a working partner and an equity 
(money) partner. When the two partners become disenchanted with their relationship and 
seek a “separation,” it might suggest things have gone sour. 
 
Disguised Transactions 
Transactions disguised to conceal their true nature often involve the lender and either an 
existing customer or new customer. Banking personnel will sometimes engage in fraudulent 
schemes to forego the requirement to record additional loan loss reserves. One method 
employed is to “sell” OREO (Other Real Estate  Owned) property to an existing customer or 
a new customer in exchange for making a new loan on another unrelated project. In other 
words, the bank is tying one transaction to another, quid pro quo. 
 
Another method of concealing the true nature of a transaction is to conduct the transaction 
through nominees. For example, the bank might be required to recognize an additional loan 
loss reserve due to the lack of performance on a particular loan. The borrower might or 
might not be a good customer of the bank. Regardless of the status of the customer, the 
bank might request that the project (underlying collateral) be sold to another party, the 
financing to be arranged by the bank. The borrower can form a new entity (nominee or shell 
company) to purchase the property; a new (generally higher) appraisal is obtained and the 
property is sold. In this illustration, the avoidance of loss required the participation of the 
bank personnel, the borrower, and the appraiser. 
 
 
Real Estate Fraud 
Generally defined, real estate fraud is any false representation, coupled with intent to 
deceive, made in connection with a real estate transaction. There are several real estate fraud 
schemes, including the real estate loan fraud schemes discussed previously. In addition, there 
has been a recent growth of mortgage fraud–related incidences due to the rise of subprime 
lending and the mortgage crisis. This section will further detail those real estate loan fraud 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.913 
schemes and will examine several other real estate fraud schemes, including those stemming 
from subprime lending and the mortgage crisis. The schemes examined include:  
• Loan falsifications 
• Forged documents 
• Appraisal fraud 
• Straw buyers 
• Mortgage-backed security fraud 
• Equity skimming 
• Property flipping 
• Identity theft perpetrated in conjunction with a real estate transaction 
• Builder-bailout schemes 
• Seller assistance scams 
• Short-sale schemes 
• Chunking or shot gunning 
• Foreclosure rescue scams 
 
Most real estate transactions require more money than any single individual or entity can 
internally finance. Therefore, most of these transactions are financed to some extent. 
Because these transactions require borrowed money, experts are needed. These experts 
include appraisers, lenders, and auditors. 
 
Loan Falsifications 
It is illegal to provide false documents to verify income or assets, to make misrepresentations 
in a loan application, and to knowingly process a false loan application. Common types of 
loan falsifications include altered bank statements, altered or fraudulent earnings 
documentation, fraudulent letters of credit, fabricated letters of gift, misrepresentation of 
employment, misrepresentation of loan purpose, altered credit scores, false Social Security 
numbers, failure to fully disclose borrower’s de bts or assets, and brokers using the identities 
of prior customers to obtain loans for customers unable to qualify.  
 
According to the Mortgage Asset Research Institute’s (MARI) Ninth Periodic Case Report 
to the Mortgage Bankers Association, false statements made in loan applications are the 
most common aspect of mortgage fraud schemes. In fact, false statements in the loan 
application are the most reported suspicious activity related to mortgage fraud, according to 
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). This is because most perpetrators 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.914                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
could not execute mortgage fraud schemes without falsifying loan applications and 
supporting documentation. 
 
Identity fraud, which is the misrepresentation of data underpinning one’s identity (such as 
using one’s Social Security number), is a common mortgage fraud scheme involving the 
improper use of identifying data. In fact, FinCEN reported in 2009 that identity fraud 
occurred in three percent of the sampled mortgage fraud reports. 
 
The individuals in the best position to use a person’s identifying information for purposes of 
committing mortgage fraud are industry insiders. Identity fraud schemes may be perpetrated 
by mortgage brokers in possession of personal identifying information provided by a 
legitimate borrower and unbeknownst to him used over and over again. 
 
Identity fraud schemes are also perpetrated by “investment club” organizers who collect 
personal information from members and then use it without their knowledge to purchase 
properties. 
 
In other cases, real estate agents, mortgage brokers, criminals, and/or other industry insiders 
provide a stolen Social Security number of an individual with good credit to an individual 
with bad credit who wishes to purchase a home and helps create a credit history under the 
bad credit borrower’s name. 
 
Finally, straw borrowers are often provided with stolen or falsified Social Security numbers 
and driver’s licenses to use in originating loans. This scenario involves a high-level of 
collusion between all parties to defraud the lender. 
 
The following red flags may identify mortgages containing false or misleading information: 
• An item other than cash is used for the down payment (i.e., gift, rent credit, sale of 
personal property, repayment of loan, etc.) 
• Borrower purchasing property from employer or landlord. 
• Borrower has a non-purchasing spouse. 
• Borrower purchasing investment property does not own current residence. 
• New home is too small for proposed occupants. 
• The only listing of employer’s address is a Post office box. 
• Borrower, purchasing private residence property, has an unreasonable commute from 
subject property to his employment. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.915 
• Borrower’s level of education is inconsistent with employment. 
• Borrower’s age is inconsistent with the sta ted employment or the number of years 
employed. 
• Borrower is self-employed or his office phone number is the same as their work number. 
• When compared, borrower’s assets and liabilities are inconsistent.  
• Buyer is downgrading.  
• Loan application is handwritten or incomplete. 
 
Forged Documents 
Since W-2 forms, bank statements, title commitments, leases, tax returns, and similar 
documents other than the loan application are used to verify income and asset information, 
such documents are routinely falsified, altered, or forged to perpetuate mortgage fraud 
schemes. In 2009, forged documents were the most reported mortgage fraud scheme 
according to FinCEN. 
 
Appraisal Fraud 
The Role of the Appraiser 
The appraiser performs an independent property valuation for the new (or old) owner. 
Appraisers should be licensed. They should also be certified by an independent professional 
association. There are several professional associations for real estate appraisers. A list of 
these organizations can be found at the end of this section. It is important, particularly in 
regard to complex commercial property, that the appraisers’ experience and credentials be 
carefully scrutinized. 
 
Fundamentals of Real Estate Appraisals 
Real estate transactions assume a willing buyer and willing seller. Fraud can occur when the 
transaction breaks down or the expert assistance is not at arm’s length. Many fraud schemes 
have a false appraisal report as a condition precedent. Several different kinds of reports are 
used by appraisers. They are summarized below. 
 
LETTER FORM REPORT 
The letter form report is used when a client is familiar with the area, and supporting data, 
therefore, is not necessary. The report consists of a brief description of the property, the 
type of value sought, the purpose served by the appraisal, the date of value, the value 
conclusion, and the signature of the appraiser. This form generally is not used by financial 
institutions for credit decisions. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.916                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SHORT FORM REPORT 
The short form report is used by financial institutions, usually for residential real estate loans 
(sometimes referred to as consumer loans). The report varies from one to four pages and 
consists of check sheets or spaces to be filled in by the appraiser about pertinent property 
data. 
 
NARRATIVE REPORT 
The narrative form includes all pertinent information about the area and the subject property 
as well as the rationale for the estimated value. It includes maps, photographs, charts, and 
plot plans. Financial institutions use narrative reports to support real estate lending and 
investment decisions on large commercial real estate transactions. Any other type of 
appraisal report (i.e., letter form or short form) on these complex transactions would likely 
be considered inadequate.  
 
Determining “Value”  
Value is comprised of four elements: utility, scarcity, demand, and transferability. Real estate 
appraisals assign three types of values to property. They are: 
 
FAIR MARKET VALUE 
This is the price the property would bring if freely offered on the open market with both a 
willing seller and a willing buyer. (Estimated) 
 
SALES PRICE 
Sales price is the price paid for the property. It might be higher or lower than fair market 
value. (Actual) 
 
LOAN VALUE 
Loan value is the percentage of a property’s va lue (fair market value or sales price) a lender 
can or might loan a borrower.  
 
Valuation Methods 
SALES COMPARISON APPROACH 
The sales comparison approach lends itself to the appraisal of land, residences, and other 
types of improvements that exhibit a high degree of similarity, and where a ready market 
exists. Compared to the other approaches, this method has great influence on residential 
portfolio valuations. This method is the least complicated to understand and apply. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.917 
Subject property is compared with similar property that is either offered for sale or has 
recently sold. Items evaluated include time of sale, location of sale (or offer for sale), physical 
characteristics, and improvements. Adjustments are made to the value of comparable 
properties (either plus or minus) on the basis of differences between them and the subject 
property. Relevant items might be an oversized lot, a view, a busy street, or access. 
 
THE COST APPROACH 
The cost approach generally does not exert much influence on the appraiser’s final value 
estimate. It serves as a “benchmark” against which the sales comparison and income 
approaches are measured. The cost approach is more accurate for new properties. It views 
the value of a parcel as the combination of the land value if vacant and the cost to construct 
a new building on the given date, less the accrued depreciation the existing building would 
suffer in comparison with the new building. 
 
The cost approach has five steps: 
• Estimate the land value as though vacant and available for development to its highest 
and best use. (Use the sales comparison approach.) 
• Estimate the replacement or reproduction cost of the existing improvements as of the 
appraisal date. 
• Estimate the accrued depreciation amount suffered by the improvements from all causes 
(physical deterioration and/or functional or external obsolescence). 
• Deduct the accrued depreciation from the replacement cost to find the estimate of value 
of the depreciated improvements. 
• Add the improvements’ depreciated value to the land value to arrive at the value of the 
property. 
 
The above is the most frequently used cost approach method. It involves the cost associated 
with rebuilding with modern methods, design, and materials that would most exactly replace 
the existing building. Reproduction cost is a cost-approach used to estimate the cost to 
reconstruct a replica of the building. It generally is used only when dealing with unique 
construction or for testimony in court. 
 
THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH 
Under this approach, the property value is based on its capacity to continue producing 
income. This method is particularly valuable for the valuation of complex commercial 
properties. The net income the property produces is an important consideration. Net income 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.918                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
is the amount of money over the remaining life of the property and its improvements that a 
fully informed person, using good management, is warranted in receiving. 
 
Income capitalization is the mathematical process of estimating the present value of income 
property based on the anticipated annual net income it will produce. Key to the application 
of this approach is the capitalization rate that is used. There are three types of capitalization 
rates: interest rate, recapture rate,  and overall capitalization rate.  Interest rate is the rate of return 
earned on investment capital. Recapture rate is the rate of return originally invested funds 
provided the owner. Overall capitalization rate is a combination of the interest and recapture 
rates. 
 
Fraudulent Appraisals 
Fraudulent appraisals result from any number of situations, some of which are: 
• Intentional use of an incompetent appraiser 
•  “Stacking the deck” by giving the appraiser improper or false assumptions to use in 
arriving at the value such as: 
? Assume zoning will be changed for a higher and better use when in fact zoning will 
not be changed. 
? Assume unrealistically high vacancy and low expense rates. 
? Assume unrealistically high income, selling prices, or absorption—the rate at which 
vacant space will become rented. 
? Otherwise influencing the appraiser, e.g., paying above-market fee or promising 
future business. 
? Direct collusion with the appraiser to commit fraud. 
 
Uses for Fraudulent Appraisals 
• To obtain approval on marginal or substandard loans to attain or exceed goals in order 
to be promoted or receive commission, bonus, or raises. 
• To justify extending or renewing a “bad” loan  to avoid recognition of a loss that might 
defer commission, promotion, bonus, or raises. 
• To avoid adverse publicity and regulatory, management, and shareholder disapproval 
because of excessive losses. 
• To avoid recognition of a loss on real estate owned, and to permit additional capital 
infusions. 
• To criminally gain money. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.919 
Red Flags of “Made-as-Instructed” Appraisals 
• The appraiser used never has been used before, is not on an approved list, has no 
professional credentials, or those offered are of questionable credibility. 
• Appraisal fee is unusually high. 
• Invalid comparables are used.  
• Supporting information is missing, insufficient, or contradictory. 
• Market data does not support the price and absorption figures used to arrive at value. 
 
Detecting Fraudulent Appraisals 
To detect unrealistic or bogus appraisals, the fraud examiner should address the following: 
(1) Read the appraisal, does it match the documents in the file? 
? Leases 
? Comparables 
? Absorption rates 
? Residual values 
? Capitalization rate 
? Legal description 
 
(2) Is there sufficient demand for the project to ensure absorption of the property into the 
marketplace? 
 
(3) Are there unique characteristics of the project that will ensure a competitive advantage 
over other projects? 
 
(4) Is the project sensitive to changes in local economic conditions? 
 
 
Mortgage Fraud 
Fraud has always been a constant presence in the mortgage industry, and it appears to be on 
the rise. There are a number of likely factors contributing to this apparent increase, including 
a rapid decline in the rate of home price appreciation, an increase in unemployment, and an 
increase in aggressive lending practices. All of these factors either reduced incentives or 
made it more difficult for borrowers to meet their mortgage obligations, which ultimately led 
to an increase in loan defaults.  
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.920                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The recent mortgage crisis has led to an increase in fraud for several reasons. One reason is 
that the declining housing market affects many in the mortgage industry (especially those 
paid by commission). During such declines, individuals are more likely to commit fraudulent 
acts to maintain their current standard of living. In addition, the declining market provides 
an ideal environment for perpetrators to employ numerous schemes that fit perfectly with 
down market (i.e., an increasing number of foreclosures, declining housing prices, and 
decreasing demand). Such down market characteristics place pressure on home builders, 
sellers, and lenders, which fraud perpetrators will attempt to exploit.  
 
The Growth of Subprime Lending Paved the Way for Fraud 
Subprime lending  refers to a variety of credit instruments lenders provide to people who do not 
qualify for the best market interest rate, usually due to weakened credit histories. There are 
many types of subprime mortgages, including: 
• Interest-only mortgages 
• Pick-a-payment loans 
• 2/28 adjustable-rate mortgage 
• Option-adjustable-rate mortgage 
 
Over the past decade, the subprime market grew dramatically, flourishing as the vehicle by 
which lenders funded loans to borrowers who would generally not qualify for traditional 
loans. According to industry newsletter Inside Mortgage Finance, Wall Street generated $1.8 
trillion in subprime loans from 2000 to 2007. In 2006, analysts estimated that 25 percent of 
all mortgages originated in the United States were subprime, and by 2007, 14 percent of all 
outstanding mortgage indebtedness in the United States was subprime in nature. By 2010, 
with the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and 
the announcement of Wells Fargo to discontinue its subprime lending division, the 
percentage of subprime mortgages in the United States is expected to decline significantly. 
As Wells Fargo was the largest lender in the United States, it is possible that the percentage 
of subprime mortgages will fall to nearly 0. 
 
Corresponding with the growth of the subprime lending industry was a substantial increase 
in the number of mortgage fraud cases. The rise in fraudulent activity is the result of several 
factors, including the growth of automated loan processing and the growth of mortgage 
broker originated loans. These conditions, coupled with very lucrative possibilities, create an 
industry that that is very attractive to untrustworthy individuals or in other words, fraudsters.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.921 
Automated Loan Processing 
The growth of automated loan processing contributed to the increase in mortgage fraud 
because the nature of such transactions is faceless. The use of the Internet to receive and 
process loan applications has grown, and, in such cases, the lenders never meet the 
borrowers. This process creates an environment susceptible to fraudulent activity.  
 
Mortgage Broker Originated Loans 
The increasing number of mortgage broker originated loans has also played a part in the 
rising number of subprime fraud cases. Historically, mortgage loans were originated by the 
loan officer at the bank. Mortgage lenders, however, started relying on third-party originators 
(TPOs) to broker their loan products. Brokers could be paid a commission rather than a 
salary, an option that worked well for minimally capitalized mortgage lenders.  
As a result, the industry has seen the evolution of mortgage brokers.  
 
As markets for mortgages became more competitive, banks with their own retail loan 
officers also started employing these third-party wholesale originators. Today, mortgage 
brokers are the largest distributors of mortgage products for mortgage lenders and banks. It 
is estimated that two-thirds of all originations are from wholesale TPO mortgage brokers 
rather than retail loan officers. 
 
Mortgage broker-originated loans are vulnerable to fraud primarily because, until recently, 
there were no national standards for the licensing and oversight of mortgage brokers. 
However, on July 30, 2008, President Bush signed into law the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act), which is part of the Housing and 
Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Designed to provide uniform licensing standards 
nationwide, the SAFE Act required all states to have in place a system of licensure meeting 
minimum standards for mortgage loan originators (i.e., anyone who takes a residential 
mortgage loan application or who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan 
application for compensation or gain) beginning July 31, 2009.  
 
Mortgage Fraud Schemes 
Straw Buyers  
Straw buyers  are loan applicants who mortgage fraud perpetrators use to obtain home loans 
but who have no intention to occupy the properties they are buying or to pay back the loan. 
Perpetrators often use straw buyers to hide the identity of the true borrower that did not 
qualify for the mortgage.  
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.922                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following red flags may occur in a straw borrower transaction:  
• At closing, discovering that the check is from someone other than the party to the 
contract.  
• Borrower resides in different state than purchasing property, which is described as a 
primary residence. 
• Quit claim deed is used very close to loan closing. 
• Investment property represented as owner-occupied. 
• A third-party signed on the borrower’s behalf. 
• Names added to purchase contract. 
• Parties to the transaction are related. 
• There is no sales agent involved. 
• There are indications that the property seller defaulted. 
• Existence of a high FICO score. 
• Gift used for down payment despite the presence of good assets. 
 
Equity Skimming 
Equity skimming is a scheme whereby an individual, entity, or group of individuals purchases 
one or several single-family homes. Typically, the financing is for a percentage of the 
purchase price (e.g., 80–90 percent) and the owner invests the balance of the purchase price 
as equity. The home(s) is/are then rented. 
 
The owners collect the rent from the tenants but fail to make the mortgage payment(s). 
When owners have withheld mortgage payments that equal the amount of the invested 
equity, they can then either resume payments or allow the mortgage to be foreclosed. 
Although the mortgage might eventually be foreclosed, the owners have recouped their 
original investment plus any rental payments not applied to the mortgage. In addition, the 
owners received state and federal tax benefits during the holding period. This scheme is 
most successful with non-recourse mortgages. 
 
Although equity skimming eventually collapses and the purchasers risk being sued for 
deficiencies (if the loans were recourse), the scheme continues to be practiced. It has become 
an increasing problem as many residential homes are auctioned and bulk purchases are 
encouraged. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.923 
Property Flipping 
Property flipping has been around for a long time. It is well known in the real estate industry 
as a way to make a profit by buying low and selling high, and it is not necessarily illegal. 
Flipping is perfectly fine when all representations of the property condition and value are 
true and accurate. However, flipping can also be a fraud for profit scheme that may lead to 
substantial losses and other devastating consequences.  
 
Property flipping is the process by which an investor purchases a home and then resells it at a 
higher price shortly thereafter. For example, an investor buys a house in need of work for 
$250,000 in July, renovates the kitchen and the bathrooms and landscapes the yard at a cost 
of $50,000, and then resells the house two months later (the time it takes to make the 
renovations) for a price that is reflective of the market for a house in its updated condition. 
This is a legitimate business transaction, and there are numerous individuals and groups in 
the real estate market who make an honest living flipping properties.  
 
However, property flipping becomes illegal and fraudulent when a home is purchased and 
resold within a short period of time at an artificially inflated value. The key in determining 
whether a flip is illegal is to watch for a significant increase in value over a short period of 
time that cannot be justified. A property that sells twice in the same day at an increase of 
$100,000 is hard to justify. 
 
An illegal property flip is usually dependent on an appraisal report that has artificially inflated 
the value of the property. The borrower may review the appraisal without inspecting the 
property, completely unaware of the market values in that property’s neighborhood. The 
borrower may also be a straw borrower or an accomplice. 
 
Nominee or Strawman Loans 
Loans made in the name of a straw borrower  or agent having no substance, while the 
identity of the real borrower is undisclosed to the lender. 
 
Mortgage Pulling 
For the purpose of disguising loans exceeding a bank’s legal limits, loans are made to a 
partnership’s members who by prearrangement then invest in a single risky venture in a total 
amount exceeding the lending limit. In reality, the single borrower is the partnership, and the 
collateral is the partnership’s property. Mort gage-pulling might involve fraudulent loan 
applications and payoffs to the individual partners for participating. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.924                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Identity Theft 
An identity theft scheme is defined as the assumption of someone else’s identity for fraudulent 
purposes. Identity theft is recognized as one of the fastest growing crimes in the U.S. Recent 
identity theft reports from credit reporting companies, corporate databases, and commercial 
data brokers indicate a substantial rise in cases of identity theft in conjunction with mortgage 
loan fraud.  
 
Two examples of identity theft schemes involving mortgage fraud include the fraudulent 
acquisition of a person’s home and the fraudulent origination of a loan on a property 
belonging to another person. 
 
PHANTOM SALE 
Phantom sale  scams are particularly harmful because they involve the fraudulent acquisition of 
a homeowner’s property by filing a fraudulent deed. This scam does not happen at the 
origination of the loan, but rather it may occur without the homeowner’s knowledge, 
decades after the property was originally sold.  
 
The perpetrator identifies a property — typically belonging to an estate or an out-of-state 
owner — that is owned free and clear. He then  creates a fictitious quit claim deed which 
purports to grant all rights and title on the property to the fraudster. The true owner’s 
signature is forged on the deed, and the scammer files it in the real property records. Once 
the deed is filed, he applies for and executes a loan on the property (using a straw borrower). 
Often the value is inflated. He pockets 100 percent of the loan proceeds and disappears. 
 
PHANTOM SECOND LIEN 
In a variation of the phantom sale scheme, a person assumes a homeowner’s identity and 
takes out an additional loan or a second mortgage in the homeowner’s name. If there is not 
enough equity in the home to warrant a second loan, an inflated appraisal is obtained. This 
scheme involves a high level of collusion between a loan officer, an appraiser, and a  
title agent. 
 
Some red flags to help identify identity theft arising during the mortgage lending process 
include:  
• A change of address notice is filed immediately. 
• The appraised value is inflated. 
• There is no prior lien payoff reflected on the HUD-1 settlement statement. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.925 
• Documents are forged or there are discrepancies between the borrower’s document 
signatures.  
• The recorded owner lives abroad or is deceased. 
• Mail or e-mail sent to the borrower is returned as undeliverable even though  
transactions continue. 
 
Builder-Bailout Schemes 
A builder bailout scheme usually occurs when a builder has sold the majority of homes in a 
tract, but is left with a few that are unsold. The builder may be suffering from financial 
difficulties with these lingering homes and may need to sell them quickly in order to pay off 
delinquent debts. To dispose of the remaining properties, the builder may undertake a 
variety of schemes that may include, but are not limited to, the use of hidden seller financing 
or inflated property values.  
 
Some builders also include lavish incentives in the transaction to lure buyers. Such incentives 
usually involve a form of down payment assistance so that a borrower can purchase a home 
without any equity contribution.  
 
Other concessions or incentives that might be offered to potential buyers include managing 
the properties as income-generating investment properties, absorbing any negative cash flow 
for the first 12 to 36 months, guaranteeing mortgage payments for the first 12 to 36 months, 
or other turnkey services and guarantees, even though the properties may remain vacant. 
Builders may also agree to pay the buyer a substantial rebate that is not disclosed to  
the lender.  
 
Getting concessions from the seller is not new and it is not necessarily fraudulent. The 
simple test to determine whether or not the transaction is illegal is to ask: Are these 
concessions disclosed and have they been approved by the lender? 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A LEGITIMATE BUYER 
Some builders engaging in builder bailout schemes find marginal, legitimate buyers whose 
intent is to occupy the property and make the payments. The following is an example of this 
type of scheme: 
• The market value for a builder’s n ew construction home is $200,000. 
• A borrower wants to buy the house but does not have the necessary down payment (10 
percent, or $20,000). 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.926                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The builder offers to sell the house for $220,000 and provide silent seller financing. 
There is a verbal or undisclosed agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after 
closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal for $220,000. This inflation is typically below 
fraud thresholds and just enough to create equity for the borrower. 
• The buyer is steered to a participating broker and title company. 
• The buyer qualifies for a 90-percent LTV ($200 ,000) which actually represents the true 
purchase or sale price. The buyer in these scenarios is often qualified for the loan based 
on material misrepresentations. 
• The buyer closes on a loan for $200,000. 
• The seller gets his original asking price of $200,000 and forgives the seller financing. 
• The lender now has a 100-percent LTV loan. 
• If the property goes into default, the lender has no equity, especially if the market 
continues to decline. 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A STRAW BORROWER 
Other builders seek straw borrowers who are often induced with no-risk investment 
property ownership. Sometimes, the straw borrower is affiliated with the builder. In another 
variation of this scheme, the builder fails to complete construction but obtains a straw 
borrower and an inflated appraisal to originate a loan. 
 
A builder bailout scheme involving a straw borrower may play out as follows: 
• The builder recruits a straw borrower to purchase the property for no money down and 
cash back at closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal that is used as a basis for the loan amount. This 
inflated loan amount will allow the builder to recoup his expenses, pay a fee to the straw, 
and keep the loan current for two to four years. This might appear on the HUD-1 
statement as a disproportionate commission to a real estate agent (30 percent) who, in 
turn, splits it with the builder. 
• The borrower is steered to a participating broker and title company and is qualified 
based on material misrepresentations. 
• The builder offers to manage the property for the borrower with the promise of four 
years with no mortgage payments. 
• The property may remain vacant and the neighborhood may be deteriorating. 
• The loan remains current for a period of time but then goes into delinquency. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.927 
Seller-Assistance Scams 
Seller-assistance schemes are more likely to occur when homes sales have declined and 
sellers are motivated to sell. These schemes are based on inflated appraisals. After the buyer 
obtains an inflated mortgage and purchases a home at the inflated value, the seller gives the 
buyer a rebate. However, the rebate is not disclosed to the lender, and as a result, the lender 
loaned more money than the property used to secure the loan was worth. If the buyer 
defaults, which generally happens, the lender cannot sell the property and recover the loaned 
money.  
 
In addition to the red flags associated with appraisal fraud noted above, the following 
triggers may indicate the existence of seller assistance scams:  
• The seller is desperate to sell the property. 
• The contract appears to be for substantially more than it is worth. 
• The buyer has already selected the appraiser. 
• The buyer insists on using a specific appraiser. 
• The sale price reflects property appreciation in an area where property values are 
declining. 
 
Deceptive Short Sales 
Short sales —which are a viable means to avoid forecl osure—occur when the lender agrees to 
accept a lesser amount than the balance on the loan. Most lenders will entertain the idea of a 
short sale because, for the lender, the foreclosure process is time-consuming and expensive. 
They would rather avoid the costs associated with a foreclosure so that the bank does not 
have to take the property in as a non-performing asset and try to sell it. Borrowers are 
receptive to short sales because they keep foreclosures off their credit reports. However, 
because short sales usually involve properties that that are sold for extremely low prices, they 
also provide fraudsters with opportunities to obtain cheap property to use in the 
advancement of other schemes.  
 
With the recent rise in foreclosures, the inventory for potential short sales will increase, as 
will the opportunities for scammers to obtain cheap property to use in the advancement of 
other schemes. The short sale scenario used by fraudsters allows them to obtain these 
properties inexpensively under false pretense. This is generally accomplished by acquiring an 
under-valued appraisal. 
 
The following are red flags suggesting the existence of a short-sale scheme: 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.928                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The fraud occurs well after the loan origination, in the lender’s workout/servicing 
department. 
• The property is facing foreclosure. 
• The house is staged to obtain an undervalued appraisal. 
• The seller will only sign the sales contract at the day of closing.  
• No official letter or document exists to provide proof that the short sale has  
been approved.  
• There are multiple sales contracts. 
• The property is immediately or concurrently resold at a price that is higher than the 
discounted value. 
• Multiple HUD settlement statements exist that do not mirror the economic basis of  
the transaction. 
• Payments made to the sellers are not disclosed on the HUD settlement statement.  
• After the property is in default or foreclosure, there are changes in ownership, but there 
is neither a new mortgage nor the dismissal of the foreclosure suit. 
• Communications with the short-sale lender are restricted. 
 
Chunking and Shot Gunning 
CHUNKING 
Chunking schemes typically involve an unsophisticated borrower who is recruited to purchase 
a property and who deals exclusively with a recruiter. The recruiter colludes with a mortgage 
broker who gathers the completed loan applications and submits them to multiple lenders 
for approval. The borrower may not even be aware that the recruiter and loan officer have 
submitted the application to multiple lenders. Multiple approvals are provided, all for the 
same property and all without knowing that other loans are being closed and funded 
simultaneously on the same property. 
 
The assistance of an appraiser and a title agent are usually required for a chunking scheme to 
be successful. The recruiter often acts as the borrower’s power of attorney (POA) in 
attending the multiple closings, and often is the one who pockets the loan proceeds over and 
above what is due to the legitimate property seller. The borrower is left with numerous loans 
from various lenders. Further, the lenders are not sufficiently collateralized, as there are 
multiple claims as first lien holder creditors. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.929 
SHOT GUNNING 
Shot-gunning  is a fraud scheme in which a mortgage broker sends multiple home equity line of 
credit (HELOC) loans on the same property to different lenders at the same time. The 
borrower’s good credit, the use of stated in come products offered on many HELOCs, and 
the lender’s determination of the property’s value based on the equity in the home rather 
than on an appraisal all facilitate a fast closing process to ensure that all applications will be 
processed during the same timeframe. Due to the delay between the dates the loans are 
closed and the dates the liens are filed in the courthouse, lenders are not aware of the other 
liens when making their underwriting decisions. Each lender believes it is first in line with  
its lien. 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SHOT-GUNNING OR CHUNKING 
• They may involve one title company that willingly closes each loan.  
• The mortgage broker may have power of attorney for the borrower. 
• They may involve forgery of the borrower’s signature on multiple closing packages, 
unbeknownst to the borrower. 
• There may be multiple lender inquiries on a credit report in a short period of time. 
 
Foreclosure Rescue Scams 
Unfortunately, as more homeowners struggle with potential foreclosure, more will fall prey 
to foreclosure rescue scams. There are some legitimate foreclosure assistance programs in 
which the homeowner is offered short-term financing that pays off the delinquent debt. This 
allows homeowners to stay in their homes as tenants until they can repair their credit and 
obtain long-term financing. However, there are also many fraudulent programs. 
 
Foreclosure rescue scams come in two primary variations: phantom-help scams and bailout, 
or rescue, scams. 
 
PHANTOM-HELP SCAMS 
In a phantom-help scam, the scammer promises to save the homeowner’s credit or get him low 
monthly payments. Instead, the homeowner pays thousands of dollars in fees, and the 
scammer either does nothing or files bankruptcy on behalf of the borrower and absconds 
with the fees. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.930                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BAILOUT OR RESCUE SCAMS 
In a bailout scam  (also called a rescue scam), the homeowner is tricked into conveying the deed 
to his house to the fraudster and ultimately loses both the house and any equity. A bailout 
scam unfolds when a homeowner is solicited with an offer of private, non-qualifying, short-
 term financing that will pay off a delinquent debt and allow the homeowner to stay in his 
home while his credit is repaired. As part of the agreement, which is usually verbal, the 
homeowner is convinced by the “investor” that, to qualify for the short-term financing, the 
homeowner will need to convey title to the property as collateral. Once the fraudster obtains 
the title, he sells the property at fair market value, pays off the debt, and skims the equity 
that was owed to the homeowner.  
 
Some other characteristics of bailout scams include the following: 
• The rescuer relies on a lender’s funds to accomplish the scam.  
• The rescuer recruits other borrowers to purchase the “rescued” properties once he has 
obtained their titles. The borrower may think that he is buying a legitimate investment 
property, or the borrower could be a straw who is paid to purchase turnkey investment 
properties. 
• The borrower is steered to a mortgage broker (or perhaps the rescuer himself is a 
mortgage broker) and qualifies for a mortgage to purchase the property at the fair market 
value (not the amount that is due on the outstanding loan). Unbeknownst to him, the 
borrower is qualified based on misrepresentation. In other cases, the straw is 
compensated for his participation in the scheme. 
• Collusion with a title company is critical. The homeowner is instructed by the rescuer to 
go to a particular title company, or the rescuer convinces the homeowner to execute a 
power of attorney (POA) giving the rescuer authorization to close the transaction, or 
papers are closed at the homeowner’s house  in a kitchen closing. Either way, the 
homeowner is in essence deeding his property to the rescuer’s borrower. Generally, in 
these cases the homeowner does not understand what is being signed, the proceeds pay 
off the defaulted loan, and the equity goes to the rescuer.  
• The straw walks away from the transaction, while the legitimate new owner (borrower) 
discovers that the tenant can’t keep up with  the rent payments and has depleted his cash 
reserves to keep the loan current. The title company fails to pay off the old debt and the 
original lender starts foreclosure procedures immediately. 
 
Many states are aggressively passing legislation to protect homeowners in foreclosure from 
these scams.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.931 
Homeowners fall for foreclosure rescue schemes because: 
• The market is saturated with rescue services that are fraught with lies, deception, 
exaggeration, and pressure. 
• The homeowner is often trusting and doesn’t believe that someone would lie to him. 
• The homeowner is kept in the dark about the foreclosure process, perhaps because he is 
told to cease all contact with the lender’s foreclosure department. 
• The homeowner may be desperate to save his home and believes there is little time to 
act. 
• The homeowner may lack financial sophistication. 
 
FORECLOSURE RESCUE SCAM RED FLAGS 
Red flags associated with foreclosure rescue scams include:  
• These scams often prey on elderly or long-time residents with large amounts of equity. 
• The borrower (either a straw or legitimate borrower) receives a remodeling allowance 
from a recruiter outside of closing. 
• The underwriter has noted on the closing instructions that a copy of the purchase 
contract must be provided at closing, so, unbeknownst to him, the seller signs a purchase 
contract at closing or the seller’s name is forged in order to meet that condition. 
• The seller on the transaction is delinquent or in foreclosure. 
• The HUD-1 settlement statement indicates that most of the seller’s equity outside of the 
mortgage payoff is going to a third-party. 
 
 
New Account Fraud Schemes 
Fraud is much more likely to occur in new accounts than in established accounts. Special 
efforts must be taken to properly identify the potential new customer. Screening criteria 
should be established and enforced by everyone handling new accounts. Prompt, decisive 
action is necessary to manage and/or close apparent problem accounts. 
 
False Identification 
New account criminals are actors. They use false identification to open new accounts and 
steal money before funds are collected by the bank. False identification is easily purchased. 
 
Business Accounts Using Stolen Checks 
Some bank customers defraud business institutions by opening a new business account using 
checks stolen from another business. The fraudsters then withdraw the funds and close the 
account. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.932                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Personal Accounts Using Fraudulent Checks 
A similar scheme is to open a new personal account with two checks drawn by other people. 
The checks are either forged or stolen. The fraudster then deposits one, and takes cash for 
the other. Shortly thereafter, the fraudster writes checks to overdraw the deposited amount. 
 
Prevention 
A relationship with a financial institution should never be established until the identity of a 
potential customer is satisfactorily established. If the identity cannot be established, the 
relationship should not be established.   
 
Personal Accounts 
No account should be opened without satisfactory identification, such as: 
• A locally issued driver’s license with a photograph  
• A passport or alien registration card, together with: 
? A college photo identification card 
? A major credit card (verify the current status) 
? An employer identification card 
? An out-of-area driver’s license 
? A current utility bill from the customer’s place of residence (e.g., gas, electricity, 
telephone) 
 
Consider the customer’s residence or place of busi ness. If it is not in the area served by the 
bank or branch, ask why the customer is opening an account at that location. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s residence or place of employment, thanking the 
customer for opening the account. Disconnected phone service or no record of employment 
warrant further investigation.  
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should  
be questioned. 
 
For large accounts, ask the customer for a prior bank reference and write a letter to the bank 
asking about the customer. 
 
Check with service bureaus for indications that the customer has been involved in 
questionable activities such as kiting incidents and NSF situations. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.933 
The identity of a customer can be established through an existing relationship with the 
institution, such as some type of loan or other account relationship. 
  
Business Accounts 
Business principals should provide evidence of legal status (e.g., sole proprietorship, 
partnership, or incorporation or association) when opening a business account. 
 
Check the name of a commercial enterprise with a reporting agency and check prior bank 
references. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s business thanking the customer for opening the 
account. Disconnected phone service warrants further investigation. 
 
When circumstances allow, perform a visual check of the business to verify the actual 
existence of the business and that the business has the capability of providing the services 
described. 
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should be 
questioned. 
 
Since tellers are oftentimes the front-line defense in preventing check fraud, it is important 
that they receive training that will allow them to identify fraudulent checks.  
 
Tellers should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Look for checks with numbers lower than 200. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges on the checks. 
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered identification. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits:  
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.934                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Detection 
Some of the more common red flags of potential new account schemes are: 
• Customer residence outside the bank’s trade area. 
• Dress and/or actions inconsistent or inappropriate for the customer’s stated age, 
occupation, or income level. 
• New account requesting immediate cash withdrawal upon deposit. 
• Request for large quantity of temporary checks. 
• No order for printed checks. 
 
 
Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes 1  
Wire transfers of funds are nothing new—they began in the 1940s. However, with today’s 
growing emphasis on a cashless society, the number of wire transfers increases each year. 
 
Typically, fraudsters who commit this type of crime are knowledgeable about wire transfer 
activity, have at least one contact within the target company, and are aggressive in carrying 
out the theft. 
 
Instantaneous Transfer 
Wire transfer services electronically move funds worldwide from a financial institution to a 
beneficiary account at any banking point according to a customer’s instructions. (A banking 
point is any institution or business capable of receiving electronic transactions such as banks, 
savings and loans, credit unions, brokerage firms, and insurance companies.) On any day, $2 
trillion to $3 trillion moves among financial institutions. The transactions are primarily for 
completing interbank purchases and sales of federal funds; purchasing, selling, and financing 
securities transactions; disbursing loan proceeds or repaying loans; and conducting real estate 
business.  
 
Although these technologies enhance operations and increase the efficiency of the financial 
institutions, they also provide a tremendous opportunity for criminals who learn to 
manipulate the electronic environment for their personal gain. Wire transfer fraud is a 
particularly dangerous risk to a business’s solvency—one major wire fraud can destroy any 
                                                          
1 The editors wish to thank James Incaprera, CFSSP, CP P, and Joyce C. Lambert, Ph.D., CIA, CPA, for their 
assistance in preparing this section. Mr. Incaprera is the Louisiana investigations manager for Bank One in New 
Orleans, LA, and Dr. Lambert is a professor of accounting at the University of New Orleans. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.935 
firm. According to the Multi-State Sharing and Analysis Center, single losses average 
$100,000 to $200,000.  
 
Common Schemes 
Dishonest Bank Employees 
People who have access to correct account identification information can transfer money 
improperly—insiders wire funds to themselves and/or related parties. 
 
Misrepresentation of Identity 
People pose as customers, having used pretext calls to obtain correct account information 
from the bank. People posing as wire room employees in another bank or a branch office 
order transfers to dummy accounts in another bank. 
 
System Password Security Compromised 
People having legitimate access to sensitive account and daily code information for a limited 
time (for example, computer consultants) effect improper transfers through unauthorized 
access. 
 
Forged Authorizations 
Bank officers’ and customers’ authorization, oral or written, is improperly obtained or 
forged. People forge orders to transfer money to their own accounts when the recipient 
account is actually in the name of someone else. 
 
Unauthorized Entry and Interception 
Unauthorized personnel gain access to the wire room and its equipment, or the actual 
transmission is intercepted and altered. 
 
Preventing and Detecting Wire Transfer Fraud 
Fraud examiners and auditors need to advise management on ways to prevent and detect 
wire transfer fraud. 
  
Business Audits and Other Controls 
Every firm, of course, must have written policies and procedures for wire transactions. In 
addition, fraud examiners or auditors should conduct unannounced audits of those 
transactions. Following are other examples of wire transfer controls. 
• Make sure the person authorizing the wire transfer isn’t the individual who orders it. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.936                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Require those ordering transfers to have secure passwords. 
• Maintain and keep a current list of those ordering wire transfers, and a log of  
all transfers. 
• Require vacations of persons who handle wire transfers. 
• Require that reconciliations of accounts affected by wire transfers be performed by 
persons not involved with the wire transfer process. 
• Keep all confidential information about firms’ accounts and wire transfers in safe rooms 
secured with locks. Give computer key cards to these rooms to authorized personnel 
only. Shred trash. 
 
Businesses frequently perform vendor audits, but often neglect to audit their bank’s wire 
transfer controls. A fraud examiner should evaluate these areas. 
• Pick a sample of transactions and review the log of the calls made back to the banking 
points to verify their authenticity (You may listen to the tape recording of the actual 
authorization to ensure compliance with call-back rules.) 
• Review documentation of past wire transfer activity from bank statements or bank 
online transaction history for a daily debit and credit match of each transaction. 
• Obtain written confirmations of transactions  from the wire transfer provider to 
determine the timeliness of their receipt by your firm. 
• Promptly reconcile problems caused by the usual custom of ending all wire transfers for 
a day in the mid-afternoon. (Some customers believe they should receive credit and 
interest on funds received at the end of a day. However, wire transfers made after the 
afternoon closing time aren’t credi ted until the next business day.) 
 
Bank Audits 
Financial institutions should ensure the following safeguards when transferring funds: 
• Provide customers with unique codes that are required to authorize or order wire 
transfers. 
• Maintain and update lists of employees authorized to perform wire transfer transactions. 
• Compile audit trails of incoming and outgoing wire transactions, as well as the employee 
responsible for each portion of the transaction. 
• Review all wire transfer transactions at the end of each day to ensure that the original 
transfer instructions were executed correctly. 
• Make sure the businesses to which the funds are transferred are contacted to ensure 
authenticity of fund transfer requests. If the businesses are contacted by phone, the 
phone numbers used should be the original numbers given by the customers when the 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.937 
accounts were opened and not the phone numbers provided by the callers who 
requested the transfers.  
• Don’t execute wire transfers solely from faxed instructions. Again, verify authenticity by 
phoning the original numbers given by the customers when the accounts were opened 
and not the numbers provided by the callers who requested the transfers.  
• Require that all accounts affected by wire transfers be reconciled by bank employees not 
involved with the wire process. 
• Ensure the in-house wire operations manual is available only to authorized personnel 
and secured when not in use — especially after hours. Cleaning crew employees could 
help themselves to client pass codes and other confidential information. 
• Record all incoming and outgoing calls for wire transfer instructions.  
• Carefully screen wire transfer personnel applicants. 
• Reassign to other departments wire transfer employees who have given notice that they 
are resigning but still have some time left with the company.  
• Require all employees involved in the transfer of funds to take at least five consecutive 
days of vacation each year; assign their duti es only to other transfer department staff 
members during their absence. 
• Make sure bank employees never disclose sensitive information over the telephone  
until the caller’s identity and authorizati on have been verified to the customer 
information file.  
• Separate duties among wire employees who transmit or receive requests for funds. These 
employees shouldn’t also verify the accuracy of the transactions. 
• Train employees on proper internal controls, fraud awareness, and the importance  
of protecting information. Share alerts issued by government agencies and  
professional groups.  
 
 
Automated Teller Machine (ATM) Fraud 
An ATM is a dispensing facility from which the holder of a debit card can draw cash. The 
facility can also perform other services such as depositing funds and checking account 
balances, but the most popular use has been to dispense funds. Fraud schemes have been 
perpetrated involving the unauthorized use of ATM facilities. Schemes include: 
• Theft of card and/or unauthorized access to PIN numbers and account codes for ATM 
transactions by unauthorized persons 
• Employee manipulation 
• Counterfeit ATM cards 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.938                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Counterfeit ATM machines 
 
EXAMPLE 
A former Citibank employee was sentenced to 41 months in  prison for masterminding a 
scheme to steal $200,000 in cash from several of the bank’s ATMs. The computer expert 
was the No. 2 official in Citibank’s ATM security department, and programmed the 
bank’s money machines to issue money and not leave any record of the transactions. This 
was done by remotely accessing  the company’s mainframe comput er and instructing it to put 
particular machines in “test mode.”  
 
Detection 
When investigating ATM schemes, look for a lack of segregation of duties between the card 
issuing function and the personal identification (PIN) issuance. 
 
 
Advanced Fee Fraud  
Banks find deals that seem “too good to be true” to gain access to large amounts of money 
(deposits) at below-market interest rates. The catch is that the bank must pay an up-front 
finder’s fee to a person claiming to have access to the money. In some cases, desperate 
institutions are offered access to illegal money, and they typically do not report the loss of 
the advance fee when the deal falls through. More information on advance fee swindles can 
be found in the “Consumer Fraud” chapter. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The bank is contacted by an agent (such as a broker, advisor, consultant, promoter, lawyer, 
or bank customer) offering to provide money at a below-market interest rate for a long 
period of time (e.g., 10–20 years). The agent asks for a large fee to close the deal. The 
agent takes the fee and disappears. The deposits might or might not exist; and if they do, 
they seldom equate to the agent’s representations. 
 
Red Flags 
• Agent requests documents on bank stationery or signatures of officers. 
• Bank is asked to give nondisclosure agreements to protect agents or other parties. 
• There are several complex layers of agents, brokers, and other middlemen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.939 
Brokered Loans 
A variation of the advanced fee scheme is the brokered loan. Loan brokering applies to either 
packages of individual residential (consumer) loans or single commercial loans. A variation 
of a brokered loan is the loan participation, where the purchaser participates in the loan but 
does not purchase the entire loan. The fraud schemes associated with brokered or 
participated loans generally involve selling phony loans (packages) or selling participations in 
loans that have not been properly underwritten. Generally, a large fee is charged for these 
brokered loans. 
 
With residential loan packages, the broker sells the package, takes the money and disappears. 
Brokered loans are generally not sold with any recourse to the broker. Therefore, the 
purchaser must look to the borrower and the underlying collateral for debt satisfaction. With 
loan participations, the lead bank generally performs the underwriting. However, this does 
not relieve the participating bank from its obligation to perform its own due diligence. If the 
participating bank does not independently examine the documentation and perform its own 
due diligence, then fraud schemes on the part of the selling institution are possible. 
 
 
Letter-of-Credit Fraud 
Most letter-of-credit fraud arises from foreig n trade and contracting. Letter-of-credit fraud 
can be perpetrated by beneficiaries using forged or fraudulent documents presented to the 
issuing bank with a demand for payment. The documents, however, must conform to the 
terms of the letter-of-credit agreement. 
 
EXAMPLE 
An American exporter might offer to sell goods to an overseas importer. When terms are 
arranged, a letter of credit is obtained in the exporter’s favor, confirmed by a bank near the 
exporter’s location. (The actual export never occurs, and the request for payment is bogus.) 
 
 
Inside/Outside Frauds 
Outside/inside frauds is an area where fraud is increasing, in which the employee (insider) 
might be co-opted through a bribe or a threat of violence against the insider or a family 
member. Sometimes the insider is a bank teller who agrees to cash certain items as long as 
the items look reasonable and are below a cashing limit. Other times the insider is a proof 
operator or sorter operator who inserts documents directly into the computer system to 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.940                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
affect fraudulent deposits. Or, the insider is selling copies of documents to individuals who 
use computer techniques to make fraudulent items. 
 
Account Information Frauds 
Information is sold to organized rings or insiders who use the information themselves. As 
financial institutions make more services available to customers and strive to make them 
more usable, information about customer account relationships reside in many forms, such 
as 24-hour customer operators, online systems, printed documents that are innocently put in 
the trash only to be retrieved, or credit card information on high line cards. 
 
Trading Activities 
Trading activities can be compromised to defraud banks. Usually perpetrated with the 
assistance of an internal employee or by an employee acting alone, trading can include 
foreign exchange, securities trading, loan sales, and securitization. Often when this type of 
problem is suspected, the investigator must turn to traders themselves as the only source to 
gather information. 
 
Prevention 
Financial institutions, like other organizations, should have standard internal control 
measures to assist in the detection and deterrence of fraud. In addition to normal 
procedures, such as segregation of duties and budget and actual comparisons, listed below 
are some specific control measures that might enhance the detection and deterrence  
of fraud. 
 
Loan Origination, Underwriting, Closing, Disbursement, and Servicing Segregation 
By separating all of the functions relating to loans, a lending institution reduces the 
opportunity for an individual (insider) to perpetrate loan fraud. Additionally, the segregation 
provides for at least one, if not several, levels of independent review to reduce its external 
loan fraud exposure. 
 
Committee Approval of All Large or Unusual Transactions 
If a loan committee or a board-of-directors committee is responsible for approving loans 
and other large or unusual transactions, then insiders will have a more difficult time 
perpetrating large fraud and the transactions submitted by external fraudsters will be subject 
to another layer of independent review. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.941 
Transfer Journal Entries and Orders Review 
Regularly review all transfer journal entries and orders. As with an expense review, if a 
routine but unscheduled review occurs from time to time, then the fraudster loses the 
vehicle for concealment. 
 
Independent Review of Loans 
An independent review of loans provides a nonpartisan approach to all loan transactions. 
Either the internal or external auditors (or other consultants) can perform this independent 
review that allows for a “second opinion” on loan transactions. The reviews should be 
consistent and performed on a regular basis to help establish loan loss reserves. Typically, 
this loan review is established for loans for more than a certain dollar amount, such as 
$25,000 or $100,000. 
 
Management Review of Write-Offs 
Excessive write-offs are a form of concealment for phantom loans, conflicts of interest, and 
embezzlement. Therefore, if all write-offs are subject to management review before they are 
written off, then management reduces the potential environment for fraud.  
 
Routine Examination of Officers’ Accounts 
Routine examination of officers’ accounts might prevent fraud schemes such as wire transfer 
fraud, embezzlement, withdrawals from dormant accounts, conflicts of interest, and so on. 
This review can be performed when the officer is on mandatory vacation.  
 
Proper Lending Policies 
Employees should be trained in the proper (and regulated) lending policies of the institution. 
Any deviations from the policies will be red flags and will help to prevent loan fraud from 
both internal and external perpetrators. 
 
Document Requirements for Standard Transactions 
Deviations from normal or proscribed documentation should be an automatic red flag. Who 
better to recognize a potential fraud than the employees routinely handling the 
documentation? Therefore, employees should be well-educated in proper documentation for 
the transactions they are handling. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.942                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Information Verification (For Example, Loan Applications) 
Fraud potential could be eliminated or at the very least detected before companies suffer 
damages if the employee knows how to verify information. For example, if the loan officer 
advises a potential borrower that the information submitted on financial statements will be 
verified, the borrower will be less likely to submit false or fraudulent financial statements. 
Additionally, if a teller advises a depositor that the deposit will be verified before cash is paid 
out, then the incidence of split deposits can be reduced.  
 
Employee Training 
Fellow employees are generally the first people to recognize unusual transactions or behavior 
changes of other employees. These might be early indicators that a fraud has or will soon 
begin. Employees and managers should be properly trained to recognize these symptoms. 
For example, bank tellers should be adequately schooled in split deposit schemes; new 
account officers in new account schemes and so on. 
 
Standardized Procedures 
An institution can provide a low fraud environment by standardizing procedures in sensitive 
areas, as detailed below: 
• Loan application processing 
• Information required for loan approval 
• Credit report requests 
• Appraisals accepted from pre-approved list of vendors 
• Inspection reports on construction draw loans 
• Conflict of interest disclosure statements 
• Routine confirmation calls for 
? Wire transfers 
? Construction vendors 
• Confirmation of registered securities with registrar or transfer agent 
• Periodic physical inventory of securities 
 
 
Suspicious Activity Reports 
Effective April 1, 1996, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) requires 
national banks to submit a Suspicious Activity Report (SAR) under certain circumstances (12 
C.F.R. § 21.11, as amended). SARs are required in each of the following instances: 
• There is a known or suspected criminal violation involving the bank and the bank has a 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.943 
substantial basis for identifying responsible bank personnel. 
• There is a known or suspected criminal violation involving the bank, the amount 
involved is $5,000 or more, and the bank has a substantial basis for identifying a possible 
suspect. 
• There is a known or suspected criminal violation involving the bank and the amount 
involved is $25,000 or more (if the amount in volved is $25,000 or more, even if the bank 
does not have a substantial basis for identifying a suspect). 
• Any transaction aggregating $5,000 or more that was conducted or attempted to be 
conducted through the bank when the bank has reason to suspect that the funds involve 
potential money laundering, are designed to evade any regulations under the Bank 
Secrecy Act, or involve computer intrusions.  
• Any transaction aggregating $5,000 or more that was conducted or attempted to be 
conducted through the bank when the bank knows that the customer is operating as an 
unlicensed money services business. 
 
In most cases, the SAR must be filed within 30 days of the date of detection. Other financial 
institutions have similar reporting requirements, including: 
• Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) - 12 C.F.R. § 353 
• Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) - 12 C.F.R. § 563.180 
• National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) - 12 C.F.R. § 748  
• Federal Reserve Board (FRB) - Form 2230 
 
More information about the Bank Secrecy Act and other reporting requirements can be 
found in the “Money Laundering” section. 
 
 
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
In the summer of 2010, the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act 
became law, adding new regulations for companies that extend credit to consumers, 
exempting small public companies from Sarbanes-Oxley section 404(b), making auditors of 
broker-dealers subject to PCAOB regulation, and changing registration requirements for 
investment bankers.   
 
New regulations for companies that extend credit to consumers include: 
• Mortgage lenders must make a reasonable effort to ensure the ability to repay before 
issuing a loan to consumers. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.944                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Non-bank entities will be regulated by the Federal Reserve if they believe that the 
entities would have a negative effect on the financial system if the company failed or 
its activities would pose a risk to the financial stability of the US  
• Prohibits the financial incentives for subprime loans that encourage lenders to steer 
borrowers into more costly loans, including the bonuses known as "yield spread 
premiums" that lenders pay to brokers to inflate the cost of loans. Prohibits pre-
 payment penalties that trapped so many borrowers into unaffordable loans.  
• Allows consumers free access to their credit score if their score negatively affects 
them in a financial transaction or a hiring decision. Gives consumers access to credit 
score disclosures as part of an adverse action and risk-based pricing notice.  
 
Additionally, the Act, created the Financial Stability Oversight Council to regulate risk in the 
financial institution industry. It is chaired by the Treasury secretary and includes the Federal 
Reserve chairman, FDIC, and SEC as members of the Council. The Council will have 
authority to break up large firms or veto rules created by another new regulator called the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. The Bureau consolidates most federal regulation of 
financial services offered to consumers and sits on the FDIC board. 
 
 
Applicable Federal Statutes 
There are many federal statutes related to fraud and false statements involving financial 
institutions. The following are some common federal statutes employed in the prosecution 
of bank fraud.  
 
Bank Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1344 
Section 1344 is the broadest of all bank fraud statutes. It punishes those obtaining assets 
owned or controlled by a bank by false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or promises. 
It covers both insiders and all other persons, even if not affiliated with the bank 
It also applies to check kiting and to off-shore frauds (extraterritorial reach). Bank fraud is a 
predicate offense under RICO (Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organization Statute). 
Penalties for bank fraud include a fine up to $1 million and/or imprisonment of up to 30 
years. 
 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act (FIRREA), Title 12, 
U.S. Code, § 1811, et seq. 
This legislation greatly strengthens the prosecutorial arm against insiders and outsiders. The 
law’s provisions are applicable to any institution-affiliated party, which includes (but is not 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.945 
limited to) directors, officers, employees, and controlling shareholders. Institution-affiliated 
parties can include attorneys, accountants, and appraisers. 
 
FIRREA provides for enhanced civil and criminal penalties for convictions of several bank-related 
statutes. The civil penalties can be $1  million per day, or a total of $5 million for 
continuing violations, or the amount of wrongful gain or loss. The maximum criminal 
penalty is either a fine of $1 million or 30 years imprisonment, or both. 
 
Crime Control Act of 1990, Title 12, U.S. Code, § 1821(d)(17)-(19) 
This Act defines a host of crimes and increases the maximum penalties on other offenses. 
For example, the maximum prison term for financial crimes was increased from 5 years to 
20 years. These penalties, however, do not become effective for offenses committed prior to 
the effective date of this law. Thus far, no court decisions have been made regarding these 
increased penalties. This statute amended the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organization 
law (RICO), making bank fraud a predicate offense under RICO. 
 
Financial Institution Anti-Fraud Enforcement Act of 1990, Title 12, U.S. Code, § 4 201, et seq. 
This statute sets out procedures for rewarding private parties for reporting violations and 
providing information concerning the recovery of assets. The statute also allows for the 
hiring of private counsel to investigate and prosecute civil claims. 
 
Continuing Financial Crime Enterprise Statute, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 225 
Also known as the “S&L Kingpin” sta tute, the law provides for fines of up to $20 million 
for organizational defendants and fines of up to $10 million and up to life imprisonment for 
individual defendants receiving $5 million or more during a 24-month period from a criminal 
enterprise. A criminal enterprise  is defined as a series of enumerated crimes related to  
financial institutions. 
 
Embezzlement, Misapplication, and False Entries 
Title 18, U.S. Code, §§ 656 and 657 
These Sections cover theft, embezzlement, or misapplication by a bank officer or employee. 
Violations are punishable by up to 30 years in prison and/or fined up to $1 million. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.946                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Title 18, U.S. Code, §§ 1001, 1005, 1006, 1007, 1008, 1014 
These statutes include all provisions that punish false or fraudulent statements orally or in 
writing to various federal agencies and federally insured financial institutions. Usually these 
result from efforts to conceal embezzlements and misapplications. 
 
Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1032, Concealment of Assets 
This statute prohibits any person from corruptly attempting to conceal assets or impede 
their recovery. Violations are punishable by  up to five years in prison plus fines. 
 
Participation in the Affairs of a Financial Institution by a Convicted Felon, Title 12, 
U.S. Code, § 1829 
This statute bars people with banking crime convictions from participating in the conduct of 
the affairs of a financial institution, with certain exceptions. A knowing violation might result 
in fines of up to $1 million per day and imprisonment of up to five years. 
 
Offer of Loan or Gratuity to a Bank Examiner, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 212 
Bank officers, directors, and employees are prohibited from giving a loan or gratuity to a 
bank examiner or assistant. Section 213 forbids an examiner or assistant from accepting a 
loan or gratuity. Both offenses are punishable by a fine of up to $5,000 or the amount loaned 
or given and up to a year’s imprisonment. 
 
Receipt of Commissions or Gifts for Procuring Loans, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 215  
The corrupt giving or receiving of anything of value to influence an officer, director, 
employee, agent, or attorney of a financial institution is punishable by fines of the greater of 
three times the value of the thing given or no more than $1 million and/or up to 30  
years imprisonment. 
 
Other Federal Statutes 
The following statutes can also be used in connection with the prosecution of fraud 
involving financial institutions. Each of these statutes is covered in more detail in the Law 
section. 
• Bribery of Public Officials and Witn esses, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 201 
• Disqualification of Former Officers and Employees, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 207 
• Fraudulent Use of Credit Cards, Title 15, U.S. Code, § 1644 
• Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Access Devices, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 
1029 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.947 
• Computer Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1030 
• Mail Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1341 
• Wire Fraud, Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1343 
• Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations (RICO), Title 18, U.S. Code, § 1961, et 
seq. 
• The Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA), Title 15, U.S. Code, §§ 78m, 78a(b), 78dd-1, 
78ff 
• Tax Evasion, Title 26, U.S. Code, § 7201  
• Filing False Tax Return, Title 26, U.S. Code, § 7206(1) 
• False Claims Act, Title 31, U.S. Code, § 3729 et seq.  
• Anti-Kickback Act of 1986, Title 41, U.S. Code, §§ 51-58 
 
Red Flag Rules 
In 2007, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued final rules and guidelines (Red Flag 
Rules) implementing sections 114 and 315 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act 
(FACTA). The Red Flag Rules require financial institutions and certain creditors to develop 
and implement a formal written program to identify, detect, and respond to red flags of 
possible identity theft. 
 
Although the Red Flag Rules apply primarily to financial institutions, they also apply to any 
creditor with covered accounts. The definition of creditor  includes any entity that “regularly 
extends, renews, or continues credit” or that “regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, 
or continuation of credit,” including banking in stitutions, mortgage lenders, retailers, utility 
companies, car dealers, and debt collectors. A covered account  is an account primarily used for 
personal, family, or household purposes and that involves multiple payments or transactions, 
including credit card accounts, mortgage loans, car loans, cell phone accounts, utility 
accounts, and savings accounts. Therefore, even if a business is not a financial services 
entity, management should determine whether the entity is a creditor under the Red Flag 
Rules.  
 
To comply with the Red Flag Rules, financial institutions and creditors with covered 
accounts must implement written identity theft prevention programs that are tailored to each 
entity’s size, complexity, and nature. These organizations must also adopt “reasonable 
policies and procedures” that:  
• Identify relevant red flags for covered accounts and incorporate them into the 
prevention program. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.948                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Detect red flags that have been incorporated into the prevention program. 
• Respond appropriately to any red flags that are detected to prevent and mitigate identity 
theft. 
• Ensure the prevention program is updated periodically, to reflect changes in risks to 
customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from 
identity theft. 
 
The Red Flag Rules also provides 26 examples of possible red flags that financial institutions 
and creditors should consider when implementing their programs. The examples are listed 
below:   
1. A fraud alert  
2. Notice of a credit freeze  
3. Notice of an address discrepancy. 
4. Unusual credit activity 
5. Identification documents appear altered or forged. 
6. ID photograph and customer appearance appear inconsistent 
7. Information presented by customer and information on ID are inconsistent 
8. Information on ID is inconsistent with information on file 
9. Application appears forged or altered 
10. Personal information on ID is inconsistent with external information sources  
11. Lack of correlation between Social Security number range and date of birth. 
12. Personal identifying information is associated with known fraud activity. 
13. Suspicious addresses supplied 
14. Provided Social Security number matches number submitted by another person  
15. Address or phone number matches that supplied by other customers 
16. In response to notice that application is incomplete, customer is unable to supply 
identifying information  
17. Personal information inconsistent with information already on file  
18. Customer unable to answer challenge questions 
19. Shortly after change of address, creditor receives request for the addition of authorized 
account users 
20. Most of available credit used for cash advances, jewelry, or electronics, or customer fails 
to make first payment 
21. Inconsistent activity patterns 
22. Previously inactive accounts suddenly becoming active 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.949 
23. Mail sent to customer repeatedly returned as undeliverable even though transactions 
continue on active account 
24. Notice that customer is not receiving paper account statements 
25. Notice of unauthorized charges or transactions on customer's account 
26. Notice of opening a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft 
  
Financial Transactions  Check and Credit Card Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1001 



:


financi institut fraud
financi institut includ bank save and loan credit union and other feder
insur repositori financi institut fraud is also known by the more gener term of
bank fraud check fraud and credit card fraud as it appli to both merchant and financi
institut is discuss in a separ chapter
a bank is defin as an organ engag in ani or all of mani financi function such
as receiv collect transfer pai lend invest deal exchang and
servic via safe deposit custodianship agenc or trusteeship monei and claim to
monei both domest and internation thi broad concept appli to institut such
as central bank for cooper exportimport bank feder intermedi credit bank
feder land bank invest bank and mortgag lender
embezzl scheme
embezzl is defin as the wrong take or convers of the properti of anoth for
the wrongdoer benefit misappl often accompani embezzl but is a separ
and distinct offens misappl is the wrong take or convers of anoth
properti for the benefit of someon els
type of embezzl scheme
there ar variou embezzl scheme that have been util over time the follow
exampl ar not an exhaust list but ar rather a summari of the more commonli
emploi scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1902 2011 fraud examin manual
fals account entri
employe debit the gener ledger to credit their own account or cover up custom
account theft
unauthor withdraw
employe make unauthor withdraw from custom account
unauthor disburs of fund to outsid
employe cash stolencounterfeit item for outsid accomplic
pai person expens from bank fund
an offic or employe caus the bank to pai person bill then caus amount to be
charg to bank expens account
theft of physic properti
employe or contractor remov offic equip build materi and furnish from
bank premis
move monei from custom dormant or inact account
person with appar author creat journal entri or transfer order not initi by
custom to move monei among account dormant or inact account ar those that show
littl or no activ often contact with the account holder by confirm letter or
telephon contact is not possibl such account ar to be transfer to dual control and
record in an inact account ledger state statut usual provid for escheat or
forfeitur to the state after a period of year
unauthor unrecord cash payment
a director offic or employe caus cash to be disburs directli to self or accomplic
and doe not record the disburs
theft and other unauthor us of collater
custodian steal sell or us collater or repossess properti for themselv or
accomplic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1903
detect method
there ar sever method by which embezzl can be detect gener if the dollar
amount of the embezzl scheme is small enough such that the financi statement will
not be materi affect embezzl fraud can be most effect detect through the
review of sourc document
if the scheme is so larg that the financi statement of the institut ar affect then a
review of the sourc document will serv to confirm or refut an alleg that an
embezzl scheme ha occur or is occur gener for larg embezzl the
most effici method of detect is an analysi of the financi statement which is also a
review of document
loan fraud
loan fraud is a multifacet activ that includ es sever type of crimin activ larger
loan fraud scheme often involv real estat lend and collus between insid and
outsid loan fraud repres the highest risk area for financi institut although the
number of occurr might be small the dollar amount per occurr tend to be larg
financi institut failur as a result of real estat loan fraud
loss report by financi institut across the globe ar in the billion of dollar most
financi institut invest heavili in real estat transact a substanti portion of these
loss relat to real estat loan
common loan fraud scheme
loan to nonexist borrow
fals applic perhap with inaccur financi statement ar knowingli or
unknowingli accept by loan offic as the basi for loan these type of loan fraud can
be perpetr by peopl either extern to the lend institut extern fraud or by
offic director or employe of the victim institut intern fraud
sham loan with kickback and divers
loan offic will sometim make loan to acco mplice who then share all or part of the
proce with the lend offic in some instanc the loan ar charg off as bad debt
in other instanc the bogu loan ar paid off with the proce of new fraudul loan
financi institut fraud financi transact
1904 2011 fraud examin manual
doublepledg collater
borrow pledg the same collater with differ lender befor lien ar record and
without tell the lender
reciproc loan arrang
insid in differ bank caus their bank to lend fund to the other or sell loan to
other bank with agreement to bui their loansal for the purpos of conceal loan
and sale
swap bad loansdaisi chain
in a daisi chain a bank bui sell and swap it bad loan for the bad loan of anoth
bank creat new document in the process it purpos is to mask or hide bad loan
by make them look like thei ar recent and good
link financ
larg deposit ar offer to a bank usual br oker deposit on the condit that loan
ar made to particular person affili with the deposit broker high return ar promis
but the loan ar longer term than the deposit hot monei sometim kickback ar paid
to the broker or banker
fals applic with fals credit inform
sometim loan applic provid fals inform about their credit situat andor
overst their asset
singlefamili hous loan fraud
in thi scheme unqualifi borrow misrepres person creditworthi overst
abil to pai and misrepres characterist of the hous unit such act mai includ
report inflat incom move debt into a depend name report inflat squar
footag of the collater or even bribe an apprais to valu the home at a higher amount
than the market valu
construct loan
construct lend ha differ vulner than other perman or interim lend
more risk ar associ with constructi on project than with alreadybuilt project
construct fraud scheme ar numer the more common ar relat to estim of
cost to complet develop overhead draw request and retainag scheme
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1905
estim of cost to complet
when borrow approach a lend institut for construct financ thei typic
have a develop plan complet with an engin report apprais and budget for
construct cost the construct cost budget is by definit an estim as the project
is built out the budget will be revis to reflect actual expens budget ar delin by
specif line item such as slab exterior glass grade landscap and tenant
improv as the project proce certain over and underbudget cost ar incur
these cost should be repres by a chang order
if the loan agreement ha been properli document and enforc no materi
differenti from the budget should occur without the lender knowledg and consent
howev the developerborrow might misrepres the true natur of the under or
overbudget amount to mislead the lender the architectengin and the lender inspector
should examin all budget chang the impact of chang order might result in the loan
becom out of balanc cost to complet exce avail loan and equiti fund
gener develop hide or conceal their overbudget construct cost in two common
place the first place is conting and the second is to remov alloc from tenant
improv and appli them to shell construct
most budget contain a conting line item in the event actual cost exce the budget
amount unfortun mani develop and lender do not monitor the total impact on
remov alloc from the conting budget in addit save ar not alloc to
the conting line item when underbudget cost ar realiz it is also common to rob on
account to make up for a shortfal in anoth account gener tenant finish is estim at
a particular dollar amount per squar foot thi allow the develop consider latitud in
negoti with tenant
howev befor the entir space ha been leas and the construct cost have been
incur the amount alloc to tenant improv remain budgetari if the develop
is allow to realloc amount from thi budget line to shell construct then when it
come time to negoti leas and finish out the space the develop might be short of
avail fund if the tenant finish is treat as a holdback and not to be realloc or
disburs except for it intend purpos then there is a greater chanc of the loan not
becom overdisburs cost to complet exceed the avail financ
financi institut fraud financi transact
1906 2011 fraud examin manual
develop overhead
it is not uncommon in construct financ to have a budget line item for develop
overhead also call gener condit thi is a ripe area for abus the purpos of develop
overhead is to suppli the develop with oper capit while the project is under
construct thi overhead alloc should not includ a profit percentag as the
develop realiz profit upon complet
in essenc the overhead budget is as if the lender is make two type of loan a real estat
loan and a work capit loan for the overhead unfortun there is seldom if ever ani
separ underwrit for the overhead portion the overhead is mere ad as a
construct cost whose ultim collater is the properti and not some other shortterm
collater histor troubl construct loan or foreclosur due to fraud have been
total disburs in the develop overhead categori
draw request
construct loan advanc ar gener support by draw request a draw request is the
document substanti that a develop ha incur the appropri construct
expens and is now seek reimburs or direct payment a typic fraud scheme in
thi area involv request advanc on the loan for inappropri cost such as person
expens andor construct cost for an unrel project draw request provid the
greatest opportun for a develop to commit fraud against the lender becaus the lender
reli upon the develop document
gener a draw request or pai applic is made onc a month and is submit on a
standard form such as the on promulg by the american institut of architect aia
the request should be accompani by the follow document
paid invoic for raw materi
lien releas from each subcontractor
inspect report
cancel check from previou draw request
bank reconcili for construct draw account for previou month
loan balanc form demonstr that the loan remain in balanc
chang order if applic
wire instruct if applic
proof of develop contribut if applic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1907
the document requir as support for each draw request will vari depend on the
payment method such as direct dual payment disburs agent wire transfer or
reimburs ani miss or alter document is a red flag that someth is amiss
with the draw request all advanc on the loan should be adequ document
some or all of the follow step should be perform befor advanc fund on a
construct loan these step ar not repres as be allinclus but rather the
preliminari disburs question that the disburs parti should address
examin the draw and determin if suffici support document ha been
submit
reconcil the amount request with the approv budget account for ani
differ
determin that the amount request have been properli inspect and approv
determin if the proper lien releas have been submit for work perform
reconcil ani chang order with the approv budget determin if the chang order
have been approv
prove the cleric accuraci of the document submit
ensur that work complet ha been inspect by the lender architectengin
determin if there ar ani request for soft nonconstruct cost and whether thei
ar appropri
determin if there ar ani budget chang if so what ar thei for have thei been
approv
prepar a cost to complet estim to determin that the loan remain in balanc
if tenant improv fund have been request establish that there is a sign leas
on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the leas ha the
leas been approv
if homeown option fund have been request establish that there is a sign
purchas contract on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the
contract ha the contractpurchas been approv
examin payment request and determin if there ar new or previous undisclos
subcontractor if so determin why
ensur that the titl updat ha been receiv
retainag
the final area of major concern in construct lend is retainag retainag is the amount
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construct is complet and the lien
financi institut fraud financi transact
1908 2011 fraud examin manual
period ha expir there ar at least two reason why construct loan contain a retainag
provis the first reason is to keep the contractor interest in the project until all the work
ha been complet and accept by the owner the amount of the retainag repres
part if not all of the contractor profit therefor if the profit is not paid until the project
ha been complet then presum the contractor will complet the assign on time
and on budget
the second reason for the retainag is to ensur that the work of subcontractor is
complet and that the gener contractor pai the subcontractor so that no lien ar file if
the gener contractor fail to pai the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probabl file
a lien on the project if the retainag will not be releas until such time as the lien period
ha expir then there ar at least some fund avail to defrai the cost of fight the lien
or make a duplic payment becaus the gener contractor might have embezzl the
first payment without pai the subcontractor
red flag of loan fraud
there ar sever red flag of loan fraud mani time the sch em ar perpetr in tandem
with other scheme so what appear to be a red flag for on scheme might in fact lead the
fraud examin to on or more scheme
nonperform loan
although thi inform might not be avail to all a nonperform loan is not
perform for some reason on of those reason might be that a fraud scheme ha or is
occur
fraud scheme result in a nonperform loan includ
fraudul apprais the cash flow cannot support an inflat loan and therefor debt
amount
fals statement the loan wa made on fals or fraudul present assumpt
equiti skim there wa never ani intent to make the underli loan payment
construct overbudget item the overbudget amount might be a conceal method for
other scheme such as embezzl misappropri or fals statement
briberi the loan wa made becaus the lender receiv a bribe or a kickback from the
borrow
land flip the purpos of the loan wa to financ the seller out of a properti that ha
an artifici inflat valu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1909
disguis transact transact that ar sham transact without substanc made
to conceal other ill
high turnov in develop personnel
on of the first sign to look for particularli in construct lend is whether or not the
real estat develop is experienc a higherthannorm employe turnov typic
when a develop experi a high degre of turnov someth is wrong with the
intern oper thi is often a preambl for other problem to come
high turnov in tenant mix
if the tenant mix in a commerci project such as a retail center or an offic build is
suddenli undergo a major chang there might be some problem with the manag of
the project or with the method of alloc the passthrough expens such as util or
mainten in addit a declin in the tenant mix might be an indic that the defer
mainten for the project is not be properli attend to
increas chang order
an increas in the number of chang order or amount on chang order might be an
indic that construct chang have taken place that would alter the origin plan
project to such an extent as to render the underwrit inappropri chang order can
have the same impact on a project as alter the origin document as with anyth that
is contract for on a bid basi chang order could also be an indic of collus
bid chang order might be an indic that the origin project wa not feasibl and
short cut ar shore up other problem area chang order should be approv by the
architect and engin on the project in addit to the lender inspector
miss document
miss or alter document is a red flag for ani type of fraud scheme becaus
conceal is a kei fraud element miss document ar a definit giveawai miss
document ar of particular concern in construct lend experi ha shown that
seldom is a complet draw request submit without some miss document
loan file
miss document in the loan file ar anoth indic that thing might be amiss it is
import to determin if miss document have been misplac or were never receiv a
waiver of certain document is on common wai for lender to conceal fraud scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1910 2011 fraud examin manual
document for real estat loan is fairli standard list below ar some of the more
import document that should be present in the loan file
apprais
architect or engin report
assign of leas and rent
assign of limit partnership note
assign of takeout commit
attornei opinion letter
avail of util water sewer ga and electr
budget
complet schedul
copi of leas exist or if project is preleas commit letter
disburs notic if requir
easement
environment impact studi
ingress and egress
inspect report lender inspector
insur binder lender should be loss paye
letter of credit if applic
list of gener and subcontractor
loan agreement
plan and specif
promissori note from limit partner to partnership if applic
road dedic
soil report
subscript agreement similar to limit partnership note if applic
survei
takeout commit if applic
titl polici includ instruct letter from close
zone
disburs file
copi of all check issu at close
lien releas issu at close architect engin etc
loan close statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1911
draw request
draw request form aia form or it equival
bank reconcili gener contractor disburs account
cancel check if gener contractor pai subcontractor copi of the cancel
check should be includ in the follow draw
inspect report lender inspector
lien releas for each subcontractor for the previou draw
loan balanc form the lender should prepar some form of reconcili to ensur
that with each draw the loan remain in balanc item of particular concern ar interest
tenant finish and retainag
receipt for all item submit on the draw request form
titl updat from the titl compani
wire transfer instruct from the lender to the gener contractor disburs
account
in addit to the normal loan file the lender should requir a continu report from the
borrow for exampl the borrow could be requir to report annual financi condit
coupl with a tax return miss document in these followup file might indic that the
project or the borrow is have difficulti that might be the result of a fraud scheme
loan increas or extens replac loan
a loan be continu extend and loan increas be made simultan might
indic that the real estat project cannot support the debt servic typic the loan
increas ar to pai for the interest and extens fee thi red flag might also indic that
the loan wa made to a relatedparti or made as a loan to hasten a sale or other transact
in other word the loan wa not properli underwritten
if the loan is increas and extend sever time it might indic that higher apprais ar
be obtain on a madeasinstruct basi loan increas and extens might be the
method us by the lender to conceal a nonperform loan
howev accord to william t thornhil cfe a consult in the field of financi
institut fraud fraud perpetr tend to write a new loan or credit facil to replac an
exist or old loan becaus thei ar awar of the fact that a rewrit mai attract loan review
loan administr or intern audit attent accordingli replac loan ar now
increasingli us rather than a simpl rewrit of a loan
financi institut fraud financi transact
1912 2011 fraud examin manual
cash flow defici
the actual cash flow of a commerci project is a veri tell red flag if the project is
experienc an unexplain cash flow defici then an intern fraud scheme might be
the caus the project cash flow might reflect ani of the abov scheme
chang in ownership makeup
a chang in the ownership makeup commonli refer to as busi divorc might
indic fraudul activ it is not uncommon to have a work partner and an equiti
monei partner when the two partner becom disench with their relationship and
seek a separ it might suggest thing have gone sour
disguis transact
transact disguis to conceal their true natur often involv the lender and either an
exist custom or new custom bank personnel will sometim engag in fraudul
scheme to forego the requir to record addit loan loss reserv on method
emploi is to sell oreo other real estat own properti to an exist custom or
a new custom in exchang for make a new loan on anoth unrel project in other
word the bank is ty on transact to anoth quid pro quo
anoth method of conceal the true natur of a transact is to conduct the transact
through nomine for exampl the bank might be requir to recogn an addit loan
loss reserv due to the lack of perform on a particular loan the borrow might or
might not be a good custom of the bank regardless of the statu of the custom the
bank might request that the project underli collater be sold to anoth parti the
financ to be arrang by the bank the borrow can form a new entiti nomine or shell
compani to purchas the properti a new gener higher apprais is obtain and the
properti is sold in thi illustr the avoid of loss requir the particip of the
bank personnel the borrow and the apprais
real estat fraud
gener defin real estat fraud is ani fals represent coupl with intent to
deceiv made in connect with a real estat transact there ar sever real estat fraud
scheme includ the real estat loan fraud scheme discuss previous in addit there
ha been a recent growth of mortgag fraudrel incid due to the rise of subprim
lend and the mortgag crisi thi section will further detail those real estat loan fraud
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1913
scheme and will examin sever other real estat fraud scheme includ those stem
from subprim lend and the mortgag crisi the scheme examin includ
loan falsif
forg document
apprais fraud
straw buyer
mortgageback secur fraud
equiti skim
properti flip
ident theft perpetr in conjunct with a real estat transact
builderbailout scheme
seller assist scam
shortsal scheme
chunk or shot gun
foreclosur rescu scam
most real estat transact requir more monei than ani singl individu or entiti can
intern financ therefor most of these transact ar financ to some extent
becaus these transact requir borrow monei expert ar need these expert
includ apprais lender and auditor
loan falsif
it is illeg to provid fals document to verifi incom or asset to make misrepresent
in a loan applic and to knowingli process a fals loan applic common type of
loan falsif includ alter bank statement alter or fraudul earn
document fraudul letter of credit fabric letter of gift misrepresent of
employ misrepresent of loan purpos alter credit score fals social secur
number failur to fulli disclos borrow de bt or asset and broker us the ident
of prior custom to obtain loan for custom unabl to qualifi
accord to the mortgag asset research institut mari ninth period case report
to the mortgag banker associ fals statement made in loan applic ar the
most common aspect of mortgag fraud scheme in fact fals statement in the loan
applic ar the most report suspici activ relat to mortgag fraud accord to
the financi crime enforc network fincen thi is becaus most perpetr
financi institut fraud financi transact
1914 2011 fraud examin manual
could not execut mortgag fraud scheme without falsifi loan applic and
support document
ident fraud which is the misrepresent of data underpin on ident such as
us on social secur number is a common mortgag fraud scheme involv the
improp us of identifi data in fact fincen report in 2009 that ident fraud
occur in three percent of the sampl mortgag fraud report
the individu in the best posit to us a person identifi inform for purpos of
commit mortgag fraud ar industri insid ident fraud scheme mai be perpetr
by mortgag broker in possess of person identifi inform provid by a
legitim borrow and unbeknownst to him us over and over again
ident fraud scheme ar also perpetr by invest club organ who collect
person inform from member and then us it without their knowledg to purchas
properti
in other case real estat agent mortgag broker crimin andor other industri insid
provid a stolen social secur number of an individu with good credit to an individu
with bad credit who wish to purchas a home and help creat a credit histori under the
bad credit borrow name
final straw borrow ar often provid with stolen or falsifi social secur number
and driver licens to us in origin loan thi scenario involv a highlevel of
collus between all parti to defraud the lender
the follow red flag mai identifi mortgag contain fals or mislead inform
an item other than cash is us for the down payment ie gift rent credit sale of
person properti repay of loan etc
borrow purchas properti from employ or landlord
borrow ha a nonpurchas spous
borrow purchas invest properti doe not own current resid
new home is too small for propos occup
the onli list of employ address is a post offic box
borrow purchas privat resid properti ha an unreason commut from
subject properti to hi employ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1915
borrow level of educ is inconsist with employ
borrow ag is inconsist with the sta ted employ or the number of year
emploi
borrow is selfemploi or hi offic phone number is the same as their work number
when compar borrow asset and liabil ar inconsist
buyer is downgrad
loan applic is handwritten or incomplet
forg document
sinc w2 form bank statement titl commit leas tax return and similar
document other than the loan applic ar us to verifi incom and asset inform
such document ar routin falsifi alter or forg to perpetu mortgag fraud
scheme in 2009 forg document were the most report mortgag fraud scheme
accord to fincen
apprais fraud
the role of the apprais
the apprais perform an independ properti valuat for the new or old owner
apprais should be licens thei should also be certifi by an independ profession
associ there ar sever profession associ for real estat apprais a list of
these organ can be found at the end of thi section it is import particularli in
regard to complex commerci properti that the apprais experi and credenti be
carefulli scrutin
fundament of real estat apprais
real estat transact assum a will buyer and will seller fraud can occur when the
transact break down or the expert assist is not at arm length mani fraud scheme
have a fals apprais report as a condit preced sever differ kind of report ar
us by apprais thei ar summar below
letter form report
the letter form report is us when a client is familiar with the area and support data
therefor is not necessari the report consist of a brief descript of the properti the
type of valu sought the purpos serv by the apprais the date of valu the valu
conclus and the signatur of the apprais thi form gener is not us by financi
institut for credit decis
financi institut fraud financi transact
1916 2011 fraud examin manual
short form report
the short form report is us by financi institut usual for residenti real estat loan
sometim refer to as consum loan the report vari from on to four page and
consist of check sheet or space to be fill in by the apprais about pertin properti
data
narr report
the narr form includ all pertin inform about the area and the subject properti
as well as the rational for the estim valu it includ map photograph chart and
plot plan financi institut us narr report to support real estat lend and
invest decis on larg commerci real estat transact ani other type of
apprais report ie letter form or short form on these complex transact would like
be consid inadequ
determin valu
valu is compris of four element util scarciti demand and transfer real estat
apprais assign three type of valu to properti thei ar
fair market valu
thi is the price the properti would bring if freeli offer on the open market with both a
will seller and a will buyer estim
sale price
sale price is the price paid for the properti it might be higher or lower than fair market
valu actual
loan valu
loan valu is the percentag of a properti va lue fair market valu or sale price a lender
can or might loan a borrow
valuat method
sale comparison approach
the sale comparison approach lend itself to the apprais of land resid and other
type of improv that exhibit a high degre of similar and where a readi market
exist compar to the other approach thi method ha great influenc on residenti
portfolio valuat thi method is the least complic to understand and appli
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1917
subject properti is compar with similar properti that is either offer for sale or ha
recent sold item evalu includ time of sale locat of sale or offer for sale physic
characterist and improv adjust ar made to the valu of compar
properti either plu or minu on the basi of differ between them and the subject
properti relev item might be an overs lot a view a busi street or access
the cost approach
the cost approach gener doe not exert much influenc on the apprais final valu
estim it serv as a benchmark against which the sale comparison and incom
approach ar measur the cost approach is more accur for new properti it view
the valu of a parcel as the combin of the land valu if vacant and the cost to construct
a new build on the given date less the accru depreci the exist build would
suffer in comparison with the new build
the cost approach ha five step
estim the land valu as though vacant and avail for develop to it highest
and best us us the sale comparison approach
estim the replac or reproduct cost of the exist improv as of the
apprais date
estim the accru depreci amount suffer by the improv from all caus
physic deterior andor function or extern obsolesc
deduct the accru depreci from the replac cost to find the estim of valu
of the depreci improv
add the improv depreci valu to the land valu to arriv at the valu of the
properti
the abov is the most frequent us cost approach method it involv the cost associ
with rebuild with modern method design and materi that would most exactli replac
the exist build reproduct cost is a costapproach us to estim the cost to
reconstruct a replica of the build it gener is us onli when deal with uniqu
construct or for testimoni in court
the incom capit approach
under thi approach the properti valu is base on it capac to continu produc
incom thi method is particularli valuabl for the valuat of complex commerci
properti the net incom the properti produc is an import consider net incom
financi institut fraud financi transact
1918 2011 fraud examin manual
is the amount of monei over the remain life of the properti and it improv that a
fulli inform person us good manag is warrant in receiv
incom capit is the mathemat process of estim the present valu of incom
properti base on the anticip annual net incom it will produc kei to the applic
of thi approach is the capit rate that is us there ar three type of capit
rate interest rate recaptur rate and overal capit rate interest rate is the rate of return
earn on invest capit recaptur rate is the rate of return origin invest fund
provid the owner overal capit rate is a combin of the interest and recaptur
rate
fraudul apprais
fraudul apprais result from ani number of situat some of which ar
intent us of an incompet apprais
stack the deck by give the apprais improp or fals assumpt to us in
arriv at the valu such as
assum zone will be chang for a higher and better us when in fact zone will
not be chang
assum unrealist high vacanc and low expens rate
assum unrealist high incom sell price or absorptionth rate at which
vacant space will becom rent
otherwis influenc the apprais eg pai abovemarket fee or promis
futur busi
direct collus with the apprais to commit fraud
us for fraudul apprais
to obtain approv on margin or substandard loan to attain or exce goal in order
to be promot or receiv commiss bonu or rais
to justifi extend or renew a bad loan to avoid recognit of a loss that might
defer commiss promot bonu or rais
to avoid advers public and regulatori manag and sharehold disapprov
becaus of excess loss
to avoid recognit of a loss on real estat own and to permit addit capit
infus
to crimin gain monei
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1919
red flag of madeasinstruct apprais
the apprais us never ha been us befor is not on an approv list ha no
profession credenti or those offer ar of question credibl
apprais fee is unusu high
invalid compar ar us
support inform is miss insuffici or contradictori
market data doe not support the price and absorpt figur us to arriv at valu
detect fraudul apprais
to detect unrealist or bogu apprais the fraud examin should address the follow
1 read the apprais doe it match the document in the file
leas
compar
absorpt rate
residu valu
capit rate
legal descript
2 is there suffici demand for the project to ensur absorpt of the properti into the
marketplac
3 ar there uniqu characterist of the project that will ensur a competit advantag
over other project
4 is the project sensit to chang in local econom condit
mortgag fraud
fraud ha alwai been a constant presenc in the mortgag industri and it appear to be on
the rise there ar a number of like factor contribut to thi appar increas includ
a rapid declin in the rate of home price appreci an increas in unemploy and an
increas in aggress lend practic all of these factor either reduc incent or
made it more difficult for borrow to meet their mortgag oblig which ultim led
to an increas in loan default
financi institut fraud financi transact
1920 2011 fraud examin manual
the recent mortgag crisi ha led to an increas in fraud for sever reason on reason is
that the declin hous market affect mani in the mortgag industri especi those
paid by commiss dure such declin individu ar more like to commit fraudul
act to maintain their current standard of live in addit the declin market provid
an ideal environ for perpetr to emploi numer scheme that fit perfectli with
down market ie an increas number of foreclosur declin hous price and
decreas demand such down market characterist place pressur on home builder
seller and lender which fraud perpetr will attempt to exploit
the growth of subprim lend pave the wai for fraud
subprim lend refer to a varieti of credit instrument lender provid to peopl who do not
qualifi for the best market interest rate usual due to weaken credit histori there ar
mani type of subprim mortgag includ
interestonli mortgag
pickapay loan
228 adjustabler mortgag
optionadjustabler mortgag
over the past decad the subprim market grew dramat flourish as the vehicl by
which lender fund loan to borrow who would gener not qualifi for tradit
loan accord to industri newslett insid mortgag financ wall street gener 18
trillion in subprim loan from 2000 to 2007 in 2006 analyst estim that 25 percent of
all mortgag origin in the unit state were subprim and by 2007 14 percent of all
outstand mortgag indebted in the unit state wa subprim in natur by 2010
with the passag of the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act and
the announc of well fargo to discontinu it subprim lend divis the
percentag of subprim mortgag in the unit state is expect to declin significantli
as well fargo wa the largest lender in the unit state it is possibl that the percentag
of subprim mortgag will fall to nearli 0
correspond with the growth of the subprim lend industri wa a substanti increas
in the number of mortgag fraud case the rise in fraudul activ is the result of sever
factor includ the growth of autom loan process and the growth of mortgag
broker origin loan these condit coupl with veri lucr possibl creat an
industri that that is veri attract to untrustworthi individu or in other word fraudster
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1921
autom loan process
the growth of autom loan process contribut to the increas in mortgag fraud
becaus the natur of such transact is faceless the us of the internet to receiv and
process loan applic ha grown and in such case the lender never meet the
borrow thi process creat an environ suscept to fraudul activ
mortgag broker origin loan
the increas number of mortgag broker origin loan ha also plai a part in the
rise number of subprim fraud case histor mortgag loan were origin by the
loan offic at the bank mortgag lender howev start reli on thirdparti origin
tpo to broker their loan product broker could be paid a commiss rather than a
salari an option that work well for minim capit mortgag lender
as a result the industri ha seen the evolut of mortgag broker
as market for mortgag becam more competit bank with their own retail loan
offic also start emploi these thirdparti wholesal origin todai mortgag
broker ar the largest distributor of mortgag product for mortgag lender and bank it
is estim that twothird of all origin ar from wholesal tpo mortgag broker
rather than retail loan offic
mortgag brokerorigin loan ar vulner to fraud primarili becaus until recent
there were no nation standard for the licens and oversight of mortgag broker
howev on juli 30 2008 presid bush sign into law the secur and fair enforc
for mortgag licens act of 2008 safe act which is part of the hous and
econom recoveri act of 2008 design to provid uniform licens standard
nationwid the safe act requir all state to have in place a system of licensur meet
minimum standard for mortgag loan origin ie anyon who take a residenti
mortgag loan applic or who offer or negoti term of a residenti mortgag loan
applic for compens or gain begin juli 31 2009
mortgag fraud scheme
straw buyer
straw buyer ar loan applic who mortgag fraud perpetr us to obtain home loan
but who have no intent to occupi the properti thei ar bui or to pai back the loan
perpetr often us straw buyer to hide the ident of the true borrow that did not
qualifi for the mortgag
financi institut fraud financi transact
1922 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow red flag mai occur in a straw borrow transact
at close discov that the check is from someon other than the parti to the
contract
borrow resid in differ state than purchas properti which is describ as a
primari resid
quit claim deed is us veri close to loan close
invest properti repres as owneroccupi
a thirdparti sign on the borrow behalf
name ad to purchas contract
parti to the transact ar relat
there is no sale agent involv
there ar indic that the properti seller default
exist of a high fico score
gift us for down payment despit the presenc of good asset
equiti skim
equiti skim is a scheme wherebi an individu entiti or group of individu purchas
on or sever singlefamili home typic the financ is for a percentag of the
purchas price eg 8090 percent and the owner invest the balanc of the purchas price
as equiti the home isar then rent
the owner collect the rent from the tenant but fail to make the mortgag payment
when owner have withheld mortgag payment that equal the amount of the invest
equiti thei can then either resum payment or allow the mortgag to be foreclos
although the mortgag might eventu be foreclos the owner have recoup their
origin invest plu ani rental payment not appli to the mortgag in addit the
owner receiv state and feder tax benefit dure the hold period thi scheme is
most success with nonrecours mortgag
although equiti skim eventu collaps and the purchas risk be su for
defici if the loan were recours the scheme continu to be practic it ha becom
an increas problem as mani residenti home ar auction and bulk purchas ar
encourag
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1923
properti flip
properti flip ha been around for a long time it is well known in the real estat industri
as a wai to make a profit by bui low and sell high and it is not necessarili illeg
flip is perfectli fine when all represent of the properti condit and valu ar
true and accur howev flip can also be a fraud for profit scheme that mai lead to
substanti loss and other devast consequ
properti flip is the process by which an investor purchas a home and then resel it at a
higher price shortli thereaft for exampl an investor bui a hous in need of work for
250000 in juli renov the kitchen and the bathroom and landscap the yard at a cost
of 50000 and then resel the hous two month later the time it take to make the
renov for a price that is reflect of the market for a hous in it updat condit
thi is a legitim busi transact and there ar numer individu and group in
the real estat market who make an honest live flip properti
howev properti flip becom illeg and fraudul when a home is purchas and
resold within a short period of time at an artifici inflat valu the kei in determin
whether a flip is illeg is to watch for a signific increas in valu over a short period of
time that cannot be justifi a properti that sell twice in the same dai at an increas of
100000 is hard to justifi
an illeg properti flip is usual depend on an apprais report that ha artifici inflat
the valu of the properti the borrow mai review the apprais without inspect the
properti complet unawar of the market valu in that properti neighborhood the
borrow mai also be a straw borrow or an accomplic
nomine or strawman loan
loan made in the name of a straw borrow or agent have no substanc while the
ident of the real borrow is undisclos to the lender
mortgag pull
for the purpos of disguis loan exceed a bank legal limit loan ar made to a
partnership member who by prearrang then invest in a singl riski ventur in a total
amount exceed the lend limit in realiti the singl borrow is the partnership and the
collater is the partnership properti mort gagepul might involv fraudul loan
applic and payoff to the individu partner for particip
financi institut fraud financi transact
1924 2011 fraud examin manual
ident theft
an ident theft scheme is defin as the assumpt of someon els ident for fraudul
purpos ident theft is recogn as on of the fastest grow crime in the us recent
ident theft report from credit report compani corpor databas and commerci
data broker indic a substanti rise in case of ident theft in conjunct with mortgag
loan fraud
two exampl of ident theft scheme involv mortgag fraud includ the fraudul
acquisit of a person home and the fraudul origin of a loan on a properti
belong to anoth person
phantom sale
phantom sale scam ar particularli harm becaus thei involv the fraudul acquisit of
a homeown properti by file a fraudul deed thi scam doe not happen at the
origin of the loan but rather it mai occur without the homeown knowledg
decad after the properti wa origin sold
the perpetr identifi a properti typic belong to an estat or an outofst
owner that is own free and clear he then creat a fictiti quit claim deed which
purport to grant all right and titl on the properti to the fraudster the true owner
signatur is forg on the deed and the scammer file it in the real properti record onc
the deed is file he appli for and execut a loan on the properti us a straw borrow
often the valu is inflat he pocket 100 percent of the loan proce and disappear
phantom second lien
in a variat of the phantom sale scheme a person assum a homeown ident and
take out an addit loan or a second mortgag in the homeown name if there is not
enough equiti in the home to warrant a second loan an inflat apprais is obtain thi
scheme involv a high level of collus between a loan offic an apprais and a
titl agent
some red flag to help identifi ident theft aris dure the mortgag lend process
includ
a chang of address notic is file immedi
the apprais valu is inflat
there is no prior lien payoff reflect on the hud1 settlement statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1925
document ar forg or there ar discrep between the borrow document
signatur
the record owner live abroad or is deceas
mail or email sent to the borrow is return as undeliver even though
transact continu
builderbailout scheme
a builder bailout scheme usual occur when a builder ha sold the major of home in a
tract but is left with a few that ar unsold the builder mai be suffer from financi
difficulti with these linger home and mai need to sell them quickli in order to pai off
delinqu debt to dispos of the remain properti the builder mai undertak a
varieti of scheme that mai includ but ar not limit to the us of hidden seller financ
or inflat properti valu
some builder also includ lavish incent in the transact to lure buyer such incent
usual involv a form of down payment assist so that a borrow can purchas a home
without ani equiti contribut
other concess or incent that might be offer to potenti buyer includ manag
the properti as incomegener invest properti absorb ani neg cash flow
for the first 12 to 36 month guarante mortgag payment for the first 12 to 36 month
or other turnkei servic and guarante even though the properti mai remain vacant
builder mai also agre to pai the buyer a substanti rebat that is not disclos to
the lender
get concess from the seller is not new and it is not necessarili fraudul the
simpl test to determin whether or not the transact is illeg is to ask ar these
concess disclos and have thei been approv by the lender
a scheme involv a legitim buyer
some builder engag in builder bailout scheme find margin legitim buyer whose
intent is to occupi the properti and make the payment the follow is an exampl of thi
type of scheme
the market valu for a builder n ew construct home is 200000
a borrow want to bui the hous but doe not have the necessari down payment 10
percent or 20000
financi institut fraud financi transact
1926 2011 fraud examin manual
the builder offer to sell the hous for 220000 and provid silent seller financ
there is a verbal or undisclos agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after
close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais for 220000 thi inflat is typic below
fraud threshold and just enough to creat equiti for the borrow
the buyer is steer to a particip broker and titl compani
the buyer qualifi for a 90percent ltv 200 000 which actual repres the true
purchas or sale price the buyer in these scenario is often qualifi for the loan base
on materi misrepresent
the buyer close on a loan for 200000
the seller get hi origin ask price of 200000 and forgiv the seller financ
the lender now ha a 100percent ltv loan
if the properti goe into default the lender ha no equiti especi if the market
continu to declin
a scheme involv a straw borrow
other builder seek straw borrow who ar often induc with norisk invest
properti ownership sometim the straw borrow is affili with the builder in anoth
variat of thi scheme the builder fail to complet construct but obtain a straw
borrow and an inflat apprais to origin a loan
a builder bailout scheme involv a straw borrow mai plai out as follow
the builder recruit a straw borrow to purchas the properti for no monei down and
cash back at close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais that is us as a basi for the loan amount thi
inflat loan amount will allow the builder to recoup hi expens pai a fee to the straw
and keep the loan current for two to four year thi might appear on the hud1
statement as a disproportion commiss to a real estat agent 30 percent who in
turn split it with the builder
the borrow is steer to a particip broker and titl compani and is qualifi
base on materi misrepresent
the builder offer to manag the properti for the borrow with the promis of four
year with no mortgag payment
the properti mai remain vacant and the neighborhood mai be deterior
the loan remain current for a period of time but then goe into delinqu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1927
sellerassist scam
sellerassist scheme ar more like to occur when home sale have declin and
seller ar motiv to sell these scheme ar base on inflat apprais after the buyer
obtain an inflat mortgag and purchas a home at the inflat valu the seller give the
buyer a rebat howev the rebat is not disclos to the lender and as a result the lender
loan more monei than the properti us to secur the loan wa worth if the buyer
default which gener happen the lender cannot sell the properti and recov the loan
monei
in addit to the red flag associ with apprais fraud note abov the follow
trigger mai indic the exist of seller assist scam
the seller is desper to sell the properti
the contract appear to be for substanti more than it is worth
the buyer ha alreadi select the apprais
the buyer insist on us a specif apprais
the sale price reflect properti appreci in an area where properti valu ar
declin
decept short sale
short sale which ar a viabl mean to avoid forecl osureoccur when the lender agre to
accept a lesser amount than the balanc on the loan most lender will entertain the idea of a
short sale becaus for the lender the foreclosur process is timeconsum and expens
thei would rather avoid the cost associ with a foreclosur so that the bank doe not
have to take the properti in as a nonperform asset and try to sell it borrow ar
recept to short sale becaus thei keep foreclosur off their credit report howev
becaus short sale usual involv properti that that ar sold for extrem low price thei
also provid fraudster with opportun to obtain cheap properti to us in the
advanc of other scheme
with the recent rise in foreclosur the inventori for potenti short sale will increas as
will the opportun for scammer to obtain cheap properti to us in the advanc of
other scheme the short sale scenario us by fraudster allow them to obtain these
properti inexpens under fals pretens thi is gener accomplish by acquir an
undervalu apprais
the follow ar red flag suggest the exist of a shortsal scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1928 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud occur well after the loan origin in the lender workoutserv
depart
the properti is face foreclosur
the hous is stage to obtain an undervalu apprais
the seller will onli sign the sale contract at the dai of close
no offici letter or document exist to provid proof that the short sale ha
been approv
there ar multipl sale contract
the properti is immedi or concurr resold at a price that is higher than the
discount valu
multipl hud settlement statement exist that do not mirror the econom basi of
the transact
payment made to the seller ar not disclos on the hud settlement statement
after the properti is in default or foreclosur there ar chang in ownership but there
is neither a new mortgag nor the dismiss of the foreclosur suit
commun with the shortsal lender ar restrict
chunk and shot gun
chunk
chunk scheme typic involv an unsophist borrow who is recruit to purchas
a properti and who deal exclus with a recruit the recruit collud with a mortgag
broker who gather the complet loan applic and submit them to multipl lender
for approv the borrow mai not even be awar that the recruit and loan offic have
submit the applic to multipl lender multipl approv ar provid all for the
same properti and all without know that other loan ar be close and fund
simultan on the same properti
the assist of an apprais and a titl agent ar usual requir for a chunk scheme to
be success the recruit often act as the borrow power of attornei poa in
attend the multipl close and often is the on who pocket the loan proce over and
abov what is due to the legitim properti seller the borrow is left with numer loan
from variou lender further the lender ar not suffici collater as there ar
multipl claim as first lien holder creditor
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1929
shot gun
shotgun is a fraud scheme in which a mortgag broker send multipl home equiti line of
credit heloc loan on the same properti to differ lender at the same time the
borrow good credit the us of state in come product offer on mani heloc and
the lender determin of the properti valu base on the equiti in the home rather
than on an apprais all facilit a fast close process to ensur that all applic will be
process dure the same timefram due to the delai between the date the loan ar
close and the date the lien ar file in the courthous lender ar not awar of the other
lien when make their underwrit decis each lender believ it is first in line with
it lien
characterist of shotgun or chunk
thei mai involv on titl compani that willingli close each loan
the mortgag broker mai have power of attornei for the borrow
thei mai involv forgeri of the borrow signatur on multipl close packag
unbeknownst to the borrow
there mai be multipl lender inquiri on a credit report in a short period of time
foreclosur rescu scam
unfortun as more homeown struggl with potenti foreclosur more will fall prei
to foreclosur rescu scam there ar some legitim foreclosur assist program in
which the homeown is offer shortterm financ that pai off the delinqu debt thi
allow homeown to stai in their home as tenant until thei can repair their credit and
obtain longterm financ howev there ar also mani fraudul program
foreclosur rescu scam come in two primari variat phantomhelp scam and bailout
or rescu scam
phantomhelp scam
in a phantomhelp scam the scammer promis to save the homeown credit or get him low
monthli payment instead the homeown pai thousand of dollar in fee and the
scammer either doe noth or file bankruptci on behalf of the borrow and abscond
with the fee
financi institut fraud financi transact
1930 2011 fraud examin manual
bailout or rescu scam
in a bailout scam also call a rescu scam the homeown is trick into convei the deed
to hi hous to the fraudster and ultim lose both the hous and ani equiti a bailout
scam unfold when a homeown is solicit with an offer of privat nonqualifi short
term financ that will pai off a delinqu debt and allow the homeown to stai in hi
home while hi credit is repair as part of the agreement which is usual verbal the
homeown is convinc by the investor that to qualifi for the shortterm financ the
homeown will need to convei titl to the properti as collater onc the fraudster obtain
the titl he sell the properti at fair market valu pai off the debt and skim the equiti
that wa ow to the homeown
some other characterist of bailout scam includ the follow
the rescuer reli on a lender fund to accomplish the scam
the rescuer recruit other borrow to purchas the rescu properti onc he ha
obtain their titl the borrow mai think that he is bui a legitim invest
properti or the borrow could be a straw who is paid to purchas turnkei invest
properti
the borrow is steer to a mortgag broker or perhap the rescuer himself is a
mortgag broker and qualifi for a mortgag to purchas the properti at the fair market
valu not the amount that is due on the outstand loan unbeknownst to him the
borrow is qualifi base on misrepresent in other case the straw is
compens for hi particip in the scheme
collus with a titl compani is critic the homeown is instruct by the rescuer to
go to a particular titl compani or the rescuer convinc the homeown to execut a
power of attornei poa give the rescuer author to close the transact or
paper ar close at the homeown hous in a kitchen close either wai the
homeown is in essenc deed hi properti to the rescuer borrow gener in
these case the homeown doe not understand what is be sign the proce pai
off the default loan and the equiti goe to the rescuer
the straw walk awai from the transact while the legitim new owner borrow
discov that the tenant cant keep up with the rent payment and ha deplet hi cash
reserv to keep the loan current the titl compani fail to pai off the old debt and the
origin lender start foreclosur procedur immedi
mani state ar aggress pass legisl to protect homeown in foreclosur from
these scam
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1931
homeown fall for foreclosur rescu scheme becaus
the market is satur with rescu servic that ar fraught with li decept
exagger and pressur
the homeown is often trust and doesnt believ that someon would lie to him
the homeown is kept in the dark about the foreclosur process perhap becaus he is
told to ceas all contact with the lender foreclosur depart
the homeown mai be desper to save hi home and believ there is littl time to
act
the homeown mai lack financi sophist
foreclosur rescu scam red flag
red flag associ with foreclosur rescu scam includ
these scam often prei on elderli or longtim resid with larg amount of equiti
the borrow either a straw or legitim borrow receiv a remodel allow
from a recruit outsid of close
the underwrit ha note on the close instruct that a copi of the purchas
contract must be provid at close so unbeknownst to him the seller sign a purchas
contract at close or the seller name is forg in order to meet that condit
the seller on the transact is delinqu or in foreclosur
the hud1 settlement statement indic that most of the seller equiti outsid of the
mortgag payoff is go to a thirdparti
new account fraud scheme
fraud is much more like to occur in new account than in establish account special
effort must be taken to properli identifi the potenti new custom screen criteria
should be establish and enforc by everyon handl new account prompt decis
action is necessari to manag andor close appar problem account
fals identif
new account crimin ar actor thei us fals identif to open new account and
steal monei befor fund ar collect by the bank fals identif is easili purchas
busi account us stolen check
some bank custom defraud busi institut by open a new busi account us
check stolen from anoth busi the fraudster then withdraw the fund and close the
account
financi institut fraud financi transact
1932 2011 fraud examin manual
person account us fraudul check
a similar scheme is to open a new person account with two check drawn by other peopl
the check ar either forg or stolen the fraudster then deposit on and take cash for
the other shortli thereaft the fraudster write check to overdraw the deposit amount
prevent
a relationship with a financi institut should never be establish until the ident of a
potenti custom is satisfactorili establish if the ident cannot be establish the
relationship should not be establish
person account
no account should be open without satisfactori identif such as
a local issu driver licens with a photograph
a passport or alien registr card togeth with
a colleg photo identif card
a major credit card verifi the current statu
an employ identif card
an outofarea driver licens
a current util bill from the custom place of resid eg ga electr
telephon
consid the custom resid or place of busi ness if it is not in the area serv by the
bank or branch ask why the custom is open an account at that locat
follow up with call to the custom resid or place of employ thank the
custom for open the account disconnect phone servic or no record of employ
warrant further investig
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should
be question
for larg account ask the custom for a prior bank refer and write a letter to the bank
ask about the custom
check with servic bureau for indic that the custom ha been involv in
question activ such as kite incid and nsf situat
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1933
the ident of a custom can be establish through an exist relationship with the
institut such as some type of loan or other account relationship
busi account
busi princip should provid evid of legal statu eg sole proprietorship
partnership or incorpor or associ when open a busi account
check the name of a commerci enterpris with a report agenc and check prior bank
refer
follow up with call to the custom busi thank the custom for open the
account disconnect phone servic warrant further investig
when circumst allow perform a visual check of the busi to verifi the actual
exist of the busi and that the busi ha the capabl of provid the servic
describ
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should be
question
sinc teller ar oftentim the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import
that thei receiv train that will allow them to identifi fraudul check
teller should
be awar of magnet rout number
look for check with number lower than 200
be awar of the date that the account wa open
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg on the check
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt identif
recogn forg negoti instrument
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
financi institut fraud financi transact
1934 2011 fraud examin manual
detect
some of the more common red flag of potenti new account scheme ar
custom resid outsid the bank trade area
dress andor action inconsist or inappropri for the custom state ag
occup or incom level
new account request immedi cash withdraw upon deposit
request for larg quantiti of temporari check
no order for print check
monei transfer wire fraud scheme 1
wire transfer of fund ar noth newthei began in the 1940 howev with todai
grow emphasi on a cashless societi the number of wire transfer increas each year
typic fraudster who commit thi type of crime ar knowledg about wire transfer
activ have at least on contact within the target compani and ar aggress in carri
out the theft
instantan transfer
wire transfer servic electron move fund worldwid from a financi institut to a
beneficiari account at ani bank point accord to a custom instruct a bank
point is ani institut or busi capabl of receiv electron transact such as bank
save and loan credit union brokerag firm and insur compani on ani dai 2
trillion to 3 trillion move among financi institut the transact ar primarili for
complet interbank purchas and sale of feder fund purchas sell and financ
secur transact disburs loan proce or repai loan and conduct real estat
busi
although these technolog enhanc oper and increas the effici of the financi
institut thei also provid a tremend opportun for crimin who learn to
manipul the electron environ for their person gain wire transfer fraud is a
particularli danger risk to a businesss solvencyon major wire fraud can destroi ani
1 the editor wish to thank jame incaprera cfssp cp p and joyc c lambert phd cia cpa for their
assist in prepar thi section mr incaprera is the louisiana investig manag for bank on in new
orlean la and dr lambert is a professor of account at the univers of new orlean
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1935
firm accord to the multist share and analysi center singl loss averag
100000 to 200000
common scheme
dishonest bank employe
peopl who have access to correct account identif inform can transfer monei
improperlyinsid wire fund to themselv andor relat parti
misrepresent of ident
peopl pose as custom have us pretext call to obtain correct account inform
from the bank peopl pose as wire room employe in anoth bank or a branch offic
order transfer to dummi account in anoth bank
system password secur compromis
peopl have legitim access to sensit account and daili code inform for a limit
time for exampl comput consult effect improp transfer through unauthor
access
forg author
bank offic and custom author oral or written is improperli obtain or
forg peopl forg order to transfer monei to their own account when the recipi
account is actual in the name of someon els
unauthor entri and intercept
unauthor personnel gain access to the wire room and it equip or the actual
transmiss is intercept and alter
prevent and detect wire transfer fraud
fraud examin and auditor need to advis manag on wai to prevent and detect
wire transfer fraud
busi audit and other control
everi firm of cours must have written polici and procedur for wire transact in
addit fraud examin or auditor should conduct unannounc audit of those
transact follow ar other exampl of wire transfer control
make sure the person author the wire transfer isnt the individu who order it
financi institut fraud financi transact
1936 2011 fraud examin manual
requir those order transfer to have secur password
maintain and keep a current list of those order wire transfer and a log of
all transfer
requir vacat of person who handl wire transfer
requir that reconcili of account affect by wire transfer be perform by
person not involv with the wire transfer process
keep all confidenti inform about firm account and wire transfer in safe room
secur with lock give comput kei card to these room to author personnel
onli shred trash
busi frequent perform vendor audit but often neglect to audit their bank wire
transfer control a fraud examin should evalu these area
pick a sampl of transact and review the log of the call made back to the bank
point to verifi their authent you mai listen to the tape record of the actual
author to ensur complianc with callback rule
review document of past wire transfer activ from bank statement or bank
onlin transact histori for a daili debit and credit match of each transact
obtain written confirm of transact from the wire transfer provid to
determin the timeli of their receipt by your firm
promptli reconcil problem caus by the usual custom of end all wire transfer for
a dai in the midafternoon some custom believ thei should receiv credit and
interest on fund receiv at the end of a dai howev wire transfer made after the
afternoon close time arent credi ted until the next busi dai
bank audit
financi institut should ensur the follow safeguard when transfer fund
provid custom with uniqu code that ar requir to author or order wire
transfer
maintain and updat list of employe author to perform wire transfer transact
compil audit trail of incom and outgo wire transact as well as the employe
respons for each portion of the transact
review all wire transfer transact at the end of each dai to ensur that the origin
transfer instruct were execut correctli
make sure the busi to which the fund ar transfer ar contact to ensur
authent of fund transfer request if the busi ar contact by phone the
phone number us should be the origin number given by the custom when the
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1937
account were open and not the phone number provid by the caller who
request the transfer
dont execut wire transfer sole from fax instruct again verifi authent by
phone the origin number given by the custom when the account were open
and not the number provid by the caller who request the transfer
requir that all account affect by wire transfer be reconcil by bank employe not
involv with the wire process
ensur the inhous wire oper manual is avail onli to author personnel
and secur when not in us especi after hour clean crew employe could
help themselv to client pass code and other confidenti inform
record all incom and outgo call for wire transfer instruct
carefulli screen wire transfer personnel applic
reassign to other depart wire transfer employe who have given notic that thei
ar resign but still have some time left with the compani
requir all employe involv in the transfer of fund to take at least five consecut
dai of vacat each year assign their duti es onli to other transfer depart staff
member dure their absenc
make sure bank employe never disclos sensit inform over the telephon
until the caller ident and authorizati on have been verifi to the custom
inform file
separ duti among wire employe who transmit or receiv request for fund these
employe shouldnt also verifi the accuraci of the transact
train employe on proper intern control fraud awar and the import
of protect inform share alert issu by govern agenc and
profession group
autom teller machin atm fraud
an atm is a dispens facil from which the holder of a debit card can draw cash the
facil can also perform other servic such as deposit fund and check account
balanc but the most popular us ha been to dispens fund fraud scheme have been
perpetr involv the unauthor us of atm facil scheme includ
theft of card andor unauthor access to pin number and account code for atm
transact by unauthor person
employe manipul
counterfeit atm card
financi institut fraud financi transact
1938 2011 fraud examin manual
counterfeit atm machin
exampl
a former citibank employe wa sentenc to 41 month in prison for mastermind a
scheme to steal 200000 in cash from sever of the bank atm the comput expert
wa the no 2 offici in citibank atm secur depart and program the
bank monei machin to issu monei and not leav ani record of the transact thi
wa done by remot access the compani mainfram comput er and instruct it to put
particular machin in test mode
detect
when investig atm scheme look for a lack of segreg of duti between the card
issu function and the person identif pin issuanc
advanc fee fraud
bank find deal that seem too good to be true to gain access to larg amount of monei
deposit at belowmarket interest rate the catch is that the bank must pai an upfront
finder fee to a person claim to have access to the monei in some case desper
institut ar offer access to illeg monei and thei typic do not report the loss of
the advanc fee when the deal fall through more inform on advanc fee swindl can
be found in the consum fraud chapter
exampl
the bank is contact by an agent such as a broker advisor consult promot lawyer
or bank custom offer to provid monei at a belowmarket interest rate for a long
period of time eg 1020 year the agent ask for a larg fee to close the deal the
agent take the fee and disappear the deposit might or might not exist and if thei do
thei seldom equat to the agent represent
red flag
agent request document on bank stationeri or signatur of offic
bank is ask to give nondisclosur agreement to protect agent or other parti
there ar sever complex layer of agent broker and other middlemen
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1939
broker loan
a variat of the advanc fee scheme is the broker loan loan broker appli to either
packag of individu residenti consum loan or singl commerci loan a variat
of a broker loan is the loan particip where the purchas particip in the loan but
doe not purchas the entir loan the fraud scheme associ with broker or
particip loan gener involv sell phoni loan packag or sell particip in
loan that have not been properli underwritten gener a larg fee is charg for these
broker loan
with residenti loan packag the broker sell the packag take the monei and disappear
broker loan ar gener not sold with ani recours to the broker therefor the
purchas must look to the borrow and the underli collater for debt satisfact with
loan particip the lead bank gener perform the underwrit howev thi doe
not reliev the particip bank from it oblig to perform it own due dilig if the
particip bank doe not independ examin the document and perform it own
due dilig then fraud scheme on the part of the sell institut ar possibl
letterofcredit fraud
most letterofcredit fraud aris from foreig n trade and contract letterofcredit fraud
can be perpetr by beneficiari us forg or fraudul document present to the
issu bank with a demand for payment the document howev must conform to the
term of the letterofcredit agreement
exampl
an american export might offer to sell good to an oversea import when term ar
arrang a letter of credit is obtain in the export favor confirm by a bank near the
export locat the actual export never occur and the request for payment is bogu
insideoutsid fraud
outsideinsid fraud is an area where fraud is increas in which the employe insid
might be coopt through a bribe or a threat of violenc against the insid or a famili
member sometim the insid is a bank teller who agre to cash certain item as long as
the item look reason and ar below a cash limit other time the insid is a proof
oper or sorter oper who insert document directli into the comput system to
financi institut fraud financi transact
1940 2011 fraud examin manual
affect fraudul deposit or the insid is sell copi of document to individu who
us comput techniqu to make fraudul item
account inform fraud
inform is sold to organ ring or insid who us the inform themselv as
financi institut make more servic avail to custom and strive to make them
more usabl inform about custom account relationship resid in mani form such
as 24hour custom oper onlin system print document that ar innoc put in
the trash onli to be retriev or credit card inform on high line card
trade activ
trade activ can be compromis to defraud bank usual perpetr with the
assist of an intern employe or by an employe act alon trade can includ
foreign exchang secur trade loan sale and securit often when thi type of
problem is suspect the investig must turn to trader themselv as the onli sourc to
gather inform
prevent
financi institut like other organ should have standard intern control
measur to assist in the detect and deterr of fraud in addit to normal
procedur such as segreg of duti and budget and actual comparison list below
ar some specif control measur that might enhanc the detect and deterr
of fraud
loan origin underwrit close disburs and servic segreg
by separ all of the function relat to loan a lend institut reduc the
opportun for an individu insid to perpetr loan fraud addition the segreg
provid for at least on if not sever level of independ review to reduc it extern
loan fraud exposur
committe approv of all larg or unusu transact
if a loan committe or a boardofdirector committe is respons for approv loan
and other larg or unusu transact then insid will have a more difficult time
perpetr larg fraud and the transact submit by extern fraudster will be subject
to anoth layer of independ review
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1941
transfer journal entri and order review
regularli review all transfer journal entri and order as with an expens review if a
routin but unschedul review occur from time to time then the fraudster lose the
vehicl for conceal
independ review of loan
an independ review of loan provid a nonpartisan approach to all loan transact
either the intern or extern auditor or other consult can perform thi independ
review that allow for a second opinion on loan transact the review should be
consist and perform on a regular basi to help establish loan loss reserv typic
thi loan review is establish for loan for more than a certain dollar amount such as
25000 or 100000
manag review of writeoff
excess writeoff ar a form of conceal for phantom loan conflict of interest and
embezzl therefor if all writeoff ar subject to manag review befor thei ar
written off then manag reduc the potenti environ for fraud
routin examin of offic account
routin examin of offic account might prevent fraud scheme such as wire transfer
fraud embezzl withdraw from dormant account conflict of interest and so on
thi review can be perform when the offic is on mandatori vacat
proper lend polici
employe should be train in the proper and regul lend polici of the institut
ani deviat from the polici will be red flag and will help to prevent loan fraud from
both intern and extern perpetr
document requir for standard transact
deviat from normal or proscrib document should be an automat red flag who
better to recogn a potenti fraud than the employe routin handl the
document therefor employe should be welleduc in proper document for
the transact thei ar handl
financi institut fraud financi transact
1942 2011 fraud examin manual
inform verif for exampl loan applic
fraud potenti could be elimin or at the veri least detect befor compani suffer
damag if the employe know how to verifi inform for exampl if the loan offic
advis a potenti borrow that the inform submit on financi statement will be
verifi the borrow will be less like to submit fals or fraudul financi statement
addition if a teller advis a depositor that the deposit will be verifi befor cash is paid
out then the incid of split deposit can be reduc
employe train
fellow employe ar gener the first peopl to recogn unusu transact or behavior
chang of other employe these might be earli indic that a fraud ha or will soon
begin employe and manag should be properli train to recogn these symptom
for exampl bank teller should be adequ school in split deposit scheme new
account offic in new account scheme and so on
standard procedur
an institut can provid a low fraud environ by standard procedur in sensit
area as detail below
loan applic process
inform requir for loan approv
credit report request
apprais accept from preapprov list of vendor
inspect report on construct draw loan
conflict of interest disclosur statement
routin confirm call for
wire transfer
construct vendor
confirm of regist secur with registrar or transfer agent
period physic inventori of secur
suspici activ report
effect april 1 1996 the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ requir
nation bank to submit a suspici activ report sar under certain circumst 12
cfr 2111 as amend sar ar requir in each of the follow instanc
there is a known or suspect crimin violat involv the bank and the bank ha a
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1943
substanti basi for identifi respons bank personnel
there is a known or suspect crimin violat involv the bank the amount
involv is 5000 or more and the bank ha a substanti basi for identifi a possibl
suspect
there is a known or suspect crimin violat involv the bank and the amount
involv is 25000 or more if the amount in volv is 25000 or more even if the bank
doe not have a substanti basi for identifi a suspect
ani transact aggreg 5000 or more that wa conduct or attempt to be
conduct through the bank when the bank ha reason to suspect that the fund involv
potenti monei launder ar design to evad ani regul under the bank
secreci act or involv comput intrus
ani transact aggreg 5000 or more that wa conduct or attempt to be
conduct through the bank when the bank know that the custom is oper as an
unlicens monei servic busi
in most case the sar must be file within 30 dai of the date of detect other financi
institut have similar report requir includ
feder deposit insur corpor fdic 12 cfr 353
offic of thrift supervis ot 12 cfr 563180
nation credit union administr ncua 12 cfr 748
feder reserv board frb form 2230
more inform about the bank secreci act and other report requir can be
found in the monei launder section
doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act
in the summer of 2010 the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act
becam law ad new regul for compani that extend credit to consum
exempt small public compani from sarbanesoxlei section 404b make auditor of
brokerdeal subject to pcaob regul and chang registr requir for
invest banker
new regul for compani that extend credit to consum includ
mortgag lender must make a reason effort to ensur the abil to repai befor
issu a loan to consum
financi institut fraud financi transact
1944 2011 fraud examin manual
nonbank entiti will be regul by the feder reserv if thei believ that the
entiti would have a neg effect on the financi system if the compani fail or
it activ would pose a risk to the financi stabil of the us
prohibit the financi incent for subprim loan that encourag lender to steer
borrow into more costli loan includ the bonus known as yield spread
premium that lender pai to broker to inflat the cost of loan prohibit pre
payment penalti that trap so mani borrow into unafford loan
allow consum free access to their credit score if their score neg affect
them in a financi transact or a hire decis give consum access to credit
score disclosur as part of an advers action and riskbas price notic
addition the act creat the financi stabil oversight council to regul risk in the
financi institut industri it is chair by the treasuri secretari and includ the feder
reserv chairman fdic and sec as member of the council the council will have
author to break up larg firm or veto rule creat by anoth new regul call the
consum financi protect bureau the bureau consolid most feder regul of
financi servic offer to consum and sit on the fdic board
applic feder statut
there ar mani feder statut relat to fraud and fals statement involv financi
institut the follow ar some common feder statut emploi in the prosecut
of bank fraud
bank fraud titl 18 us code 1344
section 1344 is the broadest of all bank fraud statut it punish those obtain asset
own or control by a bank by fals or fraudul pretens represent or promis
it cover both insid and all other person even if not affili with the bank
it also appli to check kite and to offshor fraud extraterritori reach bank fraud is a
predic offens under rico racket influenc corrupt organ statut
penalti for bank fraud includ a fine up to 1 million andor imprison of up to 30
year
financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act firrea titl 12
us code 1811 et seq
thi legisl greatli strengthen the prosecutori arm against insid and outsid the
law provis ar applic to ani institutionaffili parti which includ but is not
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1945
limit to director offic employe and control sharehold institutionaffili
parti can includ attornei account and apprais
firrea provid for enhanc civil and crimin penalti for convict of sever bankrel
statut the civil penalti can be 1 million per dai or a total of 5 million for
continu violat or the amount of wrong gain or loss the maximum crimin
penalti is either a fine of 1 million or 30 year imprison or both
crime control act of 1990 titl 12 us code 1821d1719
thi act defin a host of crime and increas the maximum penalti on other offens
for exampl the maximum prison term for financi crime wa increas from 5 year to
20 year these penalti howev do not becom effect for offens commit prior to
the effect date of thi law thu far no court decis have been made regard these
increas penalti thi statut amend the racket influenc corrupt organ
law rico make bank fraud a predic offens under rico
financi institut antifraud enforc act of 1990 titl 12 us code 4 201 et seq
thi statut set out procedur for reward privat parti for report violat and
provid inform concern the recoveri of asset the statut also allow for the
hire of privat counsel to investig and prosecut civil claim
continu financi crime enterpris statut titl 18 us code 225
also known as the sl kingpin sta tute the law provid for fine of up to 20 million
for organiz defend and fine of up to 10 million and up to life imprison for
individu defend receiv 5 million or more dure a 24month period from a crimin
enterpris a crimin enterpris is defin as a seri of enumer crime relat to
financi institut
embezzl misappl and fals entri
titl 18 us code 656 and 657
these section cover theft embezzl or misappl by a bank offic or employe
violat ar punish by up to 30 year in prison andor fine up to 1 million
financi institut fraud financi transact
1946 2011 fraud examin manual
titl 18 us code 1001 1005 1006 1007 1008 1014
these statut includ all provis that punish fals or fraudul statement oral or in
write to variou feder agenc and feder insur financi institut usual these
result from effort to conceal embezzl and misappl
titl 18 us code 1032 conceal of asset
thi statut prohibit ani person from corruptli attempt to conceal asset or imped
their recoveri violat ar punish by up to five year in prison plu fine
particip in the affair of a financi institut by a convict felon titl 12
us code 1829
thi statut bar peopl with bank crime convict from particip in the conduct of
the affair of a financi institut with certain except a know violat might result
in fine of up to 1 million per dai and imprison of up to five year
offer of loan or gratuiti to a bank examin titl 18 us code 212
bank offic director and employe ar prohibit from give a loan or gratuiti to a
bank examin or assist section 213 forbid an examin or assist from accept a
loan or gratuiti both offens ar punish by a fine of up to 5000 or the amount loan
or given and up to a year imprison
receipt of commiss or gift for procur loan titl 18 us code 215
the corrupt give or receiv of anyth of valu to influenc an offic director
employe agent or attornei of a financi institut is punish by fine of the greater of
three time the valu of the thing given or no more than 1 million andor up to 30
year imprison
other feder statut
the follow statut can also be us in connect with the prosecut of fraud
involv financi institut each of these statut is cover in more detail in the law
section
briberi of public offici and witn ess titl 18 us code 201
disqualif of former offic and employe titl 18 us code 207
fraudul us of credit card titl 15 us code 1644
fraud and relat activ in connect with access devic titl 18 us code
1029
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1947
comput fraud titl 18 us code 1030
mail fraud titl 18 us code 1341
wire fraud titl 18 us code 1343
racket influenc and corrupt organ rico titl 18 us code 1961 et
seq
the foreign corrupt practic act fcpa titl 15 us code 78m 78ab 78dd1
78ff
tax evas titl 26 us code 7201
file fals tax return titl 26 us code 72061
fals claim act titl 31 us code 3729 et seq
antikickback act of 1986 titl 41 us code 5158
red flag rule
in 2007 the feder trade commiss ftc issu final rule and guidelin red flag
rule implement section 114 and 315 of the fair and accur credit transact act
facta the red flag rule requir financi institut and certain creditor to develop
and implement a formal written program to identifi detect and respond to red flag of
possibl ident theft
although the red flag rule appli primarili to financi institut thei also appli to ani
creditor with cover account the definit of creditor includ ani entiti that regularli
extend renew or continu credit or that regularli arrang for the extens renew
or continu of credit includ bank in stitut mortgag lender retail util
compani car dealer and debt collector a cover account is an account primarili us for
person famili or household purpos and that involv multipl payment or transact
includ credit card account mortgag loan car loan cell phone account util
account and save account therefor even if a busi is not a financi servic
entiti manag should determin whether the entiti is a creditor under the red flag
rule
to compli with the red flag rule financi institut and creditor with cover
account must implement written ident theft prevent program that ar tailor to each
entiti size complex and natur these organ must also adopt reason
polici and procedur that
identifi relev red flag for cover account and incorpor them into the
prevent program
financi institut fraud financi transact
1948 2011 fraud examin manual
detect red flag that have been incorpor into the prevent program
respond appropri to ani red flag that ar detect to prevent and mitig ident
theft
ensur the prevent program is updat period to reflect chang in risk to
custom or to the safeti and sound of the financi institut or creditor from
ident theft
the red flag rule also provid 26 exampl of possibl red flag that financi institut
and creditor should consid when implement their program the exampl ar list
below
1 a fraud alert
2 notic of a credit freez
3 notic of an address discrep
4 unusu credit activ
5 identif document appear alter or forg
6 id photograph and custom appear appear inconsist
7 inform present by custom and inform on id ar inconsist
8 inform on id is inconsist with inform on file
9 applic appear forg or alter
10 person inform on id is inconsist with extern inform sourc
11 lack of correl between social secur number rang and date of birth
12 person identifi inform is associ with known fraud activ
13 suspici address suppli
14 provid social secur number match number submit by anoth person
15 address or phone number match that suppli by other custom
16 in respons to notic that applic is incomplet custom is unabl to suppli
identifi inform
17 person inform inconsist with inform alreadi on file
18 custom unabl to answer challeng question
19 shortli after chang of address creditor receiv request for the addit of author
account user
20 most of avail credit us for cash advanc jewelri or electron or custom fail
to make first payment
21 inconsist activ pattern
22 previous inact account suddenli becom activ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1949
23 mail sent to custom repeatedli return as undeliver even though transact
continu on activ account
24 notic that custom is not receiv paper account statement
25 notic of unauthor charg or transact on custom account
26 notic of open a fraudul account for a person engag in ident theft
financi transact check and credit card fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11001
