2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Embezzlement Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Embezzlement Schemes 
Embezzlement  is defined as the wrongful taking or conversion of the property of another for 
the wrongdoer’s benefit. Misapplication often accompanies embezzlement, but is a separate 
and distinct offense. Misapplication is the  wrongful taking or conversion of another’s 
property for the benefit of someone else. 
 
Types of Embezzlement Schemes 
There are various embezzlement schemes that have been utilized over time. The following 
examples are not an exhaustive list, but are rather a summary of the more commonly 
employed schemes. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.902                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
False Accounting Entries 
Employees debit the general ledger to credit their own accounts or cover up customer 
account thefts. 
 
Unauthorized Withdrawals 
Employees make unauthorized withdrawals from customer accounts. 
 
Unauthorized Disbursement of Funds to Outsiders 
Employees cash stolen/counterfeit items for outside accomplices. 
 
Paying Personal Expenses from Bank Funds  
An officer or employee causes the bank to pay personal bills, then causes amounts to be 
charged to bank expense accounts. 
 
Theft of Physical Property 
Employees or contractors remove office equipment, building materials, and furnishings from 
bank premises. 
 
Moving Money from Customers’ Dormant or Inactive Accounts 
Persons with apparent authority create journal entries or transfer orders not initiated by 
customers to move money among accounts. Dormant or inactive accounts are those that show 
little or no activity. Often contact with the account holder by confirmation, letter, or 
telephone contact is not possible. Such accounts are to be transferred to dual control and 
recorded in an inactive accounts ledger. State statutes usually provide for escheat or 
forfeiture to the state after a period of years. 
 
Unauthorized, Unrecorded Cash Payments 
A director, officer, or employee causes cash to be disbursed directly to self or accomplices 
and does not record the disbursements. 
 
Theft and Other Unauthorized Use of Collateral 
Custodians steal, sell, or use collateral or repossessed property for themselves or 
accomplices. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.903 
Detection Methods 
There are several methods by which embezzlement can be detected. Generally, if the dollar 
amount of the embezzlement scheme is small enough such that the financial statements will 
not be materially affected, embezzlement fraud can be most effectively detected through the 
review of source documents.  
 
If the scheme is so large that the financial statements of the institution are affected, then a 
review of the source documents will serve to confirm or refute an allegation that an 
embezzlement scheme has occurred, or is occurring. Generally, for large embezzlements, the 
most efficient method of detection is an analysis of the financial statements (which is also a 
review of documents).  
 
 



:


embezzl scheme
embezzl is defin as the wrong take or convers of the properti of anoth for
the wrongdoer benefit misappl often accompani embezzl but is a separ
and distinct offens misappl is the wrong take or convers of anoth
properti for the benefit of someon els
type of embezzl scheme
there ar variou embezzl scheme that have been util over time the follow
exampl ar not an exhaust list but ar rather a summari of the more commonli
emploi scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1902 2011 fraud examin manual
fals account entri
employe debit the gener ledger to credit their own account or cover up custom
account theft
unauthor withdraw
employe make unauthor withdraw from custom account
unauthor disburs of fund to outsid
employe cash stolencounterfeit item for outsid accomplic
pai person expens from bank fund
an offic or employe caus the bank to pai person bill then caus amount to be
charg to bank expens account
theft of physic properti
employe or contractor remov offic equip build materi and furnish from
bank premis
move monei from custom dormant or inact account
person with appar author creat journal entri or transfer order not initi by
custom to move monei among account dormant or inact account ar those that show
littl or no activ often contact with the account holder by confirm letter or
telephon contact is not possibl such account ar to be transfer to dual control and
record in an inact account ledger state statut usual provid for escheat or
forfeitur to the state after a period of year
unauthor unrecord cash payment
a director offic or employe caus cash to be disburs directli to self or accomplic
and doe not record the disburs
theft and other unauthor us of collater
custodian steal sell or us collater or repossess properti for themselv or
accomplic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1903
detect method
there ar sever method by which embezzl can be detect gener if the dollar
amount of the embezzl scheme is small enough such that the financi statement will
not be materi affect embezzl fraud can be most effect detect through the
review of sourc document
if the scheme is so larg that the financi statement of the institut ar affect then a
review of the sourc document will serv to confirm or refut an alleg that an
embezzl scheme ha occur or is occur gener for larg embezzl the
most effici method of detect is an analysi of the financi statement which is also a
review of document
