2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Loan Fraud 
Loan fraud is a multifaceted activity that includ es several types of criminal activities. Larger 
loan fraud schemes often involve real estate lending and collusion between insiders and 
outsiders. Loan fraud represents the highest risk  area for financial institutions. Although the 
number of occurrences might be small, the dollar amount per occurrence tends to be large. 
 
Financial Institution Failures as a Result of Real Estate Loan Fraud 
Losses reported by financial institutions across the globe are in the billions of dollars. Most 
financial institutions invest heavily in real estate transactions; a substantial portion of these 
losses relate to real estate loans. 
 
Common Loan Fraud Schemes 
Loans to Nonexistent Borrowers 
False applications, perhaps with inaccurate financial statements, are knowingly or 
unknowingly accepted by loan officers as the basis for loans. These types of loan fraud can 
be perpetrated by people either external to the lending institution (“external fraud”) or by 
officers, directors, or employees of the victim institution (“internal fraud”). 
 
Sham Loans with Kickbacks and Diversion 
Loan officers will sometimes make loans to acco mplices who then share all or part of the 
proceeds with the lending officer. In some instances, the loans are charged off as bad debts; 
in other instances, the bogus loans are paid off with the proceeds of new fraudulent loans. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.904                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Double-Pledging Collateral 
Borrowers pledge the same collateral with different lenders before liens are recorded and 
without telling the lenders. 
 
Reciprocal Loan Arrangements  
Insiders in different banks cause their banks to lend funds to the others, or sell loans to 
other banks with agreements to buy their loans—all for the purpose of concealing loans  
and sales. 
 
Swapping Bad Loans—Daisy Chains 
In a daisy chain, a bank buys, sells, and swaps its bad loans for the bad loans of another 
bank, creating new documentation in the process. Its purpose is to mask or hide bad loans 
by making them look like they are recent and good. 
 
Linked Financing 
Large deposits are offered to a bank (usually br okered deposits) on the condition that loans 
are made to particular persons affiliated with the deposit broker. High returns are promised, 
but the loans are longer term than the deposits (hot money). Sometimes kickbacks are paid 
to the broker or banker. 
 
False Applications with False Credit Information 
Sometimes loan applicants provide false information about their credit situation, and/or 
overstate their assets.  
 
Single-Family Housing Loan Fraud 
In this scheme, unqualified borrowers misrepresent personal creditworthiness, overstate 
ability to pay, and misrepresent characteristics of the housing unit. Such acts may include 
reporting inflated income, moving debt into a dependent’s name, reporting inflated square 
footage of the collateral, or even bribing an appraiser to value the home at a higher amount 
than the market value. 
 
Construction Loans 
Construction lending has different vulnerabilities than other permanent or interim lending. 
More risks are associated with constructi on projects than with already-built projects. 
Construction fraud schemes are numerous; the more common are related to estimates of 
costs to complete, developer overhead, draw requests, and retainage schemes. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.905 
ESTIMATES OF COSTS TO COMPLETE 
When borrowers approach a lending institution for construction financing they typically 
have a development plan, complete with an engineering report, appraisal, and budget for 
construction costs. The construction cost budget is, by definition, an estimate. As the project 
is built out, the budget will be revised to reflect actual expenses. Budgets are delineated by 
specific line item, such as slab, exterior glass, grading, landscaping, and tenant 
improvements. As the project proceeds, certain over- and underbudget costs are incurred. 
These costs should be represented by a change order. 
 
If the loan agreement has been properly documented and enforced, no material 
differentiation from the budget should occur without the lender’s knowledge and consent. 
However, the developer/borrower might misrepresent the true nature of the under- or 
overbudget amount to mislead the lender. The architect/engineer and the lender’s inspector 
should examine all budget changes. The impact of change orders might result in the loan 
becoming out of balance (cost to complete exceeds available loan and equity funds). 
Generally, developers hide or conceal their overbudget construction costs in two common 
places. The first place is contingency and the second is to remove allocations from tenant 
improvements and apply them to shell construction. 
 
Most budgets contain a contingency line item in  the event actual costs exceed the budgeted 
amounts. Unfortunately, many developers and lenders do not monitor the total impact on 
removing allocations from the contingency budget. In addition, savings are not allocated to 
the contingency line item when underbudget costs are realized. It is also common to rob one 
account to make up for a shortfall in another account. Generally, tenant finish is estimated at 
a particular dollar amount per square foot. This allows the developer considerable latitude in 
negotiating with tenants. 
 
However, before the entire space has been leased, and the construction costs have been 
incurred, the amount allocated to tenant improvements remains budgetary. If the developer 
is allowed to reallocate amounts from this budget line to shell construction, then when it 
comes time to negotiate leases and finish out the space, the developer might be short of 
available funds. If the tenant finish is treated as a hold-back and not to be reallocated or 
disbursed except for its intended purpose, then there is a greater chance of the loan not 
becoming over-disbursed (cost to complete exceeding the available financing). 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.906                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DEVELOPER OVERHEAD 
It is not uncommon in construction financing to have a budget line item for developer 
overhead (also called general conditions ). This is a ripe area for abuse. The purpose of developer 
overhead is to supply the developer with operating capital while the project is under 
construction. This overhead allocation should not include a profit percentage, as the 
developer realizes profit upon completion. 
 
In essence, the overhead budget is as if the lender is making two types of loans: a real estate 
loan and a working capital loan for the overhead. Unfortunately, there is seldom, if ever, any 
separate underwriting for the overhead portion. The overhead is merely added as a 
construction cost, whose ultimate collateral is the property and not some other short-term 
collateral. Historically, troubled construction loans or foreclosures due to fraud have been 
totally disbursed in the developer overhead category.  
 
DRAW REQUESTS 
Construction loan advances are generally supported by draw requests. A draw request is the 
documentation substantiating that a developer has incurred the appropriate construction 
expenses and is now seeking reimbursement or direct payment. A typical fraud scheme in 
this area involves requesting advances on the loan for inappropriate costs, such as personal 
expenses and/or construction costs for an unrelated project. Draw requests provide the 
greatest opportunity for a developer to commit fraud against the lender because the lender 
relies upon the developer’s documentation. 
 
Generally, a draw request or pay application is made once a month and is submitted on a 
standard form such as the one promulgated by the American Institute of Architects (AIA). 
The request should be accompanied by the following documents: 
• Paid invoices for raw materials 
• Lien releases from each subcontractor 
• Inspection reports 
• Canceled checks from previous draw requests 
• Bank reconciliation for construction draw account for previous month 
• Loan balancing form, demonstrating that the loan remains in balance 
• Change orders, if applicable 
• Wiring instructions, if applicable 
• Proof of developer contribution, if applicable 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.907 
The documentation required as support for each draw request will vary depending on the 
payment method (such as direct, dual payment, disbursing agent, wire transfer, or 
reimbursement). Any missing or altered documentation is a red flag that something is amiss 
with the draw request. All advances on the loan should be adequately documented. 
 
Some or all of the following steps should be performed before advancing funds on a 
construction loan. These steps are not represented as being all-inclusive, but rather the 
preliminary disbursement questions that the disbursing party should address. 
• Examine the draw and determine if sufficient supporting documentation has been 
submitted. 
• Reconcile the amounts requested with the approved budget. Account for any 
differences. 
• Determine that the amounts requested have been properly inspected and approved. 
• Determine if the proper lien releases have been submitted for work performed. 
• Reconcile any change orders with the approved budget. Determine if the change orders 
have been approved. 
• Prove the clerical accuracy of the documentation submitted. 
• Ensure that work completed has been inspected by the lender’s architect/engineer. 
• Determine if there are any requests for soft (nonconstruction) costs and whether they 
are appropriate. 
• Determine if there are any budget changes. If so, what are they for? Have they been 
approved? 
• Prepare a cost to complete estimate to determine that the loan remains in balance. 
• If tenant improvement funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed lease 
on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the lease? Has the 
lease been approved? 
• If homeowner option funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed 
purchase contract on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the 
contract? Has the contract/purchaser been approved? 
• Examine payment requests and determine if there are new or previously undisclosed 
subcontractors. If so, determine why. 
• Ensure that the title update has been received. 
 
RETAINAGE 
The final area of major concern in construction lending is retainage. Retainage is the amount 
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construction is complete and the lien 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.908                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
period has expired. There are at least two reasons why construction loans contain a retainage 
provision. The first reason is to keep the contractor’s interest in the project until all the work 
has been completed and accepted by the owner. The amount of the retainage represents 
part, if not all, of the contractor’s profit. Therefore, if the profit is not paid until the project 
has been completed, then presumably the contractor will complete the assignment on time 
and on budget. 
 
The second reason for the retainage is to ensure that the work of subcontractors is 
completed and that the general contractor pays the subcontractor so that no liens are filed. If 
the general contractor fails to pay the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probably file 
a lien on the project. If the retainage will not be released until such time as the lien period 
has expired, then there are at least some funds available to defray the cost of fighting the lien 
or making a duplicate payment because the general contractor might have embezzled the 
first payment without paying the subcontractor. 
 
Red Flags of Loan Fraud 
There are several red flags of loan fraud. Many times the sch emes are perpetrated in tandem 
with other schemes, so what appears to be a red flag for one scheme, might in fact lead the 
fraud examiner to one or more schemes. 
 
Nonperforming Loans 
Although this information might not be available to all, a nonperforming loan is not 
performing for some reason. One of those reasons might be that a fraud scheme has or is 
occurring.  
 
Fraud schemes resulting in a nonperforming loan include: 
• Fraudulent appraisals — The cash flow cannot support an inflated loan and, therefore, debt 
amount. 
• False statements — The loan was made on false or fraudulently presented assumptions. 
• Equity skimming — There was never any intention to make the underlying loan payments. 
• Construction overbudget items — The overbudget amount might be a concealment method for 
other schemes such as embezzlement, misappropriation, or false statements. 
• Bribery — The loan was made because the lender received a bribe or a kickback from the 
borrower. 
• Land flips — The purpose of the loan was to finance the seller out of a property that has 
an artificially inflated value.  
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.909 
• Disguised transactions — Transactions that are sham transactions, without substance, made 
to conceal other ills. 
 
High Turnover in Developer’s Personnel 
One of the first signs to look for, particularly  in construction lending, is whether or not the 
real estate developer is experiencing a higher-than-normal employee turnover. Typically, 
when a developer experiences a high degree of turnover, something is wrong with the 
internal operation. This is often a preamble for other problems to come. 
 
High Turnover in Tenant Mix 
If the tenant mix in a commercial project (such as a retail center or an office building) is 
suddenly undergoing a major change, there might be some problem with the management of 
the project or with the method of allocating the pass-through expenses, such as utilities or 
maintenance. In addition, a decline in the tenant mix might be an indication that the deferred 
maintenance for the project is not being properly attended to. 
 
Increased Change Orders 
An increase in the number of change orders or amounts on change orders might be an 
indication that construction changes have taken place that would alter the originally planned 
project to such an extent as to render the underwriting inappropriate. Change orders can 
have the same impact on a project as altering the original documents. As with anything that 
is contracted for on a bid basis, change orders could also be an indication of collusive 
bidding. Change orders might be an indication that the original project was not feasible and 
short cuts are shoring up other problem areas. Change orders should be approved by the 
architect and engineer on the project in addition to the lender’s inspector.  
 
Missing Documentation 
Missing or altered documentation is a red flag for any type of fraud scheme. Because 
concealment is a key fraud element, missing documents are a definite giveaway. Missing 
documents are of particular concern in construction lending. Experience has shown that 
seldom is a complete draw request submitted without some missing document. 
 
LOAN FILE 
Missing documents in the loan file are another indication that things might be amiss. It is 
important to determine if missing documents have been misplaced or were never received. A 
waiver of certain documents is one common way for lenders to conceal fraud schemes. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.910                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Documentation for real estate loans is fairly standard. Listed below are some of the more 
important documents that should be present in the loan files. 
• Appraisal 
• Architect’s or engineer’s report 
• Assignment of leases and rents 
• Assignment of limited partnership notes 
• Assignment of take-out commitment 
• Attorney opinion letter 
• Availability of utilities (water, sewer, gas, and electric) 
• Budget 
• Completion schedule 
• Copies of leases (existing or if project is preleased, commitment letters) 
• Disburser’s notice, if required 
• Easements 
• Environmental impact study 
• Ingress and egress 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector) 
• Insurance binder (lender should be loss payee) 
• Letters of credit, if applicable 
• List of general and subcontractors 
• Loan agreement 
• Plans and specifications 
• Promissory notes from limited partners to partnership, if applicable 
• Road dedications 
• Soils report 
• Subscription agreements, similar to limited partnership notes, if applicable 
• Survey 
• Take-out commitment, if applicable 
• Title policy, including instruction letter from closing 
• Zoning 
 
DISBURSEMENT FILE 
• Copies of all checks issued at closing 
• Lien releases issued at closing (architect, engineers, etc.) 
• Loan closing statement 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.911 
DRAW REQUESTS 
• Draw request form (AIA Form or its equivalent). 
• Bank reconciliation (general contractor disbursement account). 
• Canceled checks (if general contractor pays subcontractors, copies of the canceled 
checks should be included in the following draw). 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector). 
• Lien releases for each subcontractor for the previous draw 
• Loan balancing form (the lender should prepare some form of reconciliation to ensure 
that with each draw the loan remains in balance. Items of particular concern are interest, 
tenant finish, and retainage.) 
• Receipts (for all items submitted on the draw request form). 
• Title updates from the title company. 
• Wire transfer instructions (from the lender to the general contractor’s disbursement 
account. 
 
In addition to the normal loan files, the lender should require a continuing report from the 
borrower. For example, the borrower could be required to report annual financial condition 
coupled with a tax return. Missing documents in  these follow-up files might indicate that the 
project or the borrower is having difficulty that might be the result of a fraud scheme. 
 
Loan Increases or Extensions, Replacement Loans 
A loan being continually extended and loan increases being made simultaneously might 
indicate that the real estate project cannot support the debt service. Typically, the loan 
increases are to pay for the interest and extension fee. This red flag might also indicate that 
the loan was made to a related-party or made as a loan to hasten a sale or other transaction. 
In other words, the loan was not properly underwritten. 
If the loan is increased and extended several times, it might indicate that higher appraisals are 
being obtained on a “made-as-instructed” basis. Loan increases and extensions might be the 
method used by the lender to conceal a nonperforming loan. 
 
However, according to William T. Thornhill, CFE, a consultant in the field of financial 
institution fraud, fraud perpetrators tend to write a new loan or credit facility to replace  an 
existing or old loan because they are aware of the fact that a rewrite may attract loan review, 
loan administration, or internal audit attention. Accordingly, replacement loans are now 
increasingly used rather than a simple rewrite of a loan. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.912                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Cash Flow Deficiencies 
The actual cash flow of a commercial project is a very telling red flag. If the project is 
experiencing an unexplained cash flow deficiency, then an internal fraud scheme might be 
the cause. The project cash flow might reflect any of the above schemes. 
 
Change in Ownership Makeup 
A change in the ownership makeup, commonly referred to as business divorce, might 
indicate fraudulent activity. It is not uncommon to have a working partner and an equity 
(money) partner. When the two partners become disenchanted with their relationship and 
seek a “separation,” it might suggest things have gone sour. 
 
Disguised Transactions 
Transactions disguised to conceal their true nature often involve the lender and either an 
existing customer or new customer. Banking personnel will sometimes engage in fraudulent 
schemes to forego the requirement to record additional loan loss reserves. One method 
employed is to “sell” OREO (Other Real Estate  Owned) property to an existing customer or 
a new customer in exchange for making a new loan on another unrelated project. In other 
words, the bank is tying one transaction to another, quid pro quo. 
 
Another method of concealing the true nature of a transaction is to conduct the transaction 
through nominees. For example, the bank might be required to recognize an additional loan 
loss reserve due to the lack of performance on a particular loan. The borrower might or 
might not be a good customer of the bank. Regardless of the status of the customer, the 
bank might request that the project (underlying collateral) be sold to another party, the 
financing to be arranged by the bank. The borrower can form a new entity (nominee or shell 
company) to purchase the property; a new (generally higher) appraisal is obtained and the 
property is sold. In this illustration, the avoidance of loss required the participation of the 
bank personnel, the borrower, and the appraiser. 
 
 



:


loan fraud
loan fraud is a multifacet activ that includ es sever type of crimin activ larger
loan fraud scheme often involv real estat lend and collus between insid and
outsid loan fraud repres the highest risk area for financi institut although the
number of occurr might be small the dollar amount per occurr tend to be larg
financi institut failur as a result of real estat loan fraud
loss report by financi institut across the globe ar in the billion of dollar most
financi institut invest heavili in real estat transact a substanti portion of these
loss relat to real estat loan
common loan fraud scheme
loan to nonexist borrow
fals applic perhap with inaccur financi statement ar knowingli or
unknowingli accept by loan offic as the basi for loan these type of loan fraud can
be perpetr by peopl either extern to the lend institut extern fraud or by
offic director or employe of the victim institut intern fraud
sham loan with kickback and divers
loan offic will sometim make loan to acco mplice who then share all or part of the
proce with the lend offic in some instanc the loan ar charg off as bad debt
in other instanc the bogu loan ar paid off with the proce of new fraudul loan
financi institut fraud financi transact
1904 2011 fraud examin manual
doublepledg collater
borrow pledg the same collater with differ lender befor lien ar record and
without tell the lender
reciproc loan arrang
insid in differ bank caus their bank to lend fund to the other or sell loan to
other bank with agreement to bui their loansal for the purpos of conceal loan
and sale
swap bad loansdaisi chain
in a daisi chain a bank bui sell and swap it bad loan for the bad loan of anoth
bank creat new document in the process it purpos is to mask or hide bad loan
by make them look like thei ar recent and good
link financ
larg deposit ar offer to a bank usual br oker deposit on the condit that loan
ar made to particular person affili with the deposit broker high return ar promis
but the loan ar longer term than the deposit hot monei sometim kickback ar paid
to the broker or banker
fals applic with fals credit inform
sometim loan applic provid fals inform about their credit situat andor
overst their asset
singlefamili hous loan fraud
in thi scheme unqualifi borrow misrepres person creditworthi overst
abil to pai and misrepres characterist of the hous unit such act mai includ
report inflat incom move debt into a depend name report inflat squar
footag of the collater or even bribe an apprais to valu the home at a higher amount
than the market valu
construct loan
construct lend ha differ vulner than other perman or interim lend
more risk ar associ with constructi on project than with alreadybuilt project
construct fraud scheme ar numer the more common ar relat to estim of
cost to complet develop overhead draw request and retainag scheme
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1905
estim of cost to complet
when borrow approach a lend institut for construct financ thei typic
have a develop plan complet with an engin report apprais and budget for
construct cost the construct cost budget is by definit an estim as the project
is built out the budget will be revis to reflect actual expens budget ar delin by
specif line item such as slab exterior glass grade landscap and tenant
improv as the project proce certain over and underbudget cost ar incur
these cost should be repres by a chang order
if the loan agreement ha been properli document and enforc no materi
differenti from the budget should occur without the lender knowledg and consent
howev the developerborrow might misrepres the true natur of the under or
overbudget amount to mislead the lender the architectengin and the lender inspector
should examin all budget chang the impact of chang order might result in the loan
becom out of balanc cost to complet exce avail loan and equiti fund
gener develop hide or conceal their overbudget construct cost in two common
place the first place is conting and the second is to remov alloc from tenant
improv and appli them to shell construct
most budget contain a conting line item in the event actual cost exce the budget
amount unfortun mani develop and lender do not monitor the total impact on
remov alloc from the conting budget in addit save ar not alloc to
the conting line item when underbudget cost ar realiz it is also common to rob on
account to make up for a shortfal in anoth account gener tenant finish is estim at
a particular dollar amount per squar foot thi allow the develop consider latitud in
negoti with tenant
howev befor the entir space ha been leas and the construct cost have been
incur the amount alloc to tenant improv remain budgetari if the develop
is allow to realloc amount from thi budget line to shell construct then when it
come time to negoti leas and finish out the space the develop might be short of
avail fund if the tenant finish is treat as a holdback and not to be realloc or
disburs except for it intend purpos then there is a greater chanc of the loan not
becom overdisburs cost to complet exceed the avail financ
financi institut fraud financi transact
1906 2011 fraud examin manual
develop overhead
it is not uncommon in construct financ to have a budget line item for develop
overhead also call gener condit thi is a ripe area for abus the purpos of develop
overhead is to suppli the develop with oper capit while the project is under
construct thi overhead alloc should not includ a profit percentag as the
develop realiz profit upon complet
in essenc the overhead budget is as if the lender is make two type of loan a real estat
loan and a work capit loan for the overhead unfortun there is seldom if ever ani
separ underwrit for the overhead portion the overhead is mere ad as a
construct cost whose ultim collater is the properti and not some other shortterm
collater histor troubl construct loan or foreclosur due to fraud have been
total disburs in the develop overhead categori
draw request
construct loan advanc ar gener support by draw request a draw request is the
document substanti that a develop ha incur the appropri construct
expens and is now seek reimburs or direct payment a typic fraud scheme in
thi area involv request advanc on the loan for inappropri cost such as person
expens andor construct cost for an unrel project draw request provid the
greatest opportun for a develop to commit fraud against the lender becaus the lender
reli upon the develop document
gener a draw request or pai applic is made onc a month and is submit on a
standard form such as the on promulg by the american institut of architect aia
the request should be accompani by the follow document
paid invoic for raw materi
lien releas from each subcontractor
inspect report
cancel check from previou draw request
bank reconcili for construct draw account for previou month
loan balanc form demonstr that the loan remain in balanc
chang order if applic
wire instruct if applic
proof of develop contribut if applic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1907
the document requir as support for each draw request will vari depend on the
payment method such as direct dual payment disburs agent wire transfer or
reimburs ani miss or alter document is a red flag that someth is amiss
with the draw request all advanc on the loan should be adequ document
some or all of the follow step should be perform befor advanc fund on a
construct loan these step ar not repres as be allinclus but rather the
preliminari disburs question that the disburs parti should address
examin the draw and determin if suffici support document ha been
submit
reconcil the amount request with the approv budget account for ani
differ
determin that the amount request have been properli inspect and approv
determin if the proper lien releas have been submit for work perform
reconcil ani chang order with the approv budget determin if the chang order
have been approv
prove the cleric accuraci of the document submit
ensur that work complet ha been inspect by the lender architectengin
determin if there ar ani request for soft nonconstruct cost and whether thei
ar appropri
determin if there ar ani budget chang if so what ar thei for have thei been
approv
prepar a cost to complet estim to determin that the loan remain in balanc
if tenant improv fund have been request establish that there is a sign leas
on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the leas ha the
leas been approv
if homeown option fund have been request establish that there is a sign
purchas contract on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the
contract ha the contractpurchas been approv
examin payment request and determin if there ar new or previous undisclos
subcontractor if so determin why
ensur that the titl updat ha been receiv
retainag
the final area of major concern in construct lend is retainag retainag is the amount
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construct is complet and the lien
financi institut fraud financi transact
1908 2011 fraud examin manual
period ha expir there ar at least two reason why construct loan contain a retainag
provis the first reason is to keep the contractor interest in the project until all the work
ha been complet and accept by the owner the amount of the retainag repres
part if not all of the contractor profit therefor if the profit is not paid until the project
ha been complet then presum the contractor will complet the assign on time
and on budget
the second reason for the retainag is to ensur that the work of subcontractor is
complet and that the gener contractor pai the subcontractor so that no lien ar file if
the gener contractor fail to pai the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probabl file
a lien on the project if the retainag will not be releas until such time as the lien period
ha expir then there ar at least some fund avail to defrai the cost of fight the lien
or make a duplic payment becaus the gener contractor might have embezzl the
first payment without pai the subcontractor
red flag of loan fraud
there ar sever red flag of loan fraud mani time the sch em ar perpetr in tandem
with other scheme so what appear to be a red flag for on scheme might in fact lead the
fraud examin to on or more scheme
nonperform loan
although thi inform might not be avail to all a nonperform loan is not
perform for some reason on of those reason might be that a fraud scheme ha or is
occur
fraud scheme result in a nonperform loan includ
fraudul apprais the cash flow cannot support an inflat loan and therefor debt
amount
fals statement the loan wa made on fals or fraudul present assumpt
equiti skim there wa never ani intent to make the underli loan payment
construct overbudget item the overbudget amount might be a conceal method for
other scheme such as embezzl misappropri or fals statement
briberi the loan wa made becaus the lender receiv a bribe or a kickback from the
borrow
land flip the purpos of the loan wa to financ the seller out of a properti that ha
an artifici inflat valu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1909
disguis transact transact that ar sham transact without substanc made
to conceal other ill
high turnov in develop personnel
on of the first sign to look for particularli in construct lend is whether or not the
real estat develop is experienc a higherthannorm employe turnov typic
when a develop experi a high degre of turnov someth is wrong with the
intern oper thi is often a preambl for other problem to come
high turnov in tenant mix
if the tenant mix in a commerci project such as a retail center or an offic build is
suddenli undergo a major chang there might be some problem with the manag of
the project or with the method of alloc the passthrough expens such as util or
mainten in addit a declin in the tenant mix might be an indic that the defer
mainten for the project is not be properli attend to
increas chang order
an increas in the number of chang order or amount on chang order might be an
indic that construct chang have taken place that would alter the origin plan
project to such an extent as to render the underwrit inappropri chang order can
have the same impact on a project as alter the origin document as with anyth that
is contract for on a bid basi chang order could also be an indic of collus
bid chang order might be an indic that the origin project wa not feasibl and
short cut ar shore up other problem area chang order should be approv by the
architect and engin on the project in addit to the lender inspector
miss document
miss or alter document is a red flag for ani type of fraud scheme becaus
conceal is a kei fraud element miss document ar a definit giveawai miss
document ar of particular concern in construct lend experi ha shown that
seldom is a complet draw request submit without some miss document
loan file
miss document in the loan file ar anoth indic that thing might be amiss it is
import to determin if miss document have been misplac or were never receiv a
waiver of certain document is on common wai for lender to conceal fraud scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1910 2011 fraud examin manual
document for real estat loan is fairli standard list below ar some of the more
import document that should be present in the loan file
apprais
architect or engin report
assign of leas and rent
assign of limit partnership note
assign of takeout commit
attornei opinion letter
avail of util water sewer ga and electr
budget
complet schedul
copi of leas exist or if project is preleas commit letter
disburs notic if requir
easement
environment impact studi
ingress and egress
inspect report lender inspector
insur binder lender should be loss paye
letter of credit if applic
list of gener and subcontractor
loan agreement
plan and specif
promissori note from limit partner to partnership if applic
road dedic
soil report
subscript agreement similar to limit partnership note if applic
survei
takeout commit if applic
titl polici includ instruct letter from close
zone
disburs file
copi of all check issu at close
lien releas issu at close architect engin etc
loan close statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1911
draw request
draw request form aia form or it equival
bank reconcili gener contractor disburs account
cancel check if gener contractor pai subcontractor copi of the cancel
check should be includ in the follow draw
inspect report lender inspector
lien releas for each subcontractor for the previou draw
loan balanc form the lender should prepar some form of reconcili to ensur
that with each draw the loan remain in balanc item of particular concern ar interest
tenant finish and retainag
receipt for all item submit on the draw request form
titl updat from the titl compani
wire transfer instruct from the lender to the gener contractor disburs
account
in addit to the normal loan file the lender should requir a continu report from the
borrow for exampl the borrow could be requir to report annual financi condit
coupl with a tax return miss document in these followup file might indic that the
project or the borrow is have difficulti that might be the result of a fraud scheme
loan increas or extens replac loan
a loan be continu extend and loan increas be made simultan might
indic that the real estat project cannot support the debt servic typic the loan
increas ar to pai for the interest and extens fee thi red flag might also indic that
the loan wa made to a relatedparti or made as a loan to hasten a sale or other transact
in other word the loan wa not properli underwritten
if the loan is increas and extend sever time it might indic that higher apprais ar
be obtain on a madeasinstruct basi loan increas and extens might be the
method us by the lender to conceal a nonperform loan
howev accord to william t thornhil cfe a consult in the field of financi
institut fraud fraud perpetr tend to write a new loan or credit facil to replac an
exist or old loan becaus thei ar awar of the fact that a rewrit mai attract loan review
loan administr or intern audit attent accordingli replac loan ar now
increasingli us rather than a simpl rewrit of a loan
financi institut fraud financi transact
1912 2011 fraud examin manual
cash flow defici
the actual cash flow of a commerci project is a veri tell red flag if the project is
experienc an unexplain cash flow defici then an intern fraud scheme might be
the caus the project cash flow might reflect ani of the abov scheme
chang in ownership makeup
a chang in the ownership makeup commonli refer to as busi divorc might
indic fraudul activ it is not uncommon to have a work partner and an equiti
monei partner when the two partner becom disench with their relationship and
seek a separ it might suggest thing have gone sour
disguis transact
transact disguis to conceal their true natur often involv the lender and either an
exist custom or new custom bank personnel will sometim engag in fraudul
scheme to forego the requir to record addit loan loss reserv on method
emploi is to sell oreo other real estat own properti to an exist custom or
a new custom in exchang for make a new loan on anoth unrel project in other
word the bank is ty on transact to anoth quid pro quo
anoth method of conceal the true natur of a transact is to conduct the transact
through nomine for exampl the bank might be requir to recogn an addit loan
loss reserv due to the lack of perform on a particular loan the borrow might or
might not be a good custom of the bank regardless of the statu of the custom the
bank might request that the project underli collater be sold to anoth parti the
financ to be arrang by the bank the borrow can form a new entiti nomine or shell
compani to purchas the properti a new gener higher apprais is obtain and the
properti is sold in thi illustr the avoid of loss requir the particip of the
bank personnel the borrow and the apprais
