2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud/Construction Loans


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Construction Loans 
Construction lending has different vulnerabilities than other permanent or interim lending. 
More risks are associated with constructi on projects than with already-built projects. 
Construction fraud schemes are numerous; the more common are related to estimates of 
costs to complete, developer overhead, draw requests, and retainage schemes. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.905 
ESTIMATES OF COSTS TO COMPLETE 
When borrowers approach a lending institution for construction financing they typically 
have a development plan, complete with an engineering report, appraisal, and budget for 
construction costs. The construction cost budget is, by definition, an estimate. As the project 
is built out, the budget will be revised to reflect actual expenses. Budgets are delineated by 
specific line item, such as slab, exterior glass, grading, landscaping, and tenant 
improvements. As the project proceeds, certain over- and underbudget costs are incurred. 
These costs should be represented by a change order. 
 
If the loan agreement has been properly documented and enforced, no material 
differentiation from the budget should occur without the lender’s knowledge and consent. 
However, the developer/borrower might misrepresent the true nature of the under- or 
overbudget amount to mislead the lender. The architect/engineer and the lender’s inspector 
should examine all budget changes. The impact of change orders might result in the loan 
becoming out of balance (cost to complete exceeds available loan and equity funds). 
Generally, developers hide or conceal their overbudget construction costs in two common 
places. The first place is contingency and the second is to remove allocations from tenant 
improvements and apply them to shell construction. 
 
Most budgets contain a contingency line item in  the event actual costs exceed the budgeted 
amounts. Unfortunately, many developers and lenders do not monitor the total impact on 
removing allocations from the contingency budget. In addition, savings are not allocated to 
the contingency line item when underbudget costs are realized. It is also common to rob one 
account to make up for a shortfall in another account. Generally, tenant finish is estimated at 
a particular dollar amount per square foot. This allows the developer considerable latitude in 
negotiating with tenants. 
 
However, before the entire space has been leased, and the construction costs have been 
incurred, the amount allocated to tenant improvements remains budgetary. If the developer 
is allowed to reallocate amounts from this budget line to shell construction, then when it 
comes time to negotiate leases and finish out the space, the developer might be short of 
available funds. If the tenant finish is treated as a hold-back and not to be reallocated or 
disbursed except for its intended purpose, then there is a greater chance of the loan not 
becoming over-disbursed (cost to complete exceeding the available financing). 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.906                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DEVELOPER OVERHEAD 
It is not uncommon in construction financing to have a budget line item for developer 
overhead (also called general conditions ). This is a ripe area for abuse. The purpose of developer 
overhead is to supply the developer with operating capital while the project is under 
construction. This overhead allocation should not include a profit percentage, as the 
developer realizes profit upon completion. 
 
In essence, the overhead budget is as if the lender is making two types of loans: a real estate 
loan and a working capital loan for the overhead. Unfortunately, there is seldom, if ever, any 
separate underwriting for the overhead portion. The overhead is merely added as a 
construction cost, whose ultimate collateral is the property and not some other short-term 
collateral. Historically, troubled construction loans or foreclosures due to fraud have been 
totally disbursed in the developer overhead category.  
 
DRAW REQUESTS 
Construction loan advances are generally supported by draw requests. A draw request is the 
documentation substantiating that a developer has incurred the appropriate construction 
expenses and is now seeking reimbursement or direct payment. A typical fraud scheme in 
this area involves requesting advances on the loan for inappropriate costs, such as personal 
expenses and/or construction costs for an unrelated project. Draw requests provide the 
greatest opportunity for a developer to commit fraud against the lender because the lender 
relies upon the developer’s documentation. 
 
Generally, a draw request or pay application is made once a month and is submitted on a 
standard form such as the one promulgated by the American Institute of Architects (AIA). 
The request should be accompanied by the following documents: 
• Paid invoices for raw materials 
• Lien releases from each subcontractor 
• Inspection reports 
• Canceled checks from previous draw requests 
• Bank reconciliation for construction draw account for previous month 
• Loan balancing form, demonstrating that the loan remains in balance 
• Change orders, if applicable 
• Wiring instructions, if applicable 
• Proof of developer contribution, if applicable 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.907 
The documentation required as support for each draw request will vary depending on the 
payment method (such as direct, dual payment, disbursing agent, wire transfer, or 
reimbursement). Any missing or altered documentation is a red flag that something is amiss 
with the draw request. All advances on the loan should be adequately documented. 
 
Some or all of the following steps should be performed before advancing funds on a 
construction loan. These steps are not represented as being all-inclusive, but rather the 
preliminary disbursement questions that the disbursing party should address. 
• Examine the draw and determine if sufficient supporting documentation has been 
submitted. 
• Reconcile the amounts requested with the approved budget. Account for any 
differences. 
• Determine that the amounts requested have been properly inspected and approved. 
• Determine if the proper lien releases have been submitted for work performed. 
• Reconcile any change orders with the approved budget. Determine if the change orders 
have been approved. 
• Prove the clerical accuracy of the documentation submitted. 
• Ensure that work completed has been inspected by the lender’s architect/engineer. 
• Determine if there are any requests for soft (nonconstruction) costs and whether they 
are appropriate. 
• Determine if there are any budget changes. If so, what are they for? Have they been 
approved? 
• Prepare a cost to complete estimate to determine that the loan remains in balance. 
• If tenant improvement funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed lease 
on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the lease? Has the 
lease been approved? 
• If homeowner option funds have been requested, establish that there is a signed 
purchase contract on file. Is the request appropriate for the terms and conditions of the 
contract? Has the contract/purchaser been approved? 
• Examine payment requests and determine if there are new or previously undisclosed 
subcontractors. If so, determine why. 
• Ensure that the title update has been received. 
 
RETAINAGE 
The final area of major concern in construction lending is retainage. Retainage is the amount 
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construction is complete and the lien 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.908                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
period has expired. There are at least two reasons why construction loans contain a retainage 
provision. The first reason is to keep the contractor’s interest in the project until all the work 
has been completed and accepted by the owner. The amount of the retainage represents 
part, if not all, of the contractor’s profit. Therefore, if the profit is not paid until the project 
has been completed, then presumably the contractor will complete the assignment on time 
and on budget. 
 
The second reason for the retainage is to ensure that the work of subcontractors is 
completed and that the general contractor pays the subcontractor so that no liens are filed. If 
the general contractor fails to pay the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probably file 
a lien on the project. If the retainage will not be released until such time as the lien period 
has expired, then there are at least some funds available to defray the cost of fighting the lien 
or making a duplicate payment because the general contractor might have embezzled the 
first payment without paying the subcontractor. 
 



:


construct loan
construct lend ha differ vulner than other perman or interim lend
more risk ar associ with constructi on project than with alreadybuilt project
construct fraud scheme ar numer the more common ar relat to estim of
cost to complet develop overhead draw request and retainag scheme
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1905
estim of cost to complet
when borrow approach a lend institut for construct financ thei typic
have a develop plan complet with an engin report apprais and budget for
construct cost the construct cost budget is by definit an estim as the project
is built out the budget will be revis to reflect actual expens budget ar delin by
specif line item such as slab exterior glass grade landscap and tenant
improv as the project proce certain over and underbudget cost ar incur
these cost should be repres by a chang order
if the loan agreement ha been properli document and enforc no materi
differenti from the budget should occur without the lender knowledg and consent
howev the developerborrow might misrepres the true natur of the under or
overbudget amount to mislead the lender the architectengin and the lender inspector
should examin all budget chang the impact of chang order might result in the loan
becom out of balanc cost to complet exce avail loan and equiti fund
gener develop hide or conceal their overbudget construct cost in two common
place the first place is conting and the second is to remov alloc from tenant
improv and appli them to shell construct
most budget contain a conting line item in the event actual cost exce the budget
amount unfortun mani develop and lender do not monitor the total impact on
remov alloc from the conting budget in addit save ar not alloc to
the conting line item when underbudget cost ar realiz it is also common to rob on
account to make up for a shortfal in anoth account gener tenant finish is estim at
a particular dollar amount per squar foot thi allow the develop consider latitud in
negoti with tenant
howev befor the entir space ha been leas and the construct cost have been
incur the amount alloc to tenant improv remain budgetari if the develop
is allow to realloc amount from thi budget line to shell construct then when it
come time to negoti leas and finish out the space the develop might be short of
avail fund if the tenant finish is treat as a holdback and not to be realloc or
disburs except for it intend purpos then there is a greater chanc of the loan not
becom overdisburs cost to complet exceed the avail financ
financi institut fraud financi transact
1906 2011 fraud examin manual
develop overhead
it is not uncommon in construct financ to have a budget line item for develop
overhead also call gener condit thi is a ripe area for abus the purpos of develop
overhead is to suppli the develop with oper capit while the project is under
construct thi overhead alloc should not includ a profit percentag as the
develop realiz profit upon complet
in essenc the overhead budget is as if the lender is make two type of loan a real estat
loan and a work capit loan for the overhead unfortun there is seldom if ever ani
separ underwrit for the overhead portion the overhead is mere ad as a
construct cost whose ultim collater is the properti and not some other shortterm
collater histor troubl construct loan or foreclosur due to fraud have been
total disburs in the develop overhead categori
draw request
construct loan advanc ar gener support by draw request a draw request is the
document substanti that a develop ha incur the appropri construct
expens and is now seek reimburs or direct payment a typic fraud scheme in
thi area involv request advanc on the loan for inappropri cost such as person
expens andor construct cost for an unrel project draw request provid the
greatest opportun for a develop to commit fraud against the lender becaus the lender
reli upon the develop document
gener a draw request or pai applic is made onc a month and is submit on a
standard form such as the on promulg by the american institut of architect aia
the request should be accompani by the follow document
paid invoic for raw materi
lien releas from each subcontractor
inspect report
cancel check from previou draw request
bank reconcili for construct draw account for previou month
loan balanc form demonstr that the loan remain in balanc
chang order if applic
wire instruct if applic
proof of develop contribut if applic
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1907
the document requir as support for each draw request will vari depend on the
payment method such as direct dual payment disburs agent wire transfer or
reimburs ani miss or alter document is a red flag that someth is amiss
with the draw request all advanc on the loan should be adequ document
some or all of the follow step should be perform befor advanc fund on a
construct loan these step ar not repres as be allinclus but rather the
preliminari disburs question that the disburs parti should address
examin the draw and determin if suffici support document ha been
submit
reconcil the amount request with the approv budget account for ani
differ
determin that the amount request have been properli inspect and approv
determin if the proper lien releas have been submit for work perform
reconcil ani chang order with the approv budget determin if the chang order
have been approv
prove the cleric accuraci of the document submit
ensur that work complet ha been inspect by the lender architectengin
determin if there ar ani request for soft nonconstruct cost and whether thei
ar appropri
determin if there ar ani budget chang if so what ar thei for have thei been
approv
prepar a cost to complet estim to determin that the loan remain in balanc
if tenant improv fund have been request establish that there is a sign leas
on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the leas ha the
leas been approv
if homeown option fund have been request establish that there is a sign
purchas contract on file is the request appropri for the term and condit of the
contract ha the contractpurchas been approv
examin payment request and determin if there ar new or previous undisclos
subcontractor if so determin why
ensur that the titl updat ha been receiv
retainag
the final area of major concern in construct lend is retainag retainag is the amount
withheld from each draw request until such time as the construct is complet and the lien
financi institut fraud financi transact
1908 2011 fraud examin manual
period ha expir there ar at least two reason why construct loan contain a retainag
provis the first reason is to keep the contractor interest in the project until all the work
ha been complet and accept by the owner the amount of the retainag repres
part if not all of the contractor profit therefor if the profit is not paid until the project
ha been complet then presum the contractor will complet the assign on time
and on budget
the second reason for the retainag is to ensur that the work of subcontractor is
complet and that the gener contractor pai the subcontractor so that no lien ar file if
the gener contractor fail to pai the subcontractor then the subcontractor will probabl file
a lien on the project if the retainag will not be releas until such time as the lien period
ha expir then there ar at least some fund avail to defrai the cost of fight the lien
or make a duplic payment becaus the gener contractor might have embezzl the
first payment without pai the subcontractor
