2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Loan Fraud/Missing Documentation


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Missing Documentation 
Missing or altered documentation is a red flag for any type of fraud scheme. Because 
concealment is a key fraud element, missing documents are a definite giveaway. Missing 
documents are of particular concern in construction lending. Experience has shown that 
seldom is a complete draw request submitted without some missing document. 
 
LOAN FILE 
Missing documents in the loan file are another indication that things might be amiss. It is 
important to determine if missing documents have been misplaced or were never received. A 
waiver of certain documents is one common way for lenders to conceal fraud schemes. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.910                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Documentation for real estate loans is fairly standard. Listed below are some of the more 
important documents that should be present in the loan files. 
• Appraisal 
• Architect’s or engineer’s report 
• Assignment of leases and rents 
• Assignment of limited partnership notes 
• Assignment of take-out commitment 
• Attorney opinion letter 
• Availability of utilities (water, sewer, gas, and electric) 
• Budget 
• Completion schedule 
• Copies of leases (existing or if project is preleased, commitment letters) 
• Disburser’s notice, if required 
• Easements 
• Environmental impact study 
• Ingress and egress 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector) 
• Insurance binder (lender should be loss payee) 
• Letters of credit, if applicable 
• List of general and subcontractors 
• Loan agreement 
• Plans and specifications 
• Promissory notes from limited partners to partnership, if applicable 
• Road dedications 
• Soils report 
• Subscription agreements, similar to limited partnership notes, if applicable 
• Survey 
• Take-out commitment, if applicable 
• Title policy, including instruction letter from closing 
• Zoning 
 
DISBURSEMENT FILE 
• Copies of all checks issued at closing 
• Lien releases issued at closing (architect, engineers, etc.) 
• Loan closing statement 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.911 
DRAW REQUESTS 
• Draw request form (AIA Form or its equivalent). 
• Bank reconciliation (general contractor disbursement account). 
• Canceled checks (if general contractor pays subcontractors, copies of the canceled 
checks should be included in the following draw). 
• Inspection report (lender’s inspector). 
• Lien releases for each subcontractor for the previous draw 
• Loan balancing form (the lender should prepare some form of reconciliation to ensure 
that with each draw the loan remains in balance. Items of particular concern are interest, 
tenant finish, and retainage.) 
• Receipts (for all items submitted on the draw request form). 
• Title updates from the title company. 
• Wire transfer instructions (from the lender to the general contractor’s disbursement 
account. 
 
In addition to the normal loan files, the lender should require a continuing report from the 
borrower. For example, the borrower could be required to report annual financial condition 
coupled with a tax return. Missing documents in  these follow-up files might indicate that the 
project or the borrower is having difficulty that might be the result of a fraud scheme. 
 



:


miss document
miss or alter document is a red flag for ani type of fraud scheme becaus
conceal is a kei fraud element miss document ar a definit giveawai miss
document ar of particular concern in construct lend experi ha shown that
seldom is a complet draw request submit without some miss document
loan file
miss document in the loan file ar anoth indic that thing might be amiss it is
import to determin if miss document have been misplac or were never receiv a
waiver of certain document is on common wai for lender to conceal fraud scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1910 2011 fraud examin manual
document for real estat loan is fairli standard list below ar some of the more
import document that should be present in the loan file
apprais
architect or engin report
assign of leas and rent
assign of limit partnership note
assign of takeout commit
attornei opinion letter
avail of util water sewer ga and electr
budget
complet schedul
copi of leas exist or if project is preleas commit letter
disburs notic if requir
easement
environment impact studi
ingress and egress
inspect report lender inspector
insur binder lender should be loss paye
letter of credit if applic
list of gener and subcontractor
loan agreement
plan and specif
promissori note from limit partner to partnership if applic
road dedic
soil report
subscript agreement similar to limit partnership note if applic
survei
takeout commit if applic
titl polici includ instruct letter from close
zone
disburs file
copi of all check issu at close
lien releas issu at close architect engin etc
loan close statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1911
draw request
draw request form aia form or it equival
bank reconcili gener contractor disburs account
cancel check if gener contractor pai subcontractor copi of the cancel
check should be includ in the follow draw
inspect report lender inspector
lien releas for each subcontractor for the previou draw
loan balanc form the lender should prepar some form of reconcili to ensur
that with each draw the loan remain in balanc item of particular concern ar interest
tenant finish and retainag
receipt for all item submit on the draw request form
titl updat from the titl compani
wire transfer instruct from the lender to the gener contractor disburs
account
in addit to the normal loan file the lender should requir a continu report from the
borrow for exampl the borrow could be requir to report annual financi condit
coupl with a tax return miss document in these followup file might indic that the
project or the borrow is have difficulti that might be the result of a fraud scheme
