2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Real Estate Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Real Estate Fraud 
Generally defined, real estate fraud is any false representation, coupled with intent to 
deceive, made in connection with a real estate transaction. There are several real estate fraud 
schemes, including the real estate loan fraud schemes discussed previously. In addition, there 
has been a recent growth of mortgage fraud–related incidences due to the rise of subprime 
lending and the mortgage crisis. This section will further detail those real estate loan fraud 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.913 
schemes and will examine several other real estate fraud schemes, including those stemming 
from subprime lending and the mortgage crisis. The schemes examined include:  
• Loan falsifications 
• Forged documents 
• Appraisal fraud 
• Straw buyers 
• Mortgage-backed security fraud 
• Equity skimming 
• Property flipping 
• Identity theft perpetrated in conjunction with a real estate transaction 
• Builder-bailout schemes 
• Seller assistance scams 
• Short-sale schemes 
• Chunking or shot gunning 
• Foreclosure rescue scams 
 
Most real estate transactions require more money than any single individual or entity can 
internally finance. Therefore, most of these transactions are financed to some extent. 
Because these transactions require borrowed money, experts are needed. These experts 
include appraisers, lenders, and auditors. 
 
Loan Falsifications 
It is illegal to provide false documents to verify income or assets, to make misrepresentations 
in a loan application, and to knowingly process a false loan application. Common types of 
loan falsifications include altered bank statements, altered or fraudulent earnings 
documentation, fraudulent letters of credit, fabricated letters of gift, misrepresentation of 
employment, misrepresentation of loan purpose, altered credit scores, false Social Security 
numbers, failure to fully disclose borrower’s de bts or assets, and brokers using the identities 
of prior customers to obtain loans for customers unable to qualify.  
 
According to the Mortgage Asset Research Institute’s (MARI) Ninth Periodic Case Report 
to the Mortgage Bankers Association, false statements made in loan applications are the 
most common aspect of mortgage fraud schemes. In fact, false statements in the loan 
application are the most reported suspicious activity related to mortgage fraud, according to 
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). This is because most perpetrators 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.914                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
could not execute mortgage fraud schemes without falsifying loan applications and 
supporting documentation. 
 
Identity fraud, which is the misrepresentation of data underpinning one’s identity (such as 
using one’s Social Security number), is a common mortgage fraud scheme involving the 
improper use of identifying data. In fact, FinCEN reported in 2009 that identity fraud 
occurred in three percent of the sampled mortgage fraud reports. 
 
The individuals in the best position to use a person’s identifying information for purposes of 
committing mortgage fraud are industry insiders. Identity fraud schemes may be perpetrated 
by mortgage brokers in possession of personal identifying information provided by a 
legitimate borrower and unbeknownst to him used over and over again. 
 
Identity fraud schemes are also perpetrated by “investment club” organizers who collect 
personal information from members and then use it without their knowledge to purchase 
properties. 
 
In other cases, real estate agents, mortgage brokers, criminals, and/or other industry insiders 
provide a stolen Social Security number of an individual with good credit to an individual 
with bad credit who wishes to purchase a home and helps create a credit history under the 
bad credit borrower’s name. 
 
Finally, straw borrowers are often provided with stolen or falsified Social Security numbers 
and driver’s licenses to use in originating loans. This scenario involves a high-level of 
collusion between all parties to defraud the lender. 
 
The following red flags may identify mortgages containing false or misleading information: 
• An item other than cash is used for the down payment (i.e., gift, rent credit, sale of 
personal property, repayment of loan, etc.) 
• Borrower purchasing property from employer or landlord. 
• Borrower has a non-purchasing spouse. 
• Borrower purchasing investment property does not own current residence. 
• New home is too small for proposed occupants. 
• The only listing of employer’s address is a Post office box. 
• Borrower, purchasing private residence property, has an unreasonable commute from 
subject property to his employment. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.915 
• Borrower’s level of education is inconsistent with employment. 
• Borrower’s age is inconsistent with the sta ted employment or the number of years 
employed. 
• Borrower is self-employed or his office phone number is the same as their work number. 
• When compared, borrower’s assets and liabilities are inconsistent.  
• Buyer is downgrading.  
• Loan application is handwritten or incomplete. 
 
Forged Documents 
Since W-2 forms, bank statements, title commitments, leases, tax returns, and similar 
documents other than the loan application are used to verify income and asset information, 
such documents are routinely falsified, altered, or forged to perpetuate mortgage fraud 
schemes. In 2009, forged documents were the most reported mortgage fraud scheme 
according to FinCEN. 
 
Appraisal Fraud 
The Role of the Appraiser 
The appraiser performs an independent property valuation for the new (or old) owner. 
Appraisers should be licensed. They should also be certified by an independent professional 
association. There are several professional associations for real estate appraisers. A list of 
these organizations can be found at the end of this section. It is important, particularly in 
regard to complex commercial property, that the appraisers’ experience and credentials be 
carefully scrutinized. 
 
Fundamentals of Real Estate Appraisals 
Real estate transactions assume a willing buyer and willing seller. Fraud can occur when the 
transaction breaks down or the expert assistance is not at arm’s length. Many fraud schemes 
have a false appraisal report as a condition precedent. Several different kinds of reports are 
used by appraisers. They are summarized below. 
 
LETTER FORM REPORT 
The letter form report is used when a client is familiar with the area, and supporting data, 
therefore, is not necessary. The report consists of a brief description of the property, the 
type of value sought, the purpose served by the appraisal, the date of value, the value 
conclusion, and the signature of the appraiser. This form generally is not used by financial 
institutions for credit decisions. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.916                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SHORT FORM REPORT 
The short form report is used by financial institutions, usually for residential real estate loans 
(sometimes referred to as consumer loans). The report varies from one to four pages and 
consists of check sheets or spaces to be filled in by the appraiser about pertinent property 
data. 
 
NARRATIVE REPORT 
The narrative form includes all pertinent information about the area and the subject property 
as well as the rationale for the estimated value. It includes maps, photographs, charts, and 
plot plans. Financial institutions use narrative reports to support real estate lending and 
investment decisions on large commercial real estate transactions. Any other type of 
appraisal report (i.e., letter form or short form) on these complex transactions would likely 
be considered inadequate.  
 
Determining “Value”  
Value is comprised of four elements: utility, scarcity, demand, and transferability. Real estate 
appraisals assign three types of values to property. They are: 
 
FAIR MARKET VALUE 
This is the price the property would bring if freely offered on the open market with both a 
willing seller and a willing buyer. (Estimated) 
 
SALES PRICE 
Sales price is the price paid for the property. It might be higher or lower than fair market 
value. (Actual) 
 
LOAN VALUE 
Loan value is the percentage of a property’s va lue (fair market value or sales price) a lender 
can or might loan a borrower.  
 
Valuation Methods 
SALES COMPARISON APPROACH 
The sales comparison approach lends itself to the appraisal of land, residences, and other 
types of improvements that exhibit a high degree of similarity, and where a ready market 
exists. Compared to the other approaches, this method has great influence on residential 
portfolio valuations. This method is the least complicated to understand and apply. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.917 
Subject property is compared with similar property that is either offered for sale or has 
recently sold. Items evaluated include time of sale, location of sale (or offer for sale), physical 
characteristics, and improvements. Adjustments are made to the value of comparable 
properties (either plus or minus) on the basis of differences between them and the subject 
property. Relevant items might be an oversized lot, a view, a busy street, or access. 
 
THE COST APPROACH 
The cost approach generally does not exert much influence on the appraiser’s final value 
estimate. It serves as a “benchmark” against which the sales comparison and income 
approaches are measured. The cost approach is more accurate for new properties. It views 
the value of a parcel as the combination of the land value if vacant and the cost to construct 
a new building on the given date, less the accrued depreciation the existing building would 
suffer in comparison with the new building. 
 
The cost approach has five steps: 
• Estimate the land value as though vacant and available for development to its highest 
and best use. (Use the sales comparison approach.) 
• Estimate the replacement or reproduction cost of the existing improvements as of the 
appraisal date. 
• Estimate the accrued depreciation amount suffered by the improvements from all causes 
(physical deterioration and/or functional or external obsolescence). 
• Deduct the accrued depreciation from the replacement cost to find the estimate of value 
of the depreciated improvements. 
• Add the improvements’ depreciated value to the land value to arrive at the value of the 
property. 
 
The above is the most frequently used cost approach method. It involves the cost associated 
with rebuilding with modern methods, design, and materials that would most exactly replace 
the existing building. Reproduction cost is a cost-approach used to estimate the cost to 
reconstruct a replica of the building. It generally is used only when dealing with unique 
construction or for testimony in court. 
 
THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH 
Under this approach, the property value is based on its capacity to continue producing 
income. This method is particularly valuable for the valuation of complex commercial 
properties. The net income the property produces is an important consideration. Net income 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.918                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
is the amount of money over the remaining life of the property and its improvements that a 
fully informed person, using good management, is warranted in receiving. 
 
Income capitalization is the mathematical process of estimating the present value of income 
property based on the anticipated annual net income it will produce. Key to the application 
of this approach is the capitalization rate that is used. There are three types of capitalization 
rates: interest rate, recapture rate,  and overall capitalization rate.  Interest rate is the rate of return 
earned on investment capital. Recapture rate is the rate of return originally invested funds 
provided the owner. Overall capitalization rate is a combination of the interest and recapture 
rates. 
 
Fraudulent Appraisals 
Fraudulent appraisals result from any number of situations, some of which are: 
• Intentional use of an incompetent appraiser 
•  “Stacking the deck” by giving the appraiser improper or false assumptions to use in 
arriving at the value such as: 
? Assume zoning will be changed for a higher and better use when in fact zoning will 
not be changed. 
? Assume unrealistically high vacancy and low expense rates. 
? Assume unrealistically high income, selling prices, or absorption—the rate at which 
vacant space will become rented. 
? Otherwise influencing the appraiser, e.g., paying above-market fee or promising 
future business. 
? Direct collusion with the appraiser to commit fraud. 
 
Uses for Fraudulent Appraisals 
• To obtain approval on marginal or substandard loans to attain or exceed goals in order 
to be promoted or receive commission, bonus, or raises. 
• To justify extending or renewing a “bad” loan  to avoid recognition of a loss that might 
defer commission, promotion, bonus, or raises. 
• To avoid adverse publicity and regulatory, management, and shareholder disapproval 
because of excessive losses. 
• To avoid recognition of a loss on real estate owned, and to permit additional capital 
infusions. 
• To criminally gain money. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.919 
Red Flags of “Made-as-Instructed” Appraisals 
• The appraiser used never has been used before, is not on an approved list, has no 
professional credentials, or those offered are of questionable credibility. 
• Appraisal fee is unusually high. 
• Invalid comparables are used.  
• Supporting information is missing, insufficient, or contradictory. 
• Market data does not support the price and absorption figures used to arrive at value. 
 
Detecting Fraudulent Appraisals 
To detect unrealistic or bogus appraisals, the fraud examiner should address the following: 
(1) Read the appraisal, does it match the documents in the file? 
? Leases 
? Comparables 
? Absorption rates 
? Residual values 
? Capitalization rate 
? Legal description 
 
(2) Is there sufficient demand for the project to ensure absorption of the property into the 
marketplace? 
 
(3) Are there unique characteristics of the project that will ensure a competitive advantage 
over other projects? 
 
(4) Is the project sensitive to changes in local economic conditions? 
 
 



:


real estat fraud
gener defin real estat fraud is ani fals represent coupl with intent to
deceiv made in connect with a real estat transact there ar sever real estat fraud
scheme includ the real estat loan fraud scheme discuss previous in addit there
ha been a recent growth of mortgag fraudrel incid due to the rise of subprim
lend and the mortgag crisi thi section will further detail those real estat loan fraud
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1913
scheme and will examin sever other real estat fraud scheme includ those stem
from subprim lend and the mortgag crisi the scheme examin includ
loan falsif
forg document
apprais fraud
straw buyer
mortgageback secur fraud
equiti skim
properti flip
ident theft perpetr in conjunct with a real estat transact
builderbailout scheme
seller assist scam
shortsal scheme
chunk or shot gun
foreclosur rescu scam
most real estat transact requir more monei than ani singl individu or entiti can
intern financ therefor most of these transact ar financ to some extent
becaus these transact requir borrow monei expert ar need these expert
includ apprais lender and auditor
loan falsif
it is illeg to provid fals document to verifi incom or asset to make misrepresent
in a loan applic and to knowingli process a fals loan applic common type of
loan falsif includ alter bank statement alter or fraudul earn
document fraudul letter of credit fabric letter of gift misrepresent of
employ misrepresent of loan purpos alter credit score fals social secur
number failur to fulli disclos borrow de bt or asset and broker us the ident
of prior custom to obtain loan for custom unabl to qualifi
accord to the mortgag asset research institut mari ninth period case report
to the mortgag banker associ fals statement made in loan applic ar the
most common aspect of mortgag fraud scheme in fact fals statement in the loan
applic ar the most report suspici activ relat to mortgag fraud accord to
the financi crime enforc network fincen thi is becaus most perpetr
financi institut fraud financi transact
1914 2011 fraud examin manual
could not execut mortgag fraud scheme without falsifi loan applic and
support document
ident fraud which is the misrepresent of data underpin on ident such as
us on social secur number is a common mortgag fraud scheme involv the
improp us of identifi data in fact fincen report in 2009 that ident fraud
occur in three percent of the sampl mortgag fraud report
the individu in the best posit to us a person identifi inform for purpos of
commit mortgag fraud ar industri insid ident fraud scheme mai be perpetr
by mortgag broker in possess of person identifi inform provid by a
legitim borrow and unbeknownst to him us over and over again
ident fraud scheme ar also perpetr by invest club organ who collect
person inform from member and then us it without their knowledg to purchas
properti
in other case real estat agent mortgag broker crimin andor other industri insid
provid a stolen social secur number of an individu with good credit to an individu
with bad credit who wish to purchas a home and help creat a credit histori under the
bad credit borrow name
final straw borrow ar often provid with stolen or falsifi social secur number
and driver licens to us in origin loan thi scenario involv a highlevel of
collus between all parti to defraud the lender
the follow red flag mai identifi mortgag contain fals or mislead inform
an item other than cash is us for the down payment ie gift rent credit sale of
person properti repay of loan etc
borrow purchas properti from employ or landlord
borrow ha a nonpurchas spous
borrow purchas invest properti doe not own current resid
new home is too small for propos occup
the onli list of employ address is a post offic box
borrow purchas privat resid properti ha an unreason commut from
subject properti to hi employ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1915
borrow level of educ is inconsist with employ
borrow ag is inconsist with the sta ted employ or the number of year
emploi
borrow is selfemploi or hi offic phone number is the same as their work number
when compar borrow asset and liabil ar inconsist
buyer is downgrad
loan applic is handwritten or incomplet
forg document
sinc w2 form bank statement titl commit leas tax return and similar
document other than the loan applic ar us to verifi incom and asset inform
such document ar routin falsifi alter or forg to perpetu mortgag fraud
scheme in 2009 forg document were the most report mortgag fraud scheme
accord to fincen
apprais fraud
the role of the apprais
the apprais perform an independ properti valuat for the new or old owner
apprais should be licens thei should also be certifi by an independ profession
associ there ar sever profession associ for real estat apprais a list of
these organ can be found at the end of thi section it is import particularli in
regard to complex commerci properti that the apprais experi and credenti be
carefulli scrutin
fundament of real estat apprais
real estat transact assum a will buyer and will seller fraud can occur when the
transact break down or the expert assist is not at arm length mani fraud scheme
have a fals apprais report as a condit preced sever differ kind of report ar
us by apprais thei ar summar below
letter form report
the letter form report is us when a client is familiar with the area and support data
therefor is not necessari the report consist of a brief descript of the properti the
type of valu sought the purpos serv by the apprais the date of valu the valu
conclus and the signatur of the apprais thi form gener is not us by financi
institut for credit decis
financi institut fraud financi transact
1916 2011 fraud examin manual
short form report
the short form report is us by financi institut usual for residenti real estat loan
sometim refer to as consum loan the report vari from on to four page and
consist of check sheet or space to be fill in by the apprais about pertin properti
data
narr report
the narr form includ all pertin inform about the area and the subject properti
as well as the rational for the estim valu it includ map photograph chart and
plot plan financi institut us narr report to support real estat lend and
invest decis on larg commerci real estat transact ani other type of
apprais report ie letter form or short form on these complex transact would like
be consid inadequ
determin valu
valu is compris of four element util scarciti demand and transfer real estat
apprais assign three type of valu to properti thei ar
fair market valu
thi is the price the properti would bring if freeli offer on the open market with both a
will seller and a will buyer estim
sale price
sale price is the price paid for the properti it might be higher or lower than fair market
valu actual
loan valu
loan valu is the percentag of a properti va lue fair market valu or sale price a lender
can or might loan a borrow
valuat method
sale comparison approach
the sale comparison approach lend itself to the apprais of land resid and other
type of improv that exhibit a high degre of similar and where a readi market
exist compar to the other approach thi method ha great influenc on residenti
portfolio valuat thi method is the least complic to understand and appli
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1917
subject properti is compar with similar properti that is either offer for sale or ha
recent sold item evalu includ time of sale locat of sale or offer for sale physic
characterist and improv adjust ar made to the valu of compar
properti either plu or minu on the basi of differ between them and the subject
properti relev item might be an overs lot a view a busi street or access
the cost approach
the cost approach gener doe not exert much influenc on the apprais final valu
estim it serv as a benchmark against which the sale comparison and incom
approach ar measur the cost approach is more accur for new properti it view
the valu of a parcel as the combin of the land valu if vacant and the cost to construct
a new build on the given date less the accru depreci the exist build would
suffer in comparison with the new build
the cost approach ha five step
estim the land valu as though vacant and avail for develop to it highest
and best us us the sale comparison approach
estim the replac or reproduct cost of the exist improv as of the
apprais date
estim the accru depreci amount suffer by the improv from all caus
physic deterior andor function or extern obsolesc
deduct the accru depreci from the replac cost to find the estim of valu
of the depreci improv
add the improv depreci valu to the land valu to arriv at the valu of the
properti
the abov is the most frequent us cost approach method it involv the cost associ
with rebuild with modern method design and materi that would most exactli replac
the exist build reproduct cost is a costapproach us to estim the cost to
reconstruct a replica of the build it gener is us onli when deal with uniqu
construct or for testimoni in court
the incom capit approach
under thi approach the properti valu is base on it capac to continu produc
incom thi method is particularli valuabl for the valuat of complex commerci
properti the net incom the properti produc is an import consider net incom
financi institut fraud financi transact
1918 2011 fraud examin manual
is the amount of monei over the remain life of the properti and it improv that a
fulli inform person us good manag is warrant in receiv
incom capit is the mathemat process of estim the present valu of incom
properti base on the anticip annual net incom it will produc kei to the applic
of thi approach is the capit rate that is us there ar three type of capit
rate interest rate recaptur rate and overal capit rate interest rate is the rate of return
earn on invest capit recaptur rate is the rate of return origin invest fund
provid the owner overal capit rate is a combin of the interest and recaptur
rate
fraudul apprais
fraudul apprais result from ani number of situat some of which ar
intent us of an incompet apprais
stack the deck by give the apprais improp or fals assumpt to us in
arriv at the valu such as
assum zone will be chang for a higher and better us when in fact zone will
not be chang
assum unrealist high vacanc and low expens rate
assum unrealist high incom sell price or absorptionth rate at which
vacant space will becom rent
otherwis influenc the apprais eg pai abovemarket fee or promis
futur busi
direct collus with the apprais to commit fraud
us for fraudul apprais
to obtain approv on margin or substandard loan to attain or exce goal in order
to be promot or receiv commiss bonu or rais
to justifi extend or renew a bad loan to avoid recognit of a loss that might
defer commiss promot bonu or rais
to avoid advers public and regulatori manag and sharehold disapprov
becaus of excess loss
to avoid recognit of a loss on real estat own and to permit addit capit
infus
to crimin gain monei
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1919
red flag of madeasinstruct apprais
the apprais us never ha been us befor is not on an approv list ha no
profession credenti or those offer ar of question credibl
apprais fee is unusu high
invalid compar ar us
support inform is miss insuffici or contradictori
market data doe not support the price and absorpt figur us to arriv at valu
detect fraudul apprais
to detect unrealist or bogu apprais the fraud examin should address the follow
1 read the apprais doe it match the document in the file
leas
compar
absorpt rate
residu valu
capit rate
legal descript
2 is there suffici demand for the project to ensur absorpt of the properti into the
marketplac
3 ar there uniqu characterist of the project that will ensur a competit advantag
over other project
4 is the project sensit to chang in local econom condit
