2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Real Estate Fraud/Loan Falsifications


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Loan Falsifications 
It is illegal to provide false documents to verify income or assets, to make misrepresentations 
in a loan application, and to knowingly process a false loan application. Common types of 
loan falsifications include altered bank statements, altered or fraudulent earnings 
documentation, fraudulent letters of credit, fabricated letters of gift, misrepresentation of 
employment, misrepresentation of loan purpose, altered credit scores, false Social Security 
numbers, failure to fully disclose borrower’s de bts or assets, and brokers using the identities 
of prior customers to obtain loans for customers unable to qualify.  
 
According to the Mortgage Asset Research Institute’s (MARI) Ninth Periodic Case Report 
to the Mortgage Bankers Association, false statements made in loan applications are the 
most common aspect of mortgage fraud schemes. In fact, false statements in the loan 
application are the most reported suspicious activity related to mortgage fraud, according to 
the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN). This is because most perpetrators 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.914                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
could not execute mortgage fraud schemes without falsifying loan applications and 
supporting documentation. 
 
Identity fraud, which is the misrepresentation of data underpinning one’s identity (such as 
using one’s Social Security number), is a common mortgage fraud scheme involving the 
improper use of identifying data. In fact, FinCEN reported in 2009 that identity fraud 
occurred in three percent of the sampled mortgage fraud reports. 
 
The individuals in the best position to use a person’s identifying information for purposes of 
committing mortgage fraud are industry insiders. Identity fraud schemes may be perpetrated 
by mortgage brokers in possession of personal identifying information provided by a 
legitimate borrower and unbeknownst to him used over and over again. 
 
Identity fraud schemes are also perpetrated by “investment club” organizers who collect 
personal information from members and then use it without their knowledge to purchase 
properties. 
 
In other cases, real estate agents, mortgage brokers, criminals, and/or other industry insiders 
provide a stolen Social Security number of an individual with good credit to an individual 
with bad credit who wishes to purchase a home and helps create a credit history under the 
bad credit borrower’s name. 
 
Finally, straw borrowers are often provided with stolen or falsified Social Security numbers 
and driver’s licenses to use in originating loans. This scenario involves a high-level of 
collusion between all parties to defraud the lender. 
 
The following red flags may identify mortgages containing false or misleading information: 
• An item other than cash is used for the down payment (i.e., gift, rent credit, sale of 
personal property, repayment of loan, etc.) 
• Borrower purchasing property from employer or landlord. 
• Borrower has a non-purchasing spouse. 
• Borrower purchasing investment property does not own current residence. 
• New home is too small for proposed occupants. 
• The only listing of employer’s address is a Post office box. 
• Borrower, purchasing private residence property, has an unreasonable commute from 
subject property to his employment. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.915 
• Borrower’s level of education is inconsistent with employment. 
• Borrower’s age is inconsistent with the sta ted employment or the number of years 
employed. 
• Borrower is self-employed or his office phone number is the same as their work number. 
• When compared, borrower’s assets and liabilities are inconsistent.  
• Buyer is downgrading.  
• Loan application is handwritten or incomplete. 
 



:


loan falsif
it is illeg to provid fals document to verifi incom or asset to make misrepresent
in a loan applic and to knowingli process a fals loan applic common type of
loan falsif includ alter bank statement alter or fraudul earn
document fraudul letter of credit fabric letter of gift misrepresent of
employ misrepresent of loan purpos alter credit score fals social secur
number failur to fulli disclos borrow de bt or asset and broker us the ident
of prior custom to obtain loan for custom unabl to qualifi
accord to the mortgag asset research institut mari ninth period case report
to the mortgag banker associ fals statement made in loan applic ar the
most common aspect of mortgag fraud scheme in fact fals statement in the loan
applic ar the most report suspici activ relat to mortgag fraud accord to
the financi crime enforc network fincen thi is becaus most perpetr
financi institut fraud financi transact
1914 2011 fraud examin manual
could not execut mortgag fraud scheme without falsifi loan applic and
support document
ident fraud which is the misrepresent of data underpin on ident such as
us on social secur number is a common mortgag fraud scheme involv the
improp us of identifi data in fact fincen report in 2009 that ident fraud
occur in three percent of the sampl mortgag fraud report
the individu in the best posit to us a person identifi inform for purpos of
commit mortgag fraud ar industri insid ident fraud scheme mai be perpetr
by mortgag broker in possess of person identifi inform provid by a
legitim borrow and unbeknownst to him us over and over again
ident fraud scheme ar also perpetr by invest club organ who collect
person inform from member and then us it without their knowledg to purchas
properti
in other case real estat agent mortgag broker crimin andor other industri insid
provid a stolen social secur number of an individu with good credit to an individu
with bad credit who wish to purchas a home and help creat a credit histori under the
bad credit borrow name
final straw borrow ar often provid with stolen or falsifi social secur number
and driver licens to us in origin loan thi scenario involv a highlevel of
collus between all parti to defraud the lender
the follow red flag mai identifi mortgag contain fals or mislead inform
an item other than cash is us for the down payment ie gift rent credit sale of
person properti repay of loan etc
borrow purchas properti from employ or landlord
borrow ha a nonpurchas spous
borrow purchas invest properti doe not own current resid
new home is too small for propos occup
the onli list of employ address is a post offic box
borrow purchas privat resid properti ha an unreason commut from
subject properti to hi employ
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1915
borrow level of educ is inconsist with employ
borrow ag is inconsist with the sta ted employ or the number of year
emploi
borrow is selfemploi or hi offic phone number is the same as their work number
when compar borrow asset and liabil ar inconsist
buyer is downgrad
loan applic is handwritten or incomplet
