2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Real Estate Fraud/Fundamentals of Real Estate Appraisals


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Fundamentals of Real Estate Appraisals 
Real estate transactions assume a willing buyer and willing seller. Fraud can occur when the 
transaction breaks down or the expert assistance is not at arm’s length. Many fraud schemes 
have a false appraisal report as a condition precedent. Several different kinds of reports are 
used by appraisers. They are summarized below. 
 
LETTER FORM REPORT 
The letter form report is used when a client is familiar with the area, and supporting data, 
therefore, is not necessary. The report consists of a brief description of the property, the 
type of value sought, the purpose served by the appraisal, the date of value, the value 
conclusion, and the signature of the appraiser. This form generally is not used by financial 
institutions for credit decisions. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.916                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SHORT FORM REPORT 
The short form report is used by financial institutions, usually for residential real estate loans 
(sometimes referred to as consumer loans). The report varies from one to four pages and 
consists of check sheets or spaces to be filled in by the appraiser about pertinent property 
data. 
 
NARRATIVE REPORT 
The narrative form includes all pertinent information about the area and the subject property 
as well as the rationale for the estimated value. It includes maps, photographs, charts, and 
plot plans. Financial institutions use narrative reports to support real estate lending and 
investment decisions on large commercial real estate transactions. Any other type of 
appraisal report (i.e., letter form or short form) on these complex transactions would likely 
be considered inadequate.  
 



:


fundament of real estat apprais
real estat transact assum a will buyer and will seller fraud can occur when the
transact break down or the expert assist is not at arm length mani fraud scheme
have a fals apprais report as a condit preced sever differ kind of report ar
us by apprais thei ar summar below
letter form report
the letter form report is us when a client is familiar with the area and support data
therefor is not necessari the report consist of a brief descript of the properti the
type of valu sought the purpos serv by the apprais the date of valu the valu
conclus and the signatur of the apprais thi form gener is not us by financi
institut for credit decis
financi institut fraud financi transact
1916 2011 fraud examin manual
short form report
the short form report is us by financi institut usual for residenti real estat loan
sometim refer to as consum loan the report vari from on to four page and
consist of check sheet or space to be fill in by the apprais about pertin properti
data
narr report
the narr form includ all pertin inform about the area and the subject properti
as well as the rational for the estim valu it includ map photograph chart and
plot plan financi institut us narr report to support real estat lend and
invest decis on larg commerci real estat transact ani other type of
apprais report ie letter form or short form on these complex transact would like
be consid inadequ
