2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Real Estate Fraud/Valuation Methods


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Valuation Methods 
SALES COMPARISON APPROACH 
The sales comparison approach lends itself to the appraisal of land, residences, and other 
types of improvements that exhibit a high degree of similarity, and where a ready market 
exists. Compared to the other approaches, this method has great influence on residential 
portfolio valuations. This method is the least complicated to understand and apply. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.917 
Subject property is compared with similar property that is either offered for sale or has 
recently sold. Items evaluated include time of sale, location of sale (or offer for sale), physical 
characteristics, and improvements. Adjustments are made to the value of comparable 
properties (either plus or minus) on the basis of differences between them and the subject 
property. Relevant items might be an oversized lot, a view, a busy street, or access. 
 
THE COST APPROACH 
The cost approach generally does not exert much influence on the appraiser’s final value 
estimate. It serves as a “benchmark” against which the sales comparison and income 
approaches are measured. The cost approach is more accurate for new properties. It views 
the value of a parcel as the combination of the land value if vacant and the cost to construct 
a new building on the given date, less the accrued depreciation the existing building would 
suffer in comparison with the new building. 
 
The cost approach has five steps: 
• Estimate the land value as though vacant and available for development to its highest 
and best use. (Use the sales comparison approach.) 
• Estimate the replacement or reproduction cost of the existing improvements as of the 
appraisal date. 
• Estimate the accrued depreciation amount suffered by the improvements from all causes 
(physical deterioration and/or functional or external obsolescence). 
• Deduct the accrued depreciation from the replacement cost to find the estimate of value 
of the depreciated improvements. 
• Add the improvements’ depreciated value to the land value to arrive at the value of the 
property. 
 
The above is the most frequently used cost approach method. It involves the cost associated 
with rebuilding with modern methods, design, and materials that would most exactly replace 
the existing building. Reproduction cost is a cost-approach used to estimate the cost to 
reconstruct a replica of the building. It generally is used only when dealing with unique 
construction or for testimony in court. 
 
THE INCOME CAPITALIZATION APPROACH 
Under this approach, the property value is based on its capacity to continue producing 
income. This method is particularly valuable for the valuation of complex commercial 
properties. The net income the property produces is an important consideration. Net income 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.918                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
is the amount of money over the remaining life of the property and its improvements that a 
fully informed person, using good management, is warranted in receiving. 
 
Income capitalization is the mathematical process of estimating the present value of income 
property based on the anticipated annual net income it will produce. Key to the application 
of this approach is the capitalization rate that is used. There are three types of capitalization 
rates: interest rate, recapture rate,  and overall capitalization rate.  Interest rate is the rate of return 
earned on investment capital. Recapture rate is the rate of return originally invested funds 
provided the owner. Overall capitalization rate is a combination of the interest and recapture 
rates. 
 



:


valuat method
sale comparison approach
the sale comparison approach lend itself to the apprais of land resid and other
type of improv that exhibit a high degre of similar and where a readi market
exist compar to the other approach thi method ha great influenc on residenti
portfolio valuat thi method is the least complic to understand and appli
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1917
subject properti is compar with similar properti that is either offer for sale or ha
recent sold item evalu includ time of sale locat of sale or offer for sale physic
characterist and improv adjust ar made to the valu of compar
properti either plu or minu on the basi of differ between them and the subject
properti relev item might be an overs lot a view a busi street or access
the cost approach
the cost approach gener doe not exert much influenc on the apprais final valu
estim it serv as a benchmark against which the sale comparison and incom
approach ar measur the cost approach is more accur for new properti it view
the valu of a parcel as the combin of the land valu if vacant and the cost to construct
a new build on the given date less the accru depreci the exist build would
suffer in comparison with the new build
the cost approach ha five step
estim the land valu as though vacant and avail for develop to it highest
and best us us the sale comparison approach
estim the replac or reproduct cost of the exist improv as of the
apprais date
estim the accru depreci amount suffer by the improv from all caus
physic deterior andor function or extern obsolesc
deduct the accru depreci from the replac cost to find the estim of valu
of the depreci improv
add the improv depreci valu to the land valu to arriv at the valu of the
properti
the abov is the most frequent us cost approach method it involv the cost associ
with rebuild with modern method design and materi that would most exactli replac
the exist build reproduct cost is a costapproach us to estim the cost to
reconstruct a replica of the build it gener is us onli when deal with uniqu
construct or for testimoni in court
the incom capit approach
under thi approach the properti valu is base on it capac to continu produc
incom thi method is particularli valuabl for the valuat of complex commerci
properti the net incom the properti produc is an import consider net incom
financi institut fraud financi transact
1918 2011 fraud examin manual
is the amount of monei over the remain life of the properti and it improv that a
fulli inform person us good manag is warrant in receiv
incom capit is the mathemat process of estim the present valu of incom
properti base on the anticip annual net incom it will produc kei to the applic
of thi approach is the capit rate that is us there ar three type of capit
rate interest rate recaptur rate and overal capit rate interest rate is the rate of return
earn on invest capit recaptur rate is the rate of return origin invest fund
provid the owner overal capit rate is a combin of the interest and recaptur
rate
