2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Mortgage Fraud 
Fraud has always been a constant presence in the mortgage industry, and it appears to be on 
the rise. There are a number of likely factors contributing to this apparent increase, including 
a rapid decline in the rate of home price appreciation, an increase in unemployment, and an 
increase in aggressive lending practices. All of these factors either reduced incentives or 
made it more difficult for borrowers to meet their mortgage obligations, which ultimately led 
to an increase in loan defaults.  
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.920                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The recent mortgage crisis has led to an increase in fraud for several reasons. One reason is 
that the declining housing market affects many in the mortgage industry (especially those 
paid by commission). During such declines, individuals are more likely to commit fraudulent 
acts to maintain their current standard of living. In addition, the declining market provides 
an ideal environment for perpetrators to employ numerous schemes that fit perfectly with 
down market (i.e., an increasing number of foreclosures, declining housing prices, and 
decreasing demand). Such down market characteristics place pressure on home builders, 
sellers, and lenders, which fraud perpetrators will attempt to exploit.  
 
The Growth of Subprime Lending Paved the Way for Fraud 
Subprime lending  refers to a variety of credit instruments lenders provide to people who do not 
qualify for the best market interest rate, usually due to weakened credit histories. There are 
many types of subprime mortgages, including: 
• Interest-only mortgages 
• Pick-a-payment loans 
• 2/28 adjustable-rate mortgage 
• Option-adjustable-rate mortgage 
 
Over the past decade, the subprime market grew dramatically, flourishing as the vehicle by 
which lenders funded loans to borrowers who would generally not qualify for traditional 
loans. According to industry newsletter Inside Mortgage Finance, Wall Street generated $1.8 
trillion in subprime loans from 2000 to 2007. In 2006, analysts estimated that 25 percent of 
all mortgages originated in the United States were subprime, and by 2007, 14 percent of all 
outstanding mortgage indebtedness in the United States was subprime in nature. By 2010, 
with the passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and 
the announcement of Wells Fargo to discontinue its subprime lending division, the 
percentage of subprime mortgages in the United States is expected to decline significantly. 
As Wells Fargo was the largest lender in the United States, it is possible that the percentage 
of subprime mortgages will fall to nearly 0. 
 
Corresponding with the growth of the subprime lending industry was a substantial increase 
in the number of mortgage fraud cases. The rise in fraudulent activity is the result of several 
factors, including the growth of automated loan processing and the growth of mortgage 
broker originated loans. These conditions, coupled with very lucrative possibilities, create an 
industry that that is very attractive to untrustworthy individuals or in other words, fraudsters.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.921 
Automated Loan Processing 
The growth of automated loan processing contributed to the increase in mortgage fraud 
because the nature of such transactions is faceless. The use of the Internet to receive and 
process loan applications has grown, and, in such cases, the lenders never meet the 
borrowers. This process creates an environment susceptible to fraudulent activity.  
 
Mortgage Broker Originated Loans 
The increasing number of mortgage broker originated loans has also played a part in the 
rising number of subprime fraud cases. Historically, mortgage loans were originated by the 
loan officer at the bank. Mortgage lenders, however, started relying on third-party originators 
(TPOs) to broker their loan products. Brokers could be paid a commission rather than a 
salary, an option that worked well for minimally capitalized mortgage lenders.  
As a result, the industry has seen the evolution of mortgage brokers.  
 
As markets for mortgages became more competitive, banks with their own retail loan 
officers also started employing these third-party wholesale originators. Today, mortgage 
brokers are the largest distributors of mortgage products for mortgage lenders and banks. It 
is estimated that two-thirds of all originations are from wholesale TPO mortgage brokers 
rather than retail loan officers. 
 
Mortgage broker-originated loans are vulnerable to fraud primarily because, until recently, 
there were no national standards for the licensing and oversight of mortgage brokers. 
However, on July 30, 2008, President Bush signed into law the Secure and Fair Enforcement 
for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act), which is part of the Housing and 
Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Designed to provide uniform licensing standards 
nationwide, the SAFE Act required all states to have in place a system of licensure meeting 
minimum standards for mortgage loan originators (i.e., anyone who takes a residential 
mortgage loan application or who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan 
application for compensation or gain) beginning July 31, 2009.  
 
Mortgage Fraud Schemes 
Straw Buyers  
Straw buyers  are loan applicants who mortgage fraud perpetrators use to obtain home loans 
but who have no intention to occupy the properties they are buying or to pay back the loan. 
Perpetrators often use straw buyers to hide the identity of the true borrower that did not 
qualify for the mortgage.  
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.922                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following red flags may occur in a straw borrower transaction:  
• At closing, discovering that the check is from someone other than the party to the 
contract.  
• Borrower resides in different state than purchasing property, which is described as a 
primary residence. 
• Quit claim deed is used very close to loan closing. 
• Investment property represented as owner-occupied. 
• A third-party signed on the borrower’s behalf. 
• Names added to purchase contract. 
• Parties to the transaction are related. 
• There is no sales agent involved. 
• There are indications that the property seller defaulted. 
• Existence of a high FICO score. 
• Gift used for down payment despite the presence of good assets. 
 
Equity Skimming 
Equity skimming is a scheme whereby an individual, entity, or group of individuals purchases 
one or several single-family homes. Typically, the financing is for a percentage of the 
purchase price (e.g., 80–90 percent) and the owner invests the balance of the purchase price 
as equity. The home(s) is/are then rented. 
 
The owners collect the rent from the tenants but fail to make the mortgage payment(s). 
When owners have withheld mortgage payments that equal the amount of the invested 
equity, they can then either resume payments or allow the mortgage to be foreclosed. 
Although the mortgage might eventually be foreclosed, the owners have recouped their 
original investment plus any rental payments not applied to the mortgage. In addition, the 
owners received state and federal tax benefits during the holding period. This scheme is 
most successful with non-recourse mortgages. 
 
Although equity skimming eventually collapses and the purchasers risk being sued for 
deficiencies (if the loans were recourse), the scheme continues to be practiced. It has become 
an increasing problem as many residential homes are auctioned and bulk purchases are 
encouraged. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.923 
Property Flipping 
Property flipping has been around for a long time. It is well known in the real estate industry 
as a way to make a profit by buying low and selling high, and it is not necessarily illegal. 
Flipping is perfectly fine when all representations of the property condition and value are 
true and accurate. However, flipping can also be a fraud for profit scheme that may lead to 
substantial losses and other devastating consequences.  
 
Property flipping is the process by which an investor purchases a home and then resells it at a 
higher price shortly thereafter. For example, an investor buys a house in need of work for 
$250,000 in July, renovates the kitchen and the bathrooms and landscapes the yard at a cost 
of $50,000, and then resells the house two months later (the time it takes to make the 
renovations) for a price that is reflective of the market for a house in its updated condition. 
This is a legitimate business transaction, and there are numerous individuals and groups in 
the real estate market who make an honest living flipping properties.  
 
However, property flipping becomes illegal and fraudulent when a home is purchased and 
resold within a short period of time at an artificially inflated value. The key in determining 
whether a flip is illegal is to watch for a significant increase in value over a short period of 
time that cannot be justified. A property that sells twice in the same day at an increase of 
$100,000 is hard to justify. 
 
An illegal property flip is usually dependent on an appraisal report that has artificially inflated 
the value of the property. The borrower may review the appraisal without inspecting the 
property, completely unaware of the market values in that property’s neighborhood. The 
borrower may also be a straw borrower or an accomplice. 
 
Nominee or Strawman Loans 
Loans made in the name of a straw borrower  or agent having no substance, while the 
identity of the real borrower is undisclosed to the lender. 
 
Mortgage Pulling 
For the purpose of disguising loans exceeding a bank’s legal limits, loans are made to a 
partnership’s members who by prearrangement then invest in a single risky venture in a total 
amount exceeding the lending limit. In reality, the single borrower is the partnership, and the 
collateral is the partnership’s property. Mort gage-pulling might involve fraudulent loan 
applications and payoffs to the individual partners for participating. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.924                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Identity Theft 
An identity theft scheme is defined as the assumption of someone else’s identity for fraudulent 
purposes. Identity theft is recognized as one of the fastest growing crimes in the U.S. Recent 
identity theft reports from credit reporting companies, corporate databases, and commercial 
data brokers indicate a substantial rise in cases of identity theft in conjunction with mortgage 
loan fraud.  
 
Two examples of identity theft schemes involving mortgage fraud include the fraudulent 
acquisition of a person’s home and the fraudulent origination of a loan on a property 
belonging to another person. 
 
PHANTOM SALE 
Phantom sale  scams are particularly harmful because they involve the fraudulent acquisition of 
a homeowner’s property by filing a fraudulent deed. This scam does not happen at the 
origination of the loan, but rather it may occur without the homeowner’s knowledge, 
decades after the property was originally sold.  
 
The perpetrator identifies a property — typically belonging to an estate or an out-of-state 
owner — that is owned free and clear. He then  creates a fictitious quit claim deed which 
purports to grant all rights and title on the property to the fraudster. The true owner’s 
signature is forged on the deed, and the scammer files it in the real property records. Once 
the deed is filed, he applies for and executes a loan on the property (using a straw borrower). 
Often the value is inflated. He pockets 100 percent of the loan proceeds and disappears. 
 
PHANTOM SECOND LIEN 
In a variation of the phantom sale scheme, a person assumes a homeowner’s identity and 
takes out an additional loan or a second mortgage in the homeowner’s name. If there is not 
enough equity in the home to warrant a second loan, an inflated appraisal is obtained. This 
scheme involves a high level of collusion between a loan officer, an appraiser, and a  
title agent. 
 
Some red flags to help identify identity theft arising during the mortgage lending process 
include:  
• A change of address notice is filed immediately. 
• The appraised value is inflated. 
• There is no prior lien payoff reflected on the HUD-1 settlement statement. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.925 
• Documents are forged or there are discrepancies between the borrower’s document 
signatures.  
• The recorded owner lives abroad or is deceased. 
• Mail or e-mail sent to the borrower is returned as undeliverable even though  
transactions continue. 
 
Builder-Bailout Schemes 
A builder bailout scheme usually occurs when a builder has sold the majority of homes in a 
tract, but is left with a few that are unsold. The builder may be suffering from financial 
difficulties with these lingering homes and may need to sell them quickly in order to pay off 
delinquent debts. To dispose of the remaining properties, the builder may undertake a 
variety of schemes that may include, but are not limited to, the use of hidden seller financing 
or inflated property values.  
 
Some builders also include lavish incentives in the transaction to lure buyers. Such incentives 
usually involve a form of down payment assistance so that a borrower can purchase a home 
without any equity contribution.  
 
Other concessions or incentives that might be offered to potential buyers include managing 
the properties as income-generating investment properties, absorbing any negative cash flow 
for the first 12 to 36 months, guaranteeing mortgage payments for the first 12 to 36 months, 
or other turnkey services and guarantees, even though the properties may remain vacant. 
Builders may also agree to pay the buyer a substantial rebate that is not disclosed to  
the lender.  
 
Getting concessions from the seller is not new and it is not necessarily fraudulent. The 
simple test to determine whether or not the transaction is illegal is to ask: Are these 
concessions disclosed and have they been approved by the lender? 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A LEGITIMATE BUYER 
Some builders engaging in builder bailout schemes find marginal, legitimate buyers whose 
intent is to occupy the property and make the payments. The following is an example of this 
type of scheme: 
• The market value for a builder’s n ew construction home is $200,000. 
• A borrower wants to buy the house but does not have the necessary down payment (10 
percent, or $20,000). 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.926                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The builder offers to sell the house for $220,000 and provide silent seller financing. 
There is a verbal or undisclosed agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after 
closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal for $220,000. This inflation is typically below 
fraud thresholds and just enough to create equity for the borrower. 
• The buyer is steered to a participating broker and title company. 
• The buyer qualifies for a 90-percent LTV ($200 ,000) which actually represents the true 
purchase or sale price. The buyer in these scenarios is often qualified for the loan based 
on material misrepresentations. 
• The buyer closes on a loan for $200,000. 
• The seller gets his original asking price of $200,000 and forgives the seller financing. 
• The lender now has a 100-percent LTV loan. 
• If the property goes into default, the lender has no equity, especially if the market 
continues to decline. 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A STRAW BORROWER 
Other builders seek straw borrowers who are often induced with no-risk investment 
property ownership. Sometimes, the straw borrower is affiliated with the builder. In another 
variation of this scheme, the builder fails to complete construction but obtains a straw 
borrower and an inflated appraisal to originate a loan. 
 
A builder bailout scheme involving a straw borrower may play out as follows: 
• The builder recruits a straw borrower to purchase the property for no money down and 
cash back at closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal that is used as a basis for the loan amount. This 
inflated loan amount will allow the builder to recoup his expenses, pay a fee to the straw, 
and keep the loan current for two to four years. This might appear on the HUD-1 
statement as a disproportionate commission to a real estate agent (30 percent) who, in 
turn, splits it with the builder. 
• The borrower is steered to a participating broker and title company and is qualified 
based on material misrepresentations. 
• The builder offers to manage the property for the borrower with the promise of four 
years with no mortgage payments. 
• The property may remain vacant and the neighborhood may be deteriorating. 
• The loan remains current for a period of time but then goes into delinquency. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.927 
Seller-Assistance Scams 
Seller-assistance schemes are more likely to occur when homes sales have declined and 
sellers are motivated to sell. These schemes are based on inflated appraisals. After the buyer 
obtains an inflated mortgage and purchases a home at the inflated value, the seller gives the 
buyer a rebate. However, the rebate is not disclosed to the lender, and as a result, the lender 
loaned more money than the property used to secure the loan was worth. If the buyer 
defaults, which generally happens, the lender cannot sell the property and recover the loaned 
money.  
 
In addition to the red flags associated with appraisal fraud noted above, the following 
triggers may indicate the existence of seller assistance scams:  
• The seller is desperate to sell the property. 
• The contract appears to be for substantially more than it is worth. 
• The buyer has already selected the appraiser. 
• The buyer insists on using a specific appraiser. 
• The sale price reflects property appreciation in an area where property values are 
declining. 
 
Deceptive Short Sales 
Short sales —which are a viable means to avoid forecl osure—occur when the lender agrees to 
accept a lesser amount than the balance on the loan. Most lenders will entertain the idea of a 
short sale because, for the lender, the foreclosure process is time-consuming and expensive. 
They would rather avoid the costs associated with a foreclosure so that the bank does not 
have to take the property in as a non-performing asset and try to sell it. Borrowers are 
receptive to short sales because they keep foreclosures off their credit reports. However, 
because short sales usually involve properties that that are sold for extremely low prices, they 
also provide fraudsters with opportunities to obtain cheap property to use in the 
advancement of other schemes.  
 
With the recent rise in foreclosures, the inventory for potential short sales will increase, as 
will the opportunities for scammers to obtain cheap property to use in the advancement of 
other schemes. The short sale scenario used by fraudsters allows them to obtain these 
properties inexpensively under false pretense. This is generally accomplished by acquiring an 
under-valued appraisal. 
 
The following are red flags suggesting the existence of a short-sale scheme: 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.928                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The fraud occurs well after the loan origination, in the lender’s workout/servicing 
department. 
• The property is facing foreclosure. 
• The house is staged to obtain an undervalued appraisal. 
• The seller will only sign the sales contract at the day of closing.  
• No official letter or document exists to provide proof that the short sale has  
been approved.  
• There are multiple sales contracts. 
• The property is immediately or concurrently resold at a price that is higher than the 
discounted value. 
• Multiple HUD settlement statements exist that do not mirror the economic basis of  
the transaction. 
• Payments made to the sellers are not disclosed on the HUD settlement statement.  
• After the property is in default or foreclosure, there are changes in ownership, but there 
is neither a new mortgage nor the dismissal of the foreclosure suit. 
• Communications with the short-sale lender are restricted. 
 
Chunking and Shot Gunning 
CHUNKING 
Chunking schemes typically involve an unsophisticated borrower who is recruited to purchase 
a property and who deals exclusively with a recruiter. The recruiter colludes with a mortgage 
broker who gathers the completed loan applications and submits them to multiple lenders 
for approval. The borrower may not even be aware that the recruiter and loan officer have 
submitted the application to multiple lenders. Multiple approvals are provided, all for the 
same property and all without knowing that other loans are being closed and funded 
simultaneously on the same property. 
 
The assistance of an appraiser and a title agent are usually required for a chunking scheme to 
be successful. The recruiter often acts as the borrower’s power of attorney (POA) in 
attending the multiple closings, and often is the one who pockets the loan proceeds over and 
above what is due to the legitimate property seller. The borrower is left with numerous loans 
from various lenders. Further, the lenders are not sufficiently collateralized, as there are 
multiple claims as first lien holder creditors. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.929 
SHOT GUNNING 
Shot-gunning  is a fraud scheme in which a mortgage broker sends multiple home equity line of 
credit (HELOC) loans on the same property to different lenders at the same time. The 
borrower’s good credit, the use of stated in come products offered on many HELOCs, and 
the lender’s determination of the property’s value based on the equity in the home rather 
than on an appraisal all facilitate a fast closing process to ensure that all applications will be 
processed during the same timeframe. Due to the delay between the dates the loans are 
closed and the dates the liens are filed in the courthouse, lenders are not aware of the other 
liens when making their underwriting decisions. Each lender believes it is first in line with  
its lien. 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SHOT-GUNNING OR CHUNKING 
• They may involve one title company that willingly closes each loan.  
• The mortgage broker may have power of attorney for the borrower. 
• They may involve forgery of the borrower’s signature on multiple closing packages, 
unbeknownst to the borrower. 
• There may be multiple lender inquiries on a credit report in a short period of time. 
 
Foreclosure Rescue Scams 
Unfortunately, as more homeowners struggle with potential foreclosure, more will fall prey 
to foreclosure rescue scams. There are some legitimate foreclosure assistance programs in 
which the homeowner is offered short-term financing that pays off the delinquent debt. This 
allows homeowners to stay in their homes as tenants until they can repair their credit and 
obtain long-term financing. However, there are also many fraudulent programs. 
 
Foreclosure rescue scams come in two primary variations: phantom-help scams and bailout, 
or rescue, scams. 
 
PHANTOM-HELP SCAMS 
In a phantom-help scam, the scammer promises to save the homeowner’s credit or get him low 
monthly payments. Instead, the homeowner pays thousands of dollars in fees, and the 
scammer either does nothing or files bankruptcy on behalf of the borrower and absconds 
with the fees. 
 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.930                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BAILOUT OR RESCUE SCAMS 
In a bailout scam  (also called a rescue scam), the homeowner is tricked into conveying the deed 
to his house to the fraudster and ultimately loses both the house and any equity. A bailout 
scam unfolds when a homeowner is solicited with an offer of private, non-qualifying, short-
 term financing that will pay off a delinquent debt and allow the homeowner to stay in his 
home while his credit is repaired. As part of the agreement, which is usually verbal, the 
homeowner is convinced by the “investor” that, to qualify for the short-term financing, the 
homeowner will need to convey title to the property as collateral. Once the fraudster obtains 
the title, he sells the property at fair market value, pays off the debt, and skims the equity 
that was owed to the homeowner.  
 
Some other characteristics of bailout scams include the following: 
• The rescuer relies on a lender’s funds to accomplish the scam.  
• The rescuer recruits other borrowers to purchase the “rescued” properties once he has 
obtained their titles. The borrower may think that he is buying a legitimate investment 
property, or the borrower could be a straw who is paid to purchase turnkey investment 
properties. 
• The borrower is steered to a mortgage broker (or perhaps the rescuer himself is a 
mortgage broker) and qualifies for a mortgage to purchase the property at the fair market 
value (not the amount that is due on the outstanding loan). Unbeknownst to him, the 
borrower is qualified based on misrepresentation. In other cases, the straw is 
compensated for his participation in the scheme. 
• Collusion with a title company is critical. The homeowner is instructed by the rescuer to 
go to a particular title company, or the rescuer convinces the homeowner to execute a 
power of attorney (POA) giving the rescuer authorization to close the transaction, or 
papers are closed at the homeowner’s house  in a kitchen closing. Either way, the 
homeowner is in essence deeding his property to the rescuer’s borrower. Generally, in 
these cases the homeowner does not understand what is being signed, the proceeds pay 
off the defaulted loan, and the equity goes to the rescuer.  
• The straw walks away from the transaction, while the legitimate new owner (borrower) 
discovers that the tenant can’t keep up with  the rent payments and has depleted his cash 
reserves to keep the loan current. The title company fails to pay off the old debt and the 
original lender starts foreclosure procedures immediately. 
 
Many states are aggressively passing legislation to protect homeowners in foreclosure from 
these scams.  
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.931 
Homeowners fall for foreclosure rescue schemes because: 
• The market is saturated with rescue services that are fraught with lies, deception, 
exaggeration, and pressure. 
• The homeowner is often trusting and doesn’t believe that someone would lie to him. 
• The homeowner is kept in the dark about the foreclosure process, perhaps because he is 
told to cease all contact with the lender’s foreclosure department. 
• The homeowner may be desperate to save his home and believes there is little time to 
act. 
• The homeowner may lack financial sophistication. 
 
FORECLOSURE RESCUE SCAM RED FLAGS 
Red flags associated with foreclosure rescue scams include:  
• These scams often prey on elderly or long-time residents with large amounts of equity. 
• The borrower (either a straw or legitimate borrower) receives a remodeling allowance 
from a recruiter outside of closing. 
• The underwriter has noted on the closing instructions that a copy of the purchase 
contract must be provided at closing, so, unbeknownst to him, the seller signs a purchase 
contract at closing or the seller’s name is forged in order to meet that condition. 
• The seller on the transaction is delinquent or in foreclosure. 
• The HUD-1 settlement statement indicates that most of the seller’s equity outside of the 
mortgage payoff is going to a third-party. 
 
 



:


mortgag fraud
fraud ha alwai been a constant presenc in the mortgag industri and it appear to be on
the rise there ar a number of like factor contribut to thi appar increas includ
a rapid declin in the rate of home price appreci an increas in unemploy and an
increas in aggress lend practic all of these factor either reduc incent or
made it more difficult for borrow to meet their mortgag oblig which ultim led
to an increas in loan default
financi institut fraud financi transact
1920 2011 fraud examin manual
the recent mortgag crisi ha led to an increas in fraud for sever reason on reason is
that the declin hous market affect mani in the mortgag industri especi those
paid by commiss dure such declin individu ar more like to commit fraudul
act to maintain their current standard of live in addit the declin market provid
an ideal environ for perpetr to emploi numer scheme that fit perfectli with
down market ie an increas number of foreclosur declin hous price and
decreas demand such down market characterist place pressur on home builder
seller and lender which fraud perpetr will attempt to exploit
the growth of subprim lend pave the wai for fraud
subprim lend refer to a varieti of credit instrument lender provid to peopl who do not
qualifi for the best market interest rate usual due to weaken credit histori there ar
mani type of subprim mortgag includ
interestonli mortgag
pickapay loan
228 adjustabler mortgag
optionadjustabler mortgag
over the past decad the subprim market grew dramat flourish as the vehicl by
which lender fund loan to borrow who would gener not qualifi for tradit
loan accord to industri newslett insid mortgag financ wall street gener 18
trillion in subprim loan from 2000 to 2007 in 2006 analyst estim that 25 percent of
all mortgag origin in the unit state were subprim and by 2007 14 percent of all
outstand mortgag indebted in the unit state wa subprim in natur by 2010
with the passag of the doddfrank wall street reform and consum protect act and
the announc of well fargo to discontinu it subprim lend divis the
percentag of subprim mortgag in the unit state is expect to declin significantli
as well fargo wa the largest lender in the unit state it is possibl that the percentag
of subprim mortgag will fall to nearli 0
correspond with the growth of the subprim lend industri wa a substanti increas
in the number of mortgag fraud case the rise in fraudul activ is the result of sever
factor includ the growth of autom loan process and the growth of mortgag
broker origin loan these condit coupl with veri lucr possibl creat an
industri that that is veri attract to untrustworthi individu or in other word fraudster
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1921
autom loan process
the growth of autom loan process contribut to the increas in mortgag fraud
becaus the natur of such transact is faceless the us of the internet to receiv and
process loan applic ha grown and in such case the lender never meet the
borrow thi process creat an environ suscept to fraudul activ
mortgag broker origin loan
the increas number of mortgag broker origin loan ha also plai a part in the
rise number of subprim fraud case histor mortgag loan were origin by the
loan offic at the bank mortgag lender howev start reli on thirdparti origin
tpo to broker their loan product broker could be paid a commiss rather than a
salari an option that work well for minim capit mortgag lender
as a result the industri ha seen the evolut of mortgag broker
as market for mortgag becam more competit bank with their own retail loan
offic also start emploi these thirdparti wholesal origin todai mortgag
broker ar the largest distributor of mortgag product for mortgag lender and bank it
is estim that twothird of all origin ar from wholesal tpo mortgag broker
rather than retail loan offic
mortgag brokerorigin loan ar vulner to fraud primarili becaus until recent
there were no nation standard for the licens and oversight of mortgag broker
howev on juli 30 2008 presid bush sign into law the secur and fair enforc
for mortgag licens act of 2008 safe act which is part of the hous and
econom recoveri act of 2008 design to provid uniform licens standard
nationwid the safe act requir all state to have in place a system of licensur meet
minimum standard for mortgag loan origin ie anyon who take a residenti
mortgag loan applic or who offer or negoti term of a residenti mortgag loan
applic for compens or gain begin juli 31 2009
mortgag fraud scheme
straw buyer
straw buyer ar loan applic who mortgag fraud perpetr us to obtain home loan
but who have no intent to occupi the properti thei ar bui or to pai back the loan
perpetr often us straw buyer to hide the ident of the true borrow that did not
qualifi for the mortgag
financi institut fraud financi transact
1922 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow red flag mai occur in a straw borrow transact
at close discov that the check is from someon other than the parti to the
contract
borrow resid in differ state than purchas properti which is describ as a
primari resid
quit claim deed is us veri close to loan close
invest properti repres as owneroccupi
a thirdparti sign on the borrow behalf
name ad to purchas contract
parti to the transact ar relat
there is no sale agent involv
there ar indic that the properti seller default
exist of a high fico score
gift us for down payment despit the presenc of good asset
equiti skim
equiti skim is a scheme wherebi an individu entiti or group of individu purchas
on or sever singlefamili home typic the financ is for a percentag of the
purchas price eg 8090 percent and the owner invest the balanc of the purchas price
as equiti the home isar then rent
the owner collect the rent from the tenant but fail to make the mortgag payment
when owner have withheld mortgag payment that equal the amount of the invest
equiti thei can then either resum payment or allow the mortgag to be foreclos
although the mortgag might eventu be foreclos the owner have recoup their
origin invest plu ani rental payment not appli to the mortgag in addit the
owner receiv state and feder tax benefit dure the hold period thi scheme is
most success with nonrecours mortgag
although equiti skim eventu collaps and the purchas risk be su for
defici if the loan were recours the scheme continu to be practic it ha becom
an increas problem as mani residenti home ar auction and bulk purchas ar
encourag
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1923
properti flip
properti flip ha been around for a long time it is well known in the real estat industri
as a wai to make a profit by bui low and sell high and it is not necessarili illeg
flip is perfectli fine when all represent of the properti condit and valu ar
true and accur howev flip can also be a fraud for profit scheme that mai lead to
substanti loss and other devast consequ
properti flip is the process by which an investor purchas a home and then resel it at a
higher price shortli thereaft for exampl an investor bui a hous in need of work for
250000 in juli renov the kitchen and the bathroom and landscap the yard at a cost
of 50000 and then resel the hous two month later the time it take to make the
renov for a price that is reflect of the market for a hous in it updat condit
thi is a legitim busi transact and there ar numer individu and group in
the real estat market who make an honest live flip properti
howev properti flip becom illeg and fraudul when a home is purchas and
resold within a short period of time at an artifici inflat valu the kei in determin
whether a flip is illeg is to watch for a signific increas in valu over a short period of
time that cannot be justifi a properti that sell twice in the same dai at an increas of
100000 is hard to justifi
an illeg properti flip is usual depend on an apprais report that ha artifici inflat
the valu of the properti the borrow mai review the apprais without inspect the
properti complet unawar of the market valu in that properti neighborhood the
borrow mai also be a straw borrow or an accomplic
nomine or strawman loan
loan made in the name of a straw borrow or agent have no substanc while the
ident of the real borrow is undisclos to the lender
mortgag pull
for the purpos of disguis loan exceed a bank legal limit loan ar made to a
partnership member who by prearrang then invest in a singl riski ventur in a total
amount exceed the lend limit in realiti the singl borrow is the partnership and the
collater is the partnership properti mort gagepul might involv fraudul loan
applic and payoff to the individu partner for particip
financi institut fraud financi transact
1924 2011 fraud examin manual
ident theft
an ident theft scheme is defin as the assumpt of someon els ident for fraudul
purpos ident theft is recogn as on of the fastest grow crime in the us recent
ident theft report from credit report compani corpor databas and commerci
data broker indic a substanti rise in case of ident theft in conjunct with mortgag
loan fraud
two exampl of ident theft scheme involv mortgag fraud includ the fraudul
acquisit of a person home and the fraudul origin of a loan on a properti
belong to anoth person
phantom sale
phantom sale scam ar particularli harm becaus thei involv the fraudul acquisit of
a homeown properti by file a fraudul deed thi scam doe not happen at the
origin of the loan but rather it mai occur without the homeown knowledg
decad after the properti wa origin sold
the perpetr identifi a properti typic belong to an estat or an outofst
owner that is own free and clear he then creat a fictiti quit claim deed which
purport to grant all right and titl on the properti to the fraudster the true owner
signatur is forg on the deed and the scammer file it in the real properti record onc
the deed is file he appli for and execut a loan on the properti us a straw borrow
often the valu is inflat he pocket 100 percent of the loan proce and disappear
phantom second lien
in a variat of the phantom sale scheme a person assum a homeown ident and
take out an addit loan or a second mortgag in the homeown name if there is not
enough equiti in the home to warrant a second loan an inflat apprais is obtain thi
scheme involv a high level of collus between a loan offic an apprais and a
titl agent
some red flag to help identifi ident theft aris dure the mortgag lend process
includ
a chang of address notic is file immedi
the apprais valu is inflat
there is no prior lien payoff reflect on the hud1 settlement statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1925
document ar forg or there ar discrep between the borrow document
signatur
the record owner live abroad or is deceas
mail or email sent to the borrow is return as undeliver even though
transact continu
builderbailout scheme
a builder bailout scheme usual occur when a builder ha sold the major of home in a
tract but is left with a few that ar unsold the builder mai be suffer from financi
difficulti with these linger home and mai need to sell them quickli in order to pai off
delinqu debt to dispos of the remain properti the builder mai undertak a
varieti of scheme that mai includ but ar not limit to the us of hidden seller financ
or inflat properti valu
some builder also includ lavish incent in the transact to lure buyer such incent
usual involv a form of down payment assist so that a borrow can purchas a home
without ani equiti contribut
other concess or incent that might be offer to potenti buyer includ manag
the properti as incomegener invest properti absorb ani neg cash flow
for the first 12 to 36 month guarante mortgag payment for the first 12 to 36 month
or other turnkei servic and guarante even though the properti mai remain vacant
builder mai also agre to pai the buyer a substanti rebat that is not disclos to
the lender
get concess from the seller is not new and it is not necessarili fraudul the
simpl test to determin whether or not the transact is illeg is to ask ar these
concess disclos and have thei been approv by the lender
a scheme involv a legitim buyer
some builder engag in builder bailout scheme find margin legitim buyer whose
intent is to occupi the properti and make the payment the follow is an exampl of thi
type of scheme
the market valu for a builder n ew construct home is 200000
a borrow want to bui the hous but doe not have the necessari down payment 10
percent or 20000
financi institut fraud financi transact
1926 2011 fraud examin manual
the builder offer to sell the hous for 220000 and provid silent seller financ
there is a verbal or undisclos agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after
close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais for 220000 thi inflat is typic below
fraud threshold and just enough to creat equiti for the borrow
the buyer is steer to a particip broker and titl compani
the buyer qualifi for a 90percent ltv 200 000 which actual repres the true
purchas or sale price the buyer in these scenario is often qualifi for the loan base
on materi misrepresent
the buyer close on a loan for 200000
the seller get hi origin ask price of 200000 and forgiv the seller financ
the lender now ha a 100percent ltv loan
if the properti goe into default the lender ha no equiti especi if the market
continu to declin
a scheme involv a straw borrow
other builder seek straw borrow who ar often induc with norisk invest
properti ownership sometim the straw borrow is affili with the builder in anoth
variat of thi scheme the builder fail to complet construct but obtain a straw
borrow and an inflat apprais to origin a loan
a builder bailout scheme involv a straw borrow mai plai out as follow
the builder recruit a straw borrow to purchas the properti for no monei down and
cash back at close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais that is us as a basi for the loan amount thi
inflat loan amount will allow the builder to recoup hi expens pai a fee to the straw
and keep the loan current for two to four year thi might appear on the hud1
statement as a disproportion commiss to a real estat agent 30 percent who in
turn split it with the builder
the borrow is steer to a particip broker and titl compani and is qualifi
base on materi misrepresent
the builder offer to manag the properti for the borrow with the promis of four
year with no mortgag payment
the properti mai remain vacant and the neighborhood mai be deterior
the loan remain current for a period of time but then goe into delinqu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1927
sellerassist scam
sellerassist scheme ar more like to occur when home sale have declin and
seller ar motiv to sell these scheme ar base on inflat apprais after the buyer
obtain an inflat mortgag and purchas a home at the inflat valu the seller give the
buyer a rebat howev the rebat is not disclos to the lender and as a result the lender
loan more monei than the properti us to secur the loan wa worth if the buyer
default which gener happen the lender cannot sell the properti and recov the loan
monei
in addit to the red flag associ with apprais fraud note abov the follow
trigger mai indic the exist of seller assist scam
the seller is desper to sell the properti
the contract appear to be for substanti more than it is worth
the buyer ha alreadi select the apprais
the buyer insist on us a specif apprais
the sale price reflect properti appreci in an area where properti valu ar
declin
decept short sale
short sale which ar a viabl mean to avoid forecl osureoccur when the lender agre to
accept a lesser amount than the balanc on the loan most lender will entertain the idea of a
short sale becaus for the lender the foreclosur process is timeconsum and expens
thei would rather avoid the cost associ with a foreclosur so that the bank doe not
have to take the properti in as a nonperform asset and try to sell it borrow ar
recept to short sale becaus thei keep foreclosur off their credit report howev
becaus short sale usual involv properti that that ar sold for extrem low price thei
also provid fraudster with opportun to obtain cheap properti to us in the
advanc of other scheme
with the recent rise in foreclosur the inventori for potenti short sale will increas as
will the opportun for scammer to obtain cheap properti to us in the advanc of
other scheme the short sale scenario us by fraudster allow them to obtain these
properti inexpens under fals pretens thi is gener accomplish by acquir an
undervalu apprais
the follow ar red flag suggest the exist of a shortsal scheme
financi institut fraud financi transact
1928 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud occur well after the loan origin in the lender workoutserv
depart
the properti is face foreclosur
the hous is stage to obtain an undervalu apprais
the seller will onli sign the sale contract at the dai of close
no offici letter or document exist to provid proof that the short sale ha
been approv
there ar multipl sale contract
the properti is immedi or concurr resold at a price that is higher than the
discount valu
multipl hud settlement statement exist that do not mirror the econom basi of
the transact
payment made to the seller ar not disclos on the hud settlement statement
after the properti is in default or foreclosur there ar chang in ownership but there
is neither a new mortgag nor the dismiss of the foreclosur suit
commun with the shortsal lender ar restrict
chunk and shot gun
chunk
chunk scheme typic involv an unsophist borrow who is recruit to purchas
a properti and who deal exclus with a recruit the recruit collud with a mortgag
broker who gather the complet loan applic and submit them to multipl lender
for approv the borrow mai not even be awar that the recruit and loan offic have
submit the applic to multipl lender multipl approv ar provid all for the
same properti and all without know that other loan ar be close and fund
simultan on the same properti
the assist of an apprais and a titl agent ar usual requir for a chunk scheme to
be success the recruit often act as the borrow power of attornei poa in
attend the multipl close and often is the on who pocket the loan proce over and
abov what is due to the legitim properti seller the borrow is left with numer loan
from variou lender further the lender ar not suffici collater as there ar
multipl claim as first lien holder creditor
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1929
shot gun
shotgun is a fraud scheme in which a mortgag broker send multipl home equiti line of
credit heloc loan on the same properti to differ lender at the same time the
borrow good credit the us of state in come product offer on mani heloc and
the lender determin of the properti valu base on the equiti in the home rather
than on an apprais all facilit a fast close process to ensur that all applic will be
process dure the same timefram due to the delai between the date the loan ar
close and the date the lien ar file in the courthous lender ar not awar of the other
lien when make their underwrit decis each lender believ it is first in line with
it lien
characterist of shotgun or chunk
thei mai involv on titl compani that willingli close each loan
the mortgag broker mai have power of attornei for the borrow
thei mai involv forgeri of the borrow signatur on multipl close packag
unbeknownst to the borrow
there mai be multipl lender inquiri on a credit report in a short period of time
foreclosur rescu scam
unfortun as more homeown struggl with potenti foreclosur more will fall prei
to foreclosur rescu scam there ar some legitim foreclosur assist program in
which the homeown is offer shortterm financ that pai off the delinqu debt thi
allow homeown to stai in their home as tenant until thei can repair their credit and
obtain longterm financ howev there ar also mani fraudul program
foreclosur rescu scam come in two primari variat phantomhelp scam and bailout
or rescu scam
phantomhelp scam
in a phantomhelp scam the scammer promis to save the homeown credit or get him low
monthli payment instead the homeown pai thousand of dollar in fee and the
scammer either doe noth or file bankruptci on behalf of the borrow and abscond
with the fee
financi institut fraud financi transact
1930 2011 fraud examin manual
bailout or rescu scam
in a bailout scam also call a rescu scam the homeown is trick into convei the deed
to hi hous to the fraudster and ultim lose both the hous and ani equiti a bailout
scam unfold when a homeown is solicit with an offer of privat nonqualifi short
term financ that will pai off a delinqu debt and allow the homeown to stai in hi
home while hi credit is repair as part of the agreement which is usual verbal the
homeown is convinc by the investor that to qualifi for the shortterm financ the
homeown will need to convei titl to the properti as collater onc the fraudster obtain
the titl he sell the properti at fair market valu pai off the debt and skim the equiti
that wa ow to the homeown
some other characterist of bailout scam includ the follow
the rescuer reli on a lender fund to accomplish the scam
the rescuer recruit other borrow to purchas the rescu properti onc he ha
obtain their titl the borrow mai think that he is bui a legitim invest
properti or the borrow could be a straw who is paid to purchas turnkei invest
properti
the borrow is steer to a mortgag broker or perhap the rescuer himself is a
mortgag broker and qualifi for a mortgag to purchas the properti at the fair market
valu not the amount that is due on the outstand loan unbeknownst to him the
borrow is qualifi base on misrepresent in other case the straw is
compens for hi particip in the scheme
collus with a titl compani is critic the homeown is instruct by the rescuer to
go to a particular titl compani or the rescuer convinc the homeown to execut a
power of attornei poa give the rescuer author to close the transact or
paper ar close at the homeown hous in a kitchen close either wai the
homeown is in essenc deed hi properti to the rescuer borrow gener in
these case the homeown doe not understand what is be sign the proce pai
off the default loan and the equiti goe to the rescuer
the straw walk awai from the transact while the legitim new owner borrow
discov that the tenant cant keep up with the rent payment and ha deplet hi cash
reserv to keep the loan current the titl compani fail to pai off the old debt and the
origin lender start foreclosur procedur immedi
mani state ar aggress pass legisl to protect homeown in foreclosur from
these scam
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1931
homeown fall for foreclosur rescu scheme becaus
the market is satur with rescu servic that ar fraught with li decept
exagger and pressur
the homeown is often trust and doesnt believ that someon would lie to him
the homeown is kept in the dark about the foreclosur process perhap becaus he is
told to ceas all contact with the lender foreclosur depart
the homeown mai be desper to save hi home and believ there is littl time to
act
the homeown mai lack financi sophist
foreclosur rescu scam red flag
red flag associ with foreclosur rescu scam includ
these scam often prei on elderli or longtim resid with larg amount of equiti
the borrow either a straw or legitim borrow receiv a remodel allow
from a recruit outsid of close
the underwrit ha note on the close instruct that a copi of the purchas
contract must be provid at close so unbeknownst to him the seller sign a purchas
contract at close or the seller name is forg in order to meet that condit
the seller on the transact is delinqu or in foreclosur
the hud1 settlement statement indic that most of the seller equiti outsid of the
mortgag payoff is go to a thirdparti
