2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Identity Theft


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Identity Theft 
An identity theft scheme is defined as the assumption of someone else’s identity for fraudulent 
purposes. Identity theft is recognized as one of the fastest growing crimes in the U.S. Recent 
identity theft reports from credit reporting companies, corporate databases, and commercial 
data brokers indicate a substantial rise in cases of identity theft in conjunction with mortgage 
loan fraud.  
 
Two examples of identity theft schemes involving mortgage fraud include the fraudulent 
acquisition of a person’s home and the fraudulent origination of a loan on a property 
belonging to another person. 
 
PHANTOM SALE 
Phantom sale  scams are particularly harmful because they involve the fraudulent acquisition of 
a homeowner’s property by filing a fraudulent deed. This scam does not happen at the 
origination of the loan, but rather it may occur without the homeowner’s knowledge, 
decades after the property was originally sold.  
 
The perpetrator identifies a property — typically belonging to an estate or an out-of-state 
owner — that is owned free and clear. He then  creates a fictitious quit claim deed which 
purports to grant all rights and title on the property to the fraudster. The true owner’s 
signature is forged on the deed, and the scammer files it in the real property records. Once 
the deed is filed, he applies for and executes a loan on the property (using a straw borrower). 
Often the value is inflated. He pockets 100 percent of the loan proceeds and disappears. 
 
PHANTOM SECOND LIEN 
In a variation of the phantom sale scheme, a person assumes a homeowner’s identity and 
takes out an additional loan or a second mortgage in the homeowner’s name. If there is not 
enough equity in the home to warrant a second loan, an inflated appraisal is obtained. This 
scheme involves a high level of collusion between a loan officer, an appraiser, and a  
title agent. 
 
Some red flags to help identify identity theft arising during the mortgage lending process 
include:  
• A change of address notice is filed immediately. 
• The appraised value is inflated. 
• There is no prior lien payoff reflected on the HUD-1 settlement statement. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.925 
• Documents are forged or there are discrepancies between the borrower’s document 
signatures.  
• The recorded owner lives abroad or is deceased. 
• Mail or e-mail sent to the borrower is returned as undeliverable even though  
transactions continue. 
 



:


ident theft
an ident theft scheme is defin as the assumpt of someon els ident for fraudul
purpos ident theft is recogn as on of the fastest grow crime in the us recent
ident theft report from credit report compani corpor databas and commerci
data broker indic a substanti rise in case of ident theft in conjunct with mortgag
loan fraud
two exampl of ident theft scheme involv mortgag fraud includ the fraudul
acquisit of a person home and the fraudul origin of a loan on a properti
belong to anoth person
phantom sale
phantom sale scam ar particularli harm becaus thei involv the fraudul acquisit of
a homeown properti by file a fraudul deed thi scam doe not happen at the
origin of the loan but rather it mai occur without the homeown knowledg
decad after the properti wa origin sold
the perpetr identifi a properti typic belong to an estat or an outofst
owner that is own free and clear he then creat a fictiti quit claim deed which
purport to grant all right and titl on the properti to the fraudster the true owner
signatur is forg on the deed and the scammer file it in the real properti record onc
the deed is file he appli for and execut a loan on the properti us a straw borrow
often the valu is inflat he pocket 100 percent of the loan proce and disappear
phantom second lien
in a variat of the phantom sale scheme a person assum a homeown ident and
take out an addit loan or a second mortgag in the homeown name if there is not
enough equiti in the home to warrant a second loan an inflat apprais is obtain thi
scheme involv a high level of collus between a loan offic an apprais and a
titl agent
some red flag to help identifi ident theft aris dure the mortgag lend process
includ
a chang of address notic is file immedi
the apprais valu is inflat
there is no prior lien payoff reflect on the hud1 settlement statement
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1925
document ar forg or there ar discrep between the borrow document
signatur
the record owner live abroad or is deceas
mail or email sent to the borrow is return as undeliver even though
transact continu
