2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Builder-Bailout Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Builder-Bailout Schemes 
A builder bailout scheme usually occurs when a builder has sold the majority of homes in a 
tract, but is left with a few that are unsold. The builder may be suffering from financial 
difficulties with these lingering homes and may need to sell them quickly in order to pay off 
delinquent debts. To dispose of the remaining properties, the builder may undertake a 
variety of schemes that may include, but are not limited to, the use of hidden seller financing 
or inflated property values.  
 
Some builders also include lavish incentives in the transaction to lure buyers. Such incentives 
usually involve a form of down payment assistance so that a borrower can purchase a home 
without any equity contribution.  
 
Other concessions or incentives that might be offered to potential buyers include managing 
the properties as income-generating investment properties, absorbing any negative cash flow 
for the first 12 to 36 months, guaranteeing mortgage payments for the first 12 to 36 months, 
or other turnkey services and guarantees, even though the properties may remain vacant. 
Builders may also agree to pay the buyer a substantial rebate that is not disclosed to  
the lender.  
 
Getting concessions from the seller is not new and it is not necessarily fraudulent. The 
simple test to determine whether or not the transaction is illegal is to ask: Are these 
concessions disclosed and have they been approved by the lender? 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A LEGITIMATE BUYER 
Some builders engaging in builder bailout schemes find marginal, legitimate buyers whose 
intent is to occupy the property and make the payments. The following is an example of this 
type of scheme: 
• The market value for a builder’s n ew construction home is $200,000. 
• A borrower wants to buy the house but does not have the necessary down payment (10 
percent, or $20,000). 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.926                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The builder offers to sell the house for $220,000 and provide silent seller financing. 
There is a verbal or undisclosed agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after 
closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal for $220,000. This inflation is typically below 
fraud thresholds and just enough to create equity for the borrower. 
• The buyer is steered to a participating broker and title company. 
• The buyer qualifies for a 90-percent LTV ($200 ,000) which actually represents the true 
purchase or sale price. The buyer in these scenarios is often qualified for the loan based 
on material misrepresentations. 
• The buyer closes on a loan for $200,000. 
• The seller gets his original asking price of $200,000 and forgives the seller financing. 
• The lender now has a 100-percent LTV loan. 
• If the property goes into default, the lender has no equity, especially if the market 
continues to decline. 
 
A SCHEME INVOLVING A STRAW BORROWER 
Other builders seek straw borrowers who are often induced with no-risk investment 
property ownership. Sometimes, the straw borrower is affiliated with the builder. In another 
variation of this scheme, the builder fails to complete construction but obtains a straw 
borrower and an inflated appraisal to originate a loan. 
 
A builder bailout scheme involving a straw borrower may play out as follows: 
• The builder recruits a straw borrower to purchase the property for no money down and 
cash back at closing. 
• The builder obtains an inflated appraisal that is used as a basis for the loan amount. This 
inflated loan amount will allow the builder to recoup his expenses, pay a fee to the straw, 
and keep the loan current for two to four years. This might appear on the HUD-1 
statement as a disproportionate commission to a real estate agent (30 percent) who, in 
turn, splits it with the builder. 
• The borrower is steered to a participating broker and title company and is qualified 
based on material misrepresentations. 
• The builder offers to manage the property for the borrower with the promise of four 
years with no mortgage payments. 
• The property may remain vacant and the neighborhood may be deteriorating. 
• The loan remains current for a period of time but then goes into delinquency. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.927 



:


builderbailout scheme
a builder bailout scheme usual occur when a builder ha sold the major of home in a
tract but is left with a few that ar unsold the builder mai be suffer from financi
difficulti with these linger home and mai need to sell them quickli in order to pai off
delinqu debt to dispos of the remain properti the builder mai undertak a
varieti of scheme that mai includ but ar not limit to the us of hidden seller financ
or inflat properti valu
some builder also includ lavish incent in the transact to lure buyer such incent
usual involv a form of down payment assist so that a borrow can purchas a home
without ani equiti contribut
other concess or incent that might be offer to potenti buyer includ manag
the properti as incomegener invest properti absorb ani neg cash flow
for the first 12 to 36 month guarante mortgag payment for the first 12 to 36 month
or other turnkei servic and guarante even though the properti mai remain vacant
builder mai also agre to pai the buyer a substanti rebat that is not disclos to
the lender
get concess from the seller is not new and it is not necessarili fraudul the
simpl test to determin whether or not the transact is illeg is to ask ar these
concess disclos and have thei been approv by the lender
a scheme involv a legitim buyer
some builder engag in builder bailout scheme find margin legitim buyer whose
intent is to occupi the properti and make the payment the follow is an exampl of thi
type of scheme
the market valu for a builder n ew construct home is 200000
a borrow want to bui the hous but doe not have the necessari down payment 10
percent or 20000
financi institut fraud financi transact
1926 2011 fraud examin manual
the builder offer to sell the hous for 220000 and provid silent seller financ
there is a verbal or undisclos agreement that the silent second will be forgiven after
close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais for 220000 thi inflat is typic below
fraud threshold and just enough to creat equiti for the borrow
the buyer is steer to a particip broker and titl compani
the buyer qualifi for a 90percent ltv 200 000 which actual repres the true
purchas or sale price the buyer in these scenario is often qualifi for the loan base
on materi misrepresent
the buyer close on a loan for 200000
the seller get hi origin ask price of 200000 and forgiv the seller financ
the lender now ha a 100percent ltv loan
if the properti goe into default the lender ha no equiti especi if the market
continu to declin
a scheme involv a straw borrow
other builder seek straw borrow who ar often induc with norisk invest
properti ownership sometim the straw borrow is affili with the builder in anoth
variat of thi scheme the builder fail to complet construct but obtain a straw
borrow and an inflat apprais to origin a loan
a builder bailout scheme involv a straw borrow mai plai out as follow
the builder recruit a straw borrow to purchas the properti for no monei down and
cash back at close
the builder obtain an inflat apprais that is us as a basi for the loan amount thi
inflat loan amount will allow the builder to recoup hi expens pai a fee to the straw
and keep the loan current for two to four year thi might appear on the hud1
statement as a disproportion commiss to a real estat agent 30 percent who in
turn split it with the builder
the borrow is steer to a particip broker and titl compani and is qualifi
base on materi misrepresent
the builder offer to manag the properti for the borrow with the promis of four
year with no mortgag payment
the properti mai remain vacant and the neighborhood mai be deterior
the loan remain current for a period of time but then goe into delinqu
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1927
