2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Mortgage Fraud/Chunking and Shot Gunning


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Chunking and Shot Gunning 
CHUNKING 
Chunking schemes typically involve an unsophisticated borrower who is recruited to purchase 
a property and who deals exclusively with a recruiter. The recruiter colludes with a mortgage 
broker who gathers the completed loan applications and submits them to multiple lenders 
for approval. The borrower may not even be aware that the recruiter and loan officer have 
submitted the application to multiple lenders. Multiple approvals are provided, all for the 
same property and all without knowing that other loans are being closed and funded 
simultaneously on the same property. 
 
The assistance of an appraiser and a title agent are usually required for a chunking scheme to 
be successful. The recruiter often acts as the borrower’s power of attorney (POA) in 
attending the multiple closings, and often is the one who pockets the loan proceeds over and 
above what is due to the legitimate property seller. The borrower is left with numerous loans 
from various lenders. Further, the lenders are not sufficiently collateralized, as there are 
multiple claims as first lien holder creditors. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.929 
SHOT GUNNING 
Shot-gunning  is a fraud scheme in which a mortgage broker sends multiple home equity line of 
credit (HELOC) loans on the same property to different lenders at the same time. The 
borrower’s good credit, the use of stated in come products offered on many HELOCs, and 
the lender’s determination of the property’s value based on the equity in the home rather 
than on an appraisal all facilitate a fast closing process to ensure that all applications will be 
processed during the same timeframe. Due to the delay between the dates the loans are 
closed and the dates the liens are filed in the courthouse, lenders are not aware of the other 
liens when making their underwriting decisions. Each lender believes it is first in line with  
its lien. 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SHOT-GUNNING OR CHUNKING 
• They may involve one title company that willingly closes each loan.  
• The mortgage broker may have power of attorney for the borrower. 
• They may involve forgery of the borrower’s signature on multiple closing packages, 
unbeknownst to the borrower. 
• There may be multiple lender inquiries on a credit report in a short period of time. 
 



:


chunk and shot gun
chunk
chunk scheme typic involv an unsophist borrow who is recruit to purchas
a properti and who deal exclus with a recruit the recruit collud with a mortgag
broker who gather the complet loan applic and submit them to multipl lender
for approv the borrow mai not even be awar that the recruit and loan offic have
submit the applic to multipl lender multipl approv ar provid all for the
same properti and all without know that other loan ar be close and fund
simultan on the same properti
the assist of an apprais and a titl agent ar usual requir for a chunk scheme to
be success the recruit often act as the borrow power of attornei poa in
attend the multipl close and often is the on who pocket the loan proce over and
abov what is due to the legitim properti seller the borrow is left with numer loan
from variou lender further the lender ar not suffici collater as there ar
multipl claim as first lien holder creditor
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1929
shot gun
shotgun is a fraud scheme in which a mortgag broker send multipl home equiti line of
credit heloc loan on the same properti to differ lender at the same time the
borrow good credit the us of state in come product offer on mani heloc and
the lender determin of the properti valu base on the equiti in the home rather
than on an apprais all facilit a fast close process to ensur that all applic will be
process dure the same timefram due to the delai between the date the loan ar
close and the date the lien ar file in the courthous lender ar not awar of the other
lien when make their underwrit decis each lender believ it is first in line with
it lien
characterist of shotgun or chunk
thei mai involv on titl compani that willingli close each loan
the mortgag broker mai have power of attornei for the borrow
thei mai involv forgeri of the borrow signatur on multipl close packag
unbeknownst to the borrow
there mai be multipl lender inquiri on a credit report in a short period of time
