2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/New Account Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


New Account Fraud Schemes 
Fraud is much more likely to occur in new accounts than in established accounts. Special 
efforts must be taken to properly identify the potential new customer. Screening criteria 
should be established and enforced by everyone handling new accounts. Prompt, decisive 
action is necessary to manage and/or close apparent problem accounts. 
 
False Identification 
New account criminals are actors. They use false identification to open new accounts and 
steal money before funds are collected by the bank. False identification is easily purchased. 
 
Business Accounts Using Stolen Checks 
Some bank customers defraud business institutions by opening a new business account using 
checks stolen from another business. The fraudsters then withdraw the funds and close the 
account. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.932                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Personal Accounts Using Fraudulent Checks 
A similar scheme is to open a new personal account with two checks drawn by other people. 
The checks are either forged or stolen. The fraudster then deposits one, and takes cash for 
the other. Shortly thereafter, the fraudster writes checks to overdraw the deposited amount. 
 
Prevention 
A relationship with a financial institution should never be established until the identity of a 
potential customer is satisfactorily established. If the identity cannot be established, the 
relationship should not be established.   
 
Personal Accounts 
No account should be opened without satisfactory identification, such as: 
• A locally issued driver’s license with a photograph  
• A passport or alien registration card, together with: 
? A college photo identification card 
? A major credit card (verify the current status) 
? An employer identification card 
? An out-of-area driver’s license 
? A current utility bill from the customer’s place of residence (e.g., gas, electricity, 
telephone) 
 
Consider the customer’s residence or place of busi ness. If it is not in the area served by the 
bank or branch, ask why the customer is opening an account at that location. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s residence or place of employment, thanking the 
customer for opening the account. Disconnected phone service or no record of employment 
warrant further investigation.  
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should  
be questioned. 
 
For large accounts, ask the customer for a prior bank reference and write a letter to the bank 
asking about the customer. 
 
Check with service bureaus for indications that the customer has been involved in 
questionable activities such as kiting incidents and NSF situations. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.933 
The identity of a customer can be established through an existing relationship with the 
institution, such as some type of loan or other account relationship. 
  
Business Accounts 
Business principals should provide evidence of legal status (e.g., sole proprietorship, 
partnership, or incorporation or association) when opening a business account. 
 
Check the name of a commercial enterprise with a reporting agency and check prior bank 
references. 
 
Follow up with calls to the customer’s business thanking the customer for opening the 
account. Disconnected phone service warrants further investigation. 
 
When circumstances allow, perform a visual check of the business to verify the actual 
existence of the business and that the business has the capability of providing the services 
described. 
 
Consider the source of funds used to open the account. Large cash deposits should be 
questioned. 
 
Since tellers are oftentimes the front-line defense in preventing check fraud, it is important 
that they receive training that will allow them to identify fraudulent checks.  
 
Tellers should: 
• Be aware of magnetic routing numbers. 
• Look for checks with numbers lower than 200. 
• Be aware of the date that the account was opened. 
• Have easy access to the signature card. 
• Look for perforated edges on the checks. 
• Be aware of what is acceptable identification. 
• Recognize forged/altered identification. 
• Recognize forged negotiable instruments. 
• Be familiar with patterns of behavior related to potential culprits:  
? Overly polite 
? Nervous 
? Aggressive and hurried 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.934                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Detection 
Some of the more common red flags of potential new account schemes are: 
• Customer residence outside the bank’s trade area. 
• Dress and/or actions inconsistent or inappropriate for the customer’s stated age, 
occupation, or income level. 
• New account requesting immediate cash withdrawal upon deposit. 
• Request for large quantity of temporary checks. 
• No order for printed checks. 
 
 



:


new account fraud scheme
fraud is much more like to occur in new account than in establish account special
effort must be taken to properli identifi the potenti new custom screen criteria
should be establish and enforc by everyon handl new account prompt decis
action is necessari to manag andor close appar problem account
fals identif
new account crimin ar actor thei us fals identif to open new account and
steal monei befor fund ar collect by the bank fals identif is easili purchas
busi account us stolen check
some bank custom defraud busi institut by open a new busi account us
check stolen from anoth busi the fraudster then withdraw the fund and close the
account
financi institut fraud financi transact
1932 2011 fraud examin manual
person account us fraudul check
a similar scheme is to open a new person account with two check drawn by other peopl
the check ar either forg or stolen the fraudster then deposit on and take cash for
the other shortli thereaft the fraudster write check to overdraw the deposit amount
prevent
a relationship with a financi institut should never be establish until the ident of a
potenti custom is satisfactorili establish if the ident cannot be establish the
relationship should not be establish
person account
no account should be open without satisfactori identif such as
a local issu driver licens with a photograph
a passport or alien registr card togeth with
a colleg photo identif card
a major credit card verifi the current statu
an employ identif card
an outofarea driver licens
a current util bill from the custom place of resid eg ga electr
telephon
consid the custom resid or place of busi ness if it is not in the area serv by the
bank or branch ask why the custom is open an account at that locat
follow up with call to the custom resid or place of employ thank the
custom for open the account disconnect phone servic or no record of employ
warrant further investig
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should
be question
for larg account ask the custom for a prior bank refer and write a letter to the bank
ask about the custom
check with servic bureau for indic that the custom ha been involv in
question activ such as kite incid and nsf situat
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1933
the ident of a custom can be establish through an exist relationship with the
institut such as some type of loan or other account relationship
busi account
busi princip should provid evid of legal statu eg sole proprietorship
partnership or incorpor or associ when open a busi account
check the name of a commerci enterpris with a report agenc and check prior bank
refer
follow up with call to the custom busi thank the custom for open the
account disconnect phone servic warrant further investig
when circumst allow perform a visual check of the busi to verifi the actual
exist of the busi and that the busi ha the capabl of provid the servic
describ
consid the sourc of fund us to open the account larg cash deposit should be
question
sinc teller ar oftentim the frontlin defens in prevent check fraud it is import
that thei receiv train that will allow them to identifi fraudul check
teller should
be awar of magnet rout number
look for check with number lower than 200
be awar of the date that the account wa open
have easi access to the signatur card
look for perfor edg on the check
be awar of what is accept identif
recogn forgedalt identif
recogn forg negoti instrument
be familiar with pattern of behavior relat to potenti culprit
overli polit
nervou
aggress and hurri
financi institut fraud financi transact
1934 2011 fraud examin manual
detect
some of the more common red flag of potenti new account scheme ar
custom resid outsid the bank trade area
dress andor action inconsist or inappropri for the custom state ag
occup or incom level
new account request immedi cash withdraw upon deposit
request for larg quantiti of temporari check
no order for print check
