2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Money Transfer (Wire) Fraud Schemes 1  
Wire transfers of funds are nothing new—they began in the 1940s. However, with today’s 
growing emphasis on a cashless society, the number of wire transfers increases each year. 
 
Typically, fraudsters who commit this type of crime are knowledgeable about wire transfer 
activity, have at least one contact within the target company, and are aggressive in carrying 
out the theft. 
 
Instantaneous Transfer 
Wire transfer services electronically move funds worldwide from a financial institution to a 
beneficiary account at any banking point according to a customer’s instructions. (A banking 
point is any institution or business capable of receiving electronic transactions such as banks, 
savings and loans, credit unions, brokerage firms, and insurance companies.) On any day, $2 
trillion to $3 trillion moves among financial institutions. The transactions are primarily for 
completing interbank purchases and sales of federal funds; purchasing, selling, and financing 
securities transactions; disbursing loan proceeds or repaying loans; and conducting real estate 
business.  
 
Although these technologies enhance operations and increase the efficiency of the financial 
institutions, they also provide a tremendous opportunity for criminals who learn to 
manipulate the electronic environment for their personal gain. Wire transfer fraud is a 
particularly dangerous risk to a business’s solvency—one major wire fraud can destroy any 
                                                          
1 The editors wish to thank James Incaprera, CFSSP, CP P, and Joyce C. Lambert, Ph.D., CIA, CPA, for their 
assistance in preparing this section. Mr. Incaprera is the Louisiana investigations manager for Bank One in New 
Orleans, LA, and Dr. Lambert is a professor of accounting at the University of New Orleans. 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.935 
firm. According to the Multi-State Sharing and Analysis Center, single losses average 
$100,000 to $200,000.  
 
Common Schemes 
Dishonest Bank Employees 
People who have access to correct account identification information can transfer money 
improperly—insiders wire funds to themselves and/or related parties. 
 
Misrepresentation of Identity 
People pose as customers, having used pretext calls to obtain correct account information 
from the bank. People posing as wire room employees in another bank or a branch office 
order transfers to dummy accounts in another bank. 
 
System Password Security Compromised 
People having legitimate access to sensitive account and daily code information for a limited 
time (for example, computer consultants) effect improper transfers through unauthorized 
access. 
 
Forged Authorizations 
Bank officers’ and customers’ authorization, oral or written, is improperly obtained or 
forged. People forge orders to transfer money to their own accounts when the recipient 
account is actually in the name of someone else. 
 
Unauthorized Entry and Interception 
Unauthorized personnel gain access to the wire room and its equipment, or the actual 
transmission is intercepted and altered. 
 
Preventing and Detecting Wire Transfer Fraud 
Fraud examiners and auditors need to advise management on ways to prevent and detect 
wire transfer fraud. 
  
Business Audits and Other Controls 
Every firm, of course, must have written policies and procedures for wire transactions. In 
addition, fraud examiners or auditors should conduct unannounced audits of those 
transactions. Following are other examples of wire transfer controls. 
• Make sure the person authorizing the wire transfer isn’t the individual who orders it. 
Financial Institution Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.936                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Require those ordering transfers to have secure passwords. 
• Maintain and keep a current list of those ordering wire transfers, and a log of  
all transfers. 
• Require vacations of persons who handle wire transfers. 
• Require that reconciliations of accounts affected by wire transfers be performed by 
persons not involved with the wire transfer process. 
• Keep all confidential information about firms’ accounts and wire transfers in safe rooms 
secured with locks. Give computer key cards to these rooms to authorized personnel 
only. Shred trash. 
 
Businesses frequently perform vendor audits, but often neglect to audit their bank’s wire 
transfer controls. A fraud examiner should evaluate these areas. 
• Pick a sample of transactions and review the log of the calls made back to the banking 
points to verify their authenticity (You may listen to the tape recording of the actual 
authorization to ensure compliance with call-back rules.) 
• Review documentation of past wire transfer activity from bank statements or bank 
online transaction history for a daily debit and credit match of each transaction. 
• Obtain written confirmations of transactions  from the wire transfer provider to 
determine the timeliness of their receipt by your firm. 
• Promptly reconcile problems caused by the usual custom of ending all wire transfers for 
a day in the mid-afternoon. (Some customers believe they should receive credit and 
interest on funds received at the end of a day. However, wire transfers made after the 
afternoon closing time aren’t credi ted until the next business day.) 
 
Bank Audits 
Financial institutions should ensure the following safeguards when transferring funds: 
• Provide customers with unique codes that are required to authorize or order wire 
transfers. 
• Maintain and update lists of employees authorized to perform wire transfer transactions. 
• Compile audit trails of incoming and outgoing wire transactions, as well as the employee 
responsible for each portion of the transaction. 
• Review all wire transfer transactions at the end of each day to ensure that the original 
transfer instructions were executed correctly. 
• Make sure the businesses to which the funds are transferred are contacted to ensure 
authenticity of fund transfer requests. If the businesses are contacted by phone, the 
phone numbers used should be the original numbers given by the customers when the 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.937 
accounts were opened and not the phone numbers provided by the callers who 
requested the transfers.  
• Don’t execute wire transfers solely from faxed instructions. Again, verify authenticity by 
phoning the original numbers given by the customers when the accounts were opened 
and not the numbers provided by the callers who requested the transfers.  
• Require that all accounts affected by wire transfers be reconciled by bank employees not 
involved with the wire process. 
• Ensure the in-house wire operations manual is available only to authorized personnel 
and secured when not in use — especially after hours. Cleaning crew employees could 
help themselves to client pass codes and other confidential information. 
• Record all incoming and outgoing calls for wire transfer instructions.  
• Carefully screen wire transfer personnel applicants. 
• Reassign to other departments wire transfer employees who have given notice that they 
are resigning but still have some time left with the company.  
• Require all employees involved in the transfer of funds to take at least five consecutive 
days of vacation each year; assign their duti es only to other transfer department staff 
members during their absence. 
• Make sure bank employees never disclose sensitive information over the telephone  
until the caller’s identity and authorizati on have been verified to the customer 
information file.  
• Separate duties among wire employees who transmit or receive requests for funds. These 
employees shouldn’t also verify the accuracy of the transactions. 
• Train employees on proper internal controls, fraud awareness, and the importance  
of protecting information. Share alerts issued by government agencies and  
professional groups.  
 
 



:


monei transfer wire fraud scheme 1
wire transfer of fund ar noth newthei began in the 1940 howev with todai
grow emphasi on a cashless societi the number of wire transfer increas each year
typic fraudster who commit thi type of crime ar knowledg about wire transfer
activ have at least on contact within the target compani and ar aggress in carri
out the theft
instantan transfer
wire transfer servic electron move fund worldwid from a financi institut to a
beneficiari account at ani bank point accord to a custom instruct a bank
point is ani institut or busi capabl of receiv electron transact such as bank
save and loan credit union brokerag firm and insur compani on ani dai 2
trillion to 3 trillion move among financi institut the transact ar primarili for
complet interbank purchas and sale of feder fund purchas sell and financ
secur transact disburs loan proce or repai loan and conduct real estat
busi
although these technolog enhanc oper and increas the effici of the financi
institut thei also provid a tremend opportun for crimin who learn to
manipul the electron environ for their person gain wire transfer fraud is a
particularli danger risk to a businesss solvencyon major wire fraud can destroi ani
1 the editor wish to thank jame incaprera cfssp cp p and joyc c lambert phd cia cpa for their
assist in prepar thi section mr incaprera is the louisiana investig manag for bank on in new
orlean la and dr lambert is a professor of account at the univers of new orlean
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1935
firm accord to the multist share and analysi center singl loss averag
100000 to 200000
common scheme
dishonest bank employe
peopl who have access to correct account identif inform can transfer monei
improperlyinsid wire fund to themselv andor relat parti
misrepresent of ident
peopl pose as custom have us pretext call to obtain correct account inform
from the bank peopl pose as wire room employe in anoth bank or a branch offic
order transfer to dummi account in anoth bank
system password secur compromis
peopl have legitim access to sensit account and daili code inform for a limit
time for exampl comput consult effect improp transfer through unauthor
access
forg author
bank offic and custom author oral or written is improperli obtain or
forg peopl forg order to transfer monei to their own account when the recipi
account is actual in the name of someon els
unauthor entri and intercept
unauthor personnel gain access to the wire room and it equip or the actual
transmiss is intercept and alter
prevent and detect wire transfer fraud
fraud examin and auditor need to advis manag on wai to prevent and detect
wire transfer fraud
busi audit and other control
everi firm of cours must have written polici and procedur for wire transact in
addit fraud examin or auditor should conduct unannounc audit of those
transact follow ar other exampl of wire transfer control
make sure the person author the wire transfer isnt the individu who order it
financi institut fraud financi transact
1936 2011 fraud examin manual
requir those order transfer to have secur password
maintain and keep a current list of those order wire transfer and a log of
all transfer
requir vacat of person who handl wire transfer
requir that reconcili of account affect by wire transfer be perform by
person not involv with the wire transfer process
keep all confidenti inform about firm account and wire transfer in safe room
secur with lock give comput kei card to these room to author personnel
onli shred trash
busi frequent perform vendor audit but often neglect to audit their bank wire
transfer control a fraud examin should evalu these area
pick a sampl of transact and review the log of the call made back to the bank
point to verifi their authent you mai listen to the tape record of the actual
author to ensur complianc with callback rule
review document of past wire transfer activ from bank statement or bank
onlin transact histori for a daili debit and credit match of each transact
obtain written confirm of transact from the wire transfer provid to
determin the timeli of their receipt by your firm
promptli reconcil problem caus by the usual custom of end all wire transfer for
a dai in the midafternoon some custom believ thei should receiv credit and
interest on fund receiv at the end of a dai howev wire transfer made after the
afternoon close time arent credi ted until the next busi dai
bank audit
financi institut should ensur the follow safeguard when transfer fund
provid custom with uniqu code that ar requir to author or order wire
transfer
maintain and updat list of employe author to perform wire transfer transact
compil audit trail of incom and outgo wire transact as well as the employe
respons for each portion of the transact
review all wire transfer transact at the end of each dai to ensur that the origin
transfer instruct were execut correctli
make sure the busi to which the fund ar transfer ar contact to ensur
authent of fund transfer request if the busi ar contact by phone the
phone number us should be the origin number given by the custom when the
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1937
account were open and not the phone number provid by the caller who
request the transfer
dont execut wire transfer sole from fax instruct again verifi authent by
phone the origin number given by the custom when the account were open
and not the number provid by the caller who request the transfer
requir that all account affect by wire transfer be reconcil by bank employe not
involv with the wire process
ensur the inhous wire oper manual is avail onli to author personnel
and secur when not in us especi after hour clean crew employe could
help themselv to client pass code and other confidenti inform
record all incom and outgo call for wire transfer instruct
carefulli screen wire transfer personnel applic
reassign to other depart wire transfer employe who have given notic that thei
ar resign but still have some time left with the compani
requir all employe involv in the transfer of fund to take at least five consecut
dai of vacat each year assign their duti es onli to other transfer depart staff
member dure their absenc
make sure bank employe never disclos sensit inform over the telephon
until the caller ident and authorizati on have been verifi to the custom
inform file
separ duti among wire employe who transmit or receiv request for fund these
employe shouldnt also verifi the accuraci of the transact
train employe on proper intern control fraud awar and the import
of protect inform share alert issu by govern agenc and
profession group
