2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/FINANCIAL INSTITUTION FRAUD/Advanced Fee Fraud


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Financial Institution Fraud


:


Advanced Fee Fraud  
Banks find deals that seem “too good to be true” to gain access to large amounts of money 
(deposits) at below-market interest rates. The catch is that the bank must pay an up-front 
finder’s fee to a person claiming to have access to the money. In some cases, desperate 
institutions are offered access to illegal money, and they typically do not report the loss of 
the advance fee when the deal falls through. More information on advance fee swindles can 
be found in the “Consumer Fraud” chapter. 
 
EXAMPLE 
The bank is contacted by an agent (such as a broker, advisor, consultant, promoter, lawyer, 
or bank customer) offering to provide money at a below-market interest rate for a long 
period of time (e.g., 10–20 years). The agent asks for a large fee to close the deal. The 
agent takes the fee and disappears. The deposits might or might not exist; and if they do, 
they seldom equate to the agent’s representations. 
 
Red Flags 
• Agent requests documents on bank stationery or signatures of officers. 
• Bank is asked to give nondisclosure agreements to protect agents or other parties. 
• There are several complex layers of agents, brokers, and other middlemen. 
 
Financial Transactions  Financial Institution Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.939 
Brokered Loans 
A variation of the advanced fee scheme is the brokered loan. Loan brokering applies to either 
packages of individual residential (consumer) loans or single commercial loans. A variation 
of a brokered loan is the loan participation, where the purchaser participates in the loan but 
does not purchase the entire loan. The fraud schemes associated with brokered or 
participated loans generally involve selling phony loans (packages) or selling participations in 
loans that have not been properly underwritten. Generally, a large fee is charged for these 
brokered loans. 
 
With residential loan packages, the broker sells the package, takes the money and disappears. 
Brokered loans are generally not sold with any recourse to the broker. Therefore, the 
purchaser must look to the borrower and the underlying collateral for debt satisfaction. With 
loan participations, the lead bank generally performs the underwriting. However, this does 
not relieve the participating bank from its obligation to perform its own due diligence. If the 
participating bank does not independently examine the documentation and perform its own 
due diligence, then fraud schemes on the part of the selling institution are possible. 
 
 



:


advanc fee fraud
bank find deal that seem too good to be true to gain access to larg amount of monei
deposit at belowmarket interest rate the catch is that the bank must pai an upfront
finder fee to a person claim to have access to the monei in some case desper
institut ar offer access to illeg monei and thei typic do not report the loss of
the advanc fee when the deal fall through more inform on advanc fee swindl can
be found in the consum fraud chapter
exampl
the bank is contact by an agent such as a broker advisor consult promot lawyer
or bank custom offer to provid monei at a belowmarket interest rate for a long
period of time eg 1020 year the agent ask for a larg fee to close the deal the
agent take the fee and disappear the deposit might or might not exist and if thei do
thei seldom equat to the agent represent
red flag
agent request document on bank stationeri or signatur of offic
bank is ask to give nondisclosur agreement to protect agent or other parti
there ar sever complex layer of agent broker and other middlemen
financi transact financi institut fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 1939
broker loan
a variat of the advanc fee scheme is the broker loan loan broker appli to either
packag of individu residenti consum loan or singl commerci loan a variat
of a broker loan is the loan particip where the purchas particip in the loan but
doe not purchas the entir loan the fraud scheme associ with broker or
particip loan gener involv sell phoni loan packag or sell particip in
loan that have not been properli underwritten gener a larg fee is charg for these
broker loan
with residenti loan packag the broker sell the packag take the monei and disappear
broker loan ar gener not sold with ani recours to the broker therefor the
purchas must look to the borrow and the underli collater for debt satisfact with
loan particip the lead bank gener perform the underwrit howev thi doe
not reliev the particip bank from it oblig to perform it own due dilig if the
particip bank doe not independ examin the document and perform it own
due dilig then fraud scheme on the part of the sell institut ar possibl
