2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/MANAGEMENT’S, AUDITORS’, AND FRAUD EXAMINERS’ RESPONSIBILITIES/GAO Auditing Standards/Reporting Standards for Performance Audits


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


Reporting Standards for Performance Audits 
The Yellow Book standards for performance audits relate to the form of the report, the 
report contents, and the report issuance and distribution: 
• Auditors should prepare audit reports communicating the results of each audit. The 
report should be written or presented in some other retrievable form, and should be 
appropriate for its intended use.  
• The auditors’ report should contain: 
? The audit objectives, scope, and methodology; 
? The audit results, including findings, conclusions, and recommendations; 
? A reference to compliance with GAGAS; 
? The views of responsible officials; and 
? The nature of any privileged and confidential information omitted, if applicable. 
• The reported findings should include any significant deficiencies in internal control, all 
material instances of fraud and illegal acts, significant violations of provisions of 
contracts or grant agreements, and significant abuse. 
• Government auditors should submit audit reports to those charged with governance, to 
the appropriate officials of the audited entity, and to the appropriate oversight bodies or 
organizations requiring or arranging for the audits. Auditors should also send copies of 
the reports to other officials who have legal oversight authority or who may be 
responsible for acting on audit findings and recommendations, and to others authorized 
to receive such reports.  
 
In addition to these standards, auditors should refer to AU 801 (SAS No. 74), Compliance 
Auditing Considerations in Audits of Governmental Entities and Recipients of Governmental Financial 
Assistance. This standard incorporates a discussion of responsibilities under certain laws and 
government bulletins, and auditors should know these requirements. A thorough review of 
this statement will provide additional guidance. 
Management’s and Auditors’ Responsibilities Financial Transactions   
1.258                         2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
More information about the Yellow Book and government auditing is contained in the 
chapter entitled “Public Sector Fraud.” The fu ll text of all of the Government Auditing 
Standards is also available at the Government Accountability Office’s website 
(www.gao.gov). 
 
 



:


report standard for perform audit
the yellow book standard for perform audit relat to the form of the report the
report content and the report issuanc and distribut
auditor should prepar audit report commun the result of each audit the
report should be written or present in some other retriev form and should be
appropri for it intend us
the auditor report should contain
the audit object scope and methodolog
the audit result includ find conclus and recommend
a refer to complianc with gaga
the view of respons offici and
the natur of ani privileg and confidenti inform omit if applic
the report find should includ ani signific defici in intern control all
materi instanc of fraud and illeg act signific violat of provis of
contract or grant agreement and signific abus
govern auditor should submit audit report to those charg with govern to
the appropri offici of the audit entiti and to the appropri oversight bodi or
organ requir or arrang for the audit auditor should also send copi of
the report to other offici who have legal oversight author or who mai be
respons for act on audit find and recommend and to other author
to receiv such report
in addit to these standard auditor should refer to au 801 sa no 74 complianc
audit consider in audit of government entiti and recipi of government financi
assist thi standard incorpor a discuss of respons under certain law and
govern bulletin and auditor should know these requir a thorough review of
thi statement will provid addit guidanc
manag and auditor respons financi transact
1258 2011 fraud examin manual
more inform about the yellow book and govern audit is contain in the
chapter entitl public sector fraud the fu ll text of all of the govern audit
standard is also avail at the govern account offic websit
wwwgaogov
