2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/Introduction


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


Introduction  
The ACFE’s Fraud Risk Assessment Tool can be  used by fraud examiners to identify their 
clients’ or employers’ vulnerabilities to fraud. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool consists of 15 modules, each containing a series of 
questions designed to help organizations zoom in on areas of risk. The fraud professional 
and the client or employer should begin the risk assessment process by working together to 
answer the questions in each module. It is important that the client or employer select 
people within the organization who have extensive knowledge of company operations, such 
as managers and internal auditors, to work with the fraud professional. Upon completion of 
all of the questions, the fraud professional should review the results of the assessment with 
the client or employer in order to: 
• Identify the potential inherent fraud risks. 
• Assess the likelihood and significance of occurrence of the identified fraud risks. 
• Evaluate which people and departments are most likely to commit fraud and identify the 
methods they are likely to use. 
• Identify and map existing preventive and detective controls to the relevant fraud risks. 
• Evaluate whether the identified controls are operating effectively and efficiently. 
• Identify and evaluate residual fraud risks resulting from ineffective or  
nonexistent controls. 
• Respond to residual fraud risks. 
 
The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool may reveal certain residual fraud risks that have not been 
adequately mitigated due to lack of, or non-compliance with, appropriate preventive and 
detective controls. The fraud professional should work with the client to develop mitigation 
strategies for any residual risks with an unacceptably high likelihood or significance of 
occurrence. Responses should be evaluated in terms of their costs versus benefits and in 
light of the organization’s level of risk tolerance. 
 
Be aware, however, that this assessment only provides a snapshot of a particular point in 
time. The dynamic nature of organizations requires routine monitoring and updating of their 
financial risk assessment processes in order for them to remain effective. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.829 



:


introduct
the acf fraud risk assess tool can be us by fraud examin to identifi their
client or employ vulner to fraud
the fraud risk assess tool consist of 15 modul each contain a seri of
question design to help organ zoom in on area of risk the fraud profession
and the client or employ should begin the risk assess process by work togeth to
answer the question in each modul it is import that the client or employ select
peopl within the organ who have extens knowledg of compani oper such
as manag and intern auditor to work with the fraud profession upon complet of
all of the question the fraud profession should review the result of the assess with
the client or employ in order to
identifi the potenti inher fraud risk
assess the likelihood and signific of occurr of the identifi fraud risk
evalu which peopl and depart ar most like to commit fraud and identifi the
method thei ar like to us
identifi and map exist prevent and detect control to the relev fraud risk
evalu whether the identifi control ar oper effect and effici
identifi and evalu residu fraud risk result from ineffect or
nonexist control
respond to residu fraud risk
the fraud risk assess tool mai reveal certain residu fraud risk that have not been
adequ mitig due to lack of or noncompli with appropri prevent and
detect control the fraud profession should work with the client to develop mitig
strategi for ani residu risk with an unaccept high likelihood or signific of
occurr respons should be evalu in term of their cost versu benefit and in
light of the organ level of risk toler
be awar howev that thi assess onli provid a snapshot of a particular point in
time the dynam natur of organ requir routin monitor and updat of their
financi risk assess process in order for them to remain effect
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4829
