2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 3 — Physical Controls to Deter Employee Theft and Fraud


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 3 — Physical Controls to Deter Employee Theft and Fraud  
The physical controls assessment questions are designed to assess the probability of a 
fraudulent event occurring within the organization based on: 
• Physical controls in place to control access to accounting records and information 
• Physical controls in place to protect the assets of the organization 
 
1. Does the organization conduct pre-employment back ground checks to identify previous dishonest or 
unethical behavior?  
Before offering employment to an applicant, a company should conduct a pre-employment 
background check (where permitted by law). 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.839 
2. Are there policies and procedures that address dishonest or unethical behavior?  
The company should document and implement policies and procedures that describe (1) 
unethical conduct, (2) punishment for engaging in unethical conduct, and (3) how to report 
unethical conduct. 
 
3. Does management support the ethics and anti-fraud policies?  
Senior management sets the tone for ethical conduct throughout the organization. The tone 
should signal that fraud will not be tolerated. 
 
4. Does the organization educate employees about the importance of ethics and anti-fraud programs?  
All employees should receive training on the ethics and anti-fraud policies of the company. 
The employees should sign an acknowledgment that they have received the training and 
understand the policies. 
 
5. Does the organization provide an anonymous way to re port suspected violations of the ethics and anti-fraud 
policies? 
Organizations should provide a system for anonymous reporting of suspected violations of 
the ethics and anti-fraud policies. 
 
6. Does the organization restrict access to areas containing sensitive documents (such as invoices, receipts, 
journals, ledgers, and checks) and maintain a sy stem for providing an audit trail of access? 
Access to areas containing sensitive documents should be restricted to those individuals 
 who need the information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should  
be maintained. 
 
7. Does the organization restrict access to computer systems with sensitive documents (such as accounting 
software, inventory, and payroll) and create a system to provide an audit trail of access?  
Access to computer systems should be restricted to those individuals who need the 
information to carry out their jobs. Also, an audit trail of access should be maintained. 
 
8. Does the organization restrict access to areas with high value assets, such as shipping, receiving, storerooms, 
and cash?  
Organizations should restrict access to areas with high value assets and should maintain a log 
of persons accessing such areas. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
9. Does the organization use CCTV and recording equipment to monitor entries, exits,  areas with sensitive 
or high value assets, and sales areas?  
Entries, exits, areas with sensitive or high value assets, and sales areas can be monitored 
using CCTV and recording equipment. 
 
10. Does the organization conduct random, unannounced audits of inventory, ca sh, expense, purchasing, 
billing, and other accounts by in ternal or external auditors?  
Random, unannounced audits help prevent fraud perpetrators from having time to alter, 
destroy, and misplace records and other evidence of their offenses. 
 
11. Does the organization use professional loss prevention  or security personnel to monitor physical controls?  
Professional loss prevention or security personnel can be used to monitor physical controls. 
 
12. Does the organization promptly investigate incidents of suspected or reported fraud?  
Promptly investigating incidents of suspected or reported fraud can minimize losses. 
 



:


modul 3 physic control to deter employe theft and fraud
the physic control assess question ar design to assess the probabl of a
fraudul event occur within the organ base on
physic control in place to control access to account record and inform
physic control in place to protect the asset of the organ
1 doe the organ conduct preemploy back ground check to identifi previou dishonest or
uneth behavior
befor offer employ to an applic a compani should conduct a preemploy
background check where permit by law
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4839
2 ar there polici and procedur that address dishonest or uneth behavior
the compani should document and implement polici and procedur that describ 1
uneth conduct 2 punish for engag in uneth conduct and 3 how to report
uneth conduct
3 doe manag support the ethic and antifraud polici
senior manag set the tone for ethic conduct throughout the organ the tone
should signal that fraud will not be toler
4 doe the organ educ employe about the import of ethic and antifraud program
all employe should receiv train on the ethic and antifraud polici of the compani
the employe should sign an acknowledg that thei have receiv the train and
understand the polici
5 doe the organ provid an anonym wai to re port suspect violat of the ethic and antifraud
polici
organ should provid a system for anonym report of suspect violat of
the ethic and antifraud polici
6 doe the organ restrict access to area contain sensit document such as invoic receipt
journal ledger and check and maintain a sy stem for provid an audit trail of access
access to area contain sensit document should be restrict to those individu
who need the inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should
be maintain
7 doe the organ restrict access to comput system with sensit document such as account
softwar inventori and payrol and creat a system to provid an audit trail of access
access to comput system should be restrict to those individu who need the
inform to carri out their job also an audit trail of access should be maintain
8 doe the organ restrict access to area with high valu asset such as ship receiv storeroom
and cash
organ should restrict access to area with high valu asset and should maintain a log
of person access such area
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4840 2011 fraud examin manual
9 doe the organ us cctv and record equip to monitor entri exit area with sensit
or high valu asset and sale area
entri exit area with sensit or high valu asset and sale area can be monitor
us cctv and record equip
10 doe the organ conduct random unannounc audit of inventori ca sh expens purchas
bill and other account by in ternal or extern auditor
random unannounc audit help prevent fraud perpetr from have time to alter
destroi and misplac record and other evid of their offens
11 doe the organ us profession loss prevent or secur personnel to monitor physic control
profession loss prevent or secur personnel can be us to monitor physic control
12 doe the organ promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud
promptli investig incid of suspect or report fraud can minim loss
