2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 11 — Theft of Inventory and Equipment


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 11 — Theft of Inventory and Equipment  
• Fake sale schemes occur when an accomplice of an employee “buys” merchandise, but 
the employee does not ring up the sale and the accomplice takes the merchandise 
without making any payment. 
• Purchasing schemes occur when an employee with purchasing authority uses that 
authority to purchase and misappropriate merchandise. 
• Receiving schemes occur when an employee misappropriates assets purchased by the 
company as they are received at the company. 
• False shipment schemes occur when an employee creates false sales documents and false 
shipping documents to make it appear that missing inventory was not actually stolen, but 
rather sold. 
• Misuse of company assets occurs when an employee borrows company assets for 
personal use without authorization. 
• Larceny schemes occur when an employee takes inventory from the company premises 
without attempting to conceal the theft in the accounting records. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.858   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
1. Has a recent inventory of company equipment, list ing serial numbers and descriptions, been completed? 
Companies should inventory company equipment and maintain a list of the equipment, serial 
numbers, and descriptions. 
 
2. Does the company assign an individual from  outside of the department to conduct the  
department’s inventory? 
An employee who doesn’t work in the department should be assigned to conduct the 
department’s inventory. 
 
3. Are unexplained entries to the inventory records examined for source documentation?  
Unexplained entries to the inventory records should be examined for source documentation. 
 
4. Is the company experiencing sizeable invent ory increases without comparable sales increases? 
Sizeable inventory increases without comparable sales increases may indicate an inventory 
overstatement fraud scheme and should be investigated. 
 
5. Are analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory conducted 
periodically to look for unexplained differences? 
Analytical reviews of beginning inventory, sales, cost of goods sold, and ending inventory 
should be conducted periodically. Any discrepancies should be investigated. 
 
6. Is there an unusual volume of inventory adjustments,  write-offs, or disposals?  
Any unusual volume of inventory adjustments, write-offs, or disposals should  
be investigated. 
 
7. Does the organization have writte n inventory instructions and orders?  
Organizations should document and impl ement inventory instructions and orders. 
 
8. Does someone independent of the purchasing, receiv ing, and warehousing functions physically count  
the inventory?  
Physical inventory counts should be conducted by someone independent of the purchasing, 
receiving, and warehousing functions. 
 
9. Are pre-numbered inventory tags used? 
Pre-numbered inventory tags should be used. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.859 
10. Are the inventory tags controlled and accounted for? 
Inventory tags should be controlled and accounted for. 
 
11. Do the inventory procedures prevent double counting?  
Organizations should implement inventory procedures that prevent double counting. 
 
12. Are inventory counts subject to independent recounts?  
Inventory counts should be subject to independent recounts. 
 
13. Is the inventory reasonably identifiable for prop er classification in the accounting system, such as 
description, condition, or stage of completion?  
The inventory should be reasonably identifiable for proper classification in the accounting 
system, such as description, condition, or stage of completion. 
 
14. Are differences between physical counts and invent ory records investigated be fore inventory records  
are adjusted? 
Differences between physical counts and inventory records should be investigated before 
inventory records are adjusted. 
 
15. Is scrap inventoried and is scrap disposal accounted for? 
Scrap should be inventoried and scrap disposal should be accounted for. 
 
16. Are the following duties segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of in ventory, disbursement of 
inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from the sale of scrap inventory?  
The following duties should be segregated: requisition of inventory, receiving of inventory, 
disbursement of inventory, writing off of inventory as scrap, and receipt of proceeds from 
the sale of scrap inventory. 
 
17. Is a receiving report prepared for all purchased goods?  
A receiving report should be prepared for all purchased goods. 
 
18. Are copies of receiving reports sent directly to the purchasing and ac counting departments? 
Copies of receiving reports should be sent directly to the purchasing and  
accounting departments. 
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.860   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
19. Is the receiving department provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items to be received? 
The receiving department should be provided with a copy of the purchase order on all items 
to be received. 
 
20. Are partial shipments annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets? 
Partial shipments should be annotated on purchase orders or attached as separate sheets. 
 
21. Are overage, shortage, and damage reports completed and sent to the purchasing and  
accounting departments?  
Overage, shortage, and damage reports should be completed and sent to the purchasing and 
accounting departments. 
 
22. Are quantities of materials received counted and compared to purchase orders?  
Quantities of materials received should be counted and compared to purchase orders. 
 
23. Is there a written policy allowing management to inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on 
company property? 
Companies should document and implement a written policy allowing management to 
inspect all desks, file cabinets, and other containers on company property. 
 
24. Is there an equipment removal au thorization policy requiring written management approval to remove any 
company equipment from the company premises? 
Companies should document and implement an equipment removal authorization policy 
requiring written management approval to remove any company equipment from the 
company premises. 
 
25. Is there a policy requiring the in spection of packages, boxes, and other containers before they leave the 
company premises?  
Companies should document and implement a policy requiring the inspection of packages, 
boxes, and other containers before they leave the company premises. 
 
26. Is the removal of trash and trash receptacles periodically monitored? 
Companies should periodically monitor the removal of trash and trash receptacles. 
 
27. Are the shipping and receiving areas adequately supervised to prevent theft?  
Shipping and receiving areas should be adequately supervised to prevent theft. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.861 
28. Are high value items stored in secure or continuously monitored areas?  
High value items should be stored in secure or continuously monitored areas. 
 
29. Is the shipping function separate from  the purchasing and inventory functions?  
The shipping function should be separate from the purchasing and inventory functions. 
 
30. Are shipping documents pre-numbered and accounted for?  
Shipping documents should be pre-numbered and accounted for. 
 
31. Are shipping orders matched with sales orders and contracts?  
Shipping orders should be matched with sales orders and contracts to prevent inventory and 
vendor schemes. 
 
32. Are shipments of goods required to have authorized sales orders  and contracts prior to shipping?  
Shipments of goods should be required to have authorized sales orders and sales contracts 
prior to shipping. 
 
33. Are shipping documents forwarded directly to the a ccounting department for recording inventory reduction 
and cost of sales? 
Shipping documents should be forwarded directly to the accounting department for 
recording inventory reduction and cost of sales. 
 



:


modul 11 theft of inventori and equip
fake sale scheme occur when an accomplic of an employe bui merchandis but
the employe doe not ring up the sale and the accomplic take the merchandis
without make ani payment
purchas scheme occur when an employe with purchas author us that
author to purchas and misappropri merchandis
receiv scheme occur when an employe misappropri asset purchas by the
compani as thei ar receiv at the compani
fals shipment scheme occur when an employe creat fals sale document and fals
ship document to make it appear that miss inventori wa not actual stolen but
rather sold
misus of compani asset occur when an employe borrow compani asset for
person us without author
larceni scheme occur when an employe take inventori from the compani premis
without attempt to conceal the theft in the account record
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4858 2011 fraud examin manual
1 ha a recent inventori of compani equip list ing serial number and descript been complet
compani should inventori compani equip and maintain a list of the equip serial
number and descript
2 doe the compani assign an individu from outsid of the depart to conduct the
depart inventori
an employe who doesnt work in the depart should be assign to conduct the
depart inventori
3 ar unexplain entri to the inventori record examin for sourc document
unexplain entri to the inventori record should be examin for sourc document
4 is the compani experienc sizeabl invent ori increas without compar sale increas
sizeabl inventori increas without compar sale increas mai indic an inventori
overstat fraud scheme and should be investig
5 ar analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori conduct
period to look for unexplain differ
analyt review of begin inventori sale cost of good sold and end inventori
should be conduct period ani discrep should be investig
6 is there an unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos
ani unusu volum of inventori adjust writeoff or dispos should
be investig
7 doe the organ have writt n inventori instruct and order
organ should document and impl ement inventori instruct and order
8 doe someon independ of the purchas receiv ing and wareh function physic count
the inventori
physic inventori count should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas
receiv and wareh function
9 ar prenumb inventori tag us
prenumb inventori tag should be us
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4859
10 ar the inventori tag control and account for
inventori tag should be control and account for
11 do the inventori procedur prevent doubl count
organ should implement inventori procedur that prevent doubl count
12 ar inventori count subject to independ recount
inventori count should be subject to independ recount
13 is the inventori reason identifi for prop er classif in the account system such as
descript condit or stage of complet
the inventori should be reason identifi for proper classif in the account
system such as descript condit or stage of complet
14 ar differ between physic count and invent ori record investig be fore inventori record
ar adjust
differ between physic count and inventori record should be investig befor
inventori record ar adjust
15 is scrap inventori and is scrap dispos account for
scrap should be inventori and scrap dispos should be account for
16 ar the follow duti segreg requisit of inventori receiv of in ventori disburs of
inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from the sale of scrap inventori
the follow duti should be segreg requisit of inventori receiv of inventori
disburs of inventori write off of inventori as scrap and receipt of proce from
the sale of scrap inventori
17 is a receiv report prepar for all purchas good
a receiv report should be prepar for all purchas good
18 ar copi of receiv report sent directli to the purchas and ac count depart
copi of receiv report should be sent directli to the purchas and
account depart
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4860 2011 fraud examin manual
19 is the receiv depart provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item to be receiv
the receiv depart should be provid with a copi of the purchas order on all item
to be receiv
20 ar partial shipment annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
partial shipment should be annot on purchas order or attach as separ sheet
21 ar overag shortag and damag report complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
overag shortag and damag report should be complet and sent to the purchas and
account depart
22 ar quantiti of materi receiv count and compar to purchas order
quantiti of materi receiv should be count and compar to purchas order
23 is there a written polici allow manag to inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on
compani properti
compani should document and implement a written polici allow manag to
inspect all desk file cabinet and other contain on compani properti
24 is there an equip remov au thoriz polici requir written manag approv to remov ani
compani equip from the compani premis
compani should document and implement an equip remov author polici
requir written manag approv to remov ani compani equip from the
compani premis
25 is there a polici requir the in spection of packag box and other contain befor thei leav the
compani premis
compani should document and implement a polici requir the inspect of packag
box and other contain befor thei leav the compani premis
26 is the remov of trash and trash receptacl period monitor
compani should period monitor the remov of trash and trash receptacl
27 ar the ship and receiv area adequ supervis to prevent theft
ship and receiv area should be adequ supervis to prevent theft
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4861
28 ar high valu item store in secur or continu monitor area
high valu item should be store in secur or continu monitor area
29 is the ship function separ from the purchas and inventori function
the ship function should be separ from the purchas and inventori function
30 ar ship document prenumb and account for
ship document should be prenumb and account for
31 ar ship order match with sale order and contract
ship order should be match with sale order and contract to prevent inventori and
vendor scheme
32 ar shipment of good requir to have author sale order and contract prior to ship
shipment of good should be requir to have author sale order and sale contract
prior to ship
33 ar ship document forward directli to the a ccount depart for record inventori reduct
and cost of sale
ship document should be forward directli to the account depart for
record inventori reduct and cost of sale
