2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 12 — Theft of Proprietary Information


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 12 — Theft of Proprietary Information  
• Theft of proprietary information involves theft or disclosure of confidential or trade 
secret information for financial gain. 
 
1. Are there policies and procedures addressing the identification, classification, and handling of  
proprietary information? 
The company should implement policies and procedures addressing the identification, 
classification, and handling of proprietary information. 
 
2. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign nondisclosure agreements?  
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
nondisclosure agreements. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.862   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
3. Are employees who have access to proprietary information required to sign no ncompete agreements to 
prevent them from working for competitors with in a stated period of time and location? 
Employees who have access to proprietary information should be required to sign 
noncompete agreements to prevent them from working for competitors within a stated 
period of time. 
 
4. Are employees provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, their responsibility 
to protect the information, and the company policies and procedures relating to proprietary information?  
Employees should be provided with training to make them aware of proprietary information, 
their responsibility to protect proprietary information, and company policies and procedures 
relating to proprietary information. 
 
5. Is there an established procedure to identify what information should be  classified as sensitive and for  
how long? 
Companies should implement a procedure to identify what information should be classified 
as sensitive and for how long. 
 
6. Are sensitive documents properly cl assified and marked as confidential? 
Sensitive documents should be properly classified and marked as confidential. 
 
7. Is sensitive information properly secured when not being used? 
Sensitive information should be properly secured when not being used. 
 
8. Is access to sensitive information ph ysically controlled and accounted for?  
Access to sensitive information should be physically controlled and accounted for. 
 
9. Is sensitive information promptly destroyed when it is no longer needed? 
Organizations should promptly destroy sensitive information when it is no longer needed. 
 
10. Are compromises to the security of proprietary information promptly investigated to determine the source? 
Companies should promptly investigate any compromises to the security of proprietary 
information to determine the source. 
 
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.863 
11. Are employees required to use screensaver and/ or server passwords to protect unattended  
computer systems? 
Employees should be required to use screensaver and/or server passwords to protect 
unattended computer systems. 
 
12. Are confidential documents shredded when discarded? 
Confidential documents should be shredded when discarded. 
 



:


modul 12 theft of proprietari inform
theft of proprietari inform involv theft or disclosur of confidenti or trade
secret inform for financi gain
1 ar there polici and procedur address the identif classif and handl of
proprietari inform
the compani should implement polici and procedur address the identif
classif and handl of proprietari inform
2 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign nondisclosur agreement
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
nondisclosur agreement
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4862 2011 fraud examin manual
3 ar employe who have access to proprietari inform requir to sign no ncompet agreement to
prevent them from work for competitor with in a state period of time and locat
employe who have access to proprietari inform should be requir to sign
noncompet agreement to prevent them from work for competitor within a state
period of time
4 ar employe provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform their respons
to protect the inform and the compani polici and procedur relat to proprietari inform
employe should be provid with train to make them awar of proprietari inform
their respons to protect proprietari inform and compani polici and procedur
relat to proprietari inform
5 is there an establish procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi as sensit and for
how long
compani should implement a procedur to identifi what inform should be classifi
as sensit and for how long
6 ar sensit document properli cl assifi and mark as confidenti
sensit document should be properli classifi and mark as confidenti
7 is sensit inform properli secur when not be us
sensit inform should be properli secur when not be us
8 is access to sensit inform ph ysical control and account for
access to sensit inform should be physic control and account for
9 is sensit inform promptli destroi when it is no longer need
organ should promptli destroi sensit inform when it is no longer need
10 ar compromis to the secur of proprietari inform promptli investig to determin the sourc
compani should promptli investig ani compromis to the secur of proprietari
inform to determin the sourc
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4863
11 ar employe requir to us screensav and or server password to protect unattend
comput system
employe should be requir to us screensav andor server password to protect
unattend comput system
12 ar confidenti document shred when discard
confidenti document should be shred when discard
