2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION: INVENTORY AND OTHER ASSETS/Misuse of Inventory and Other Assets


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Inventory and Other Assets


:


Misuse of Inventory and Other Assets 
There are basically two ways a person can misappropriate a company asset. The asset can be 
misused or it can be stolen. Simple misuse is obviously the less egregious of the two. Assets 
that are misused but not stolen typically include company vehicles, company supplies, 
computers, and other office equipment.  
 
EXAMPLE 
An employee made personal use of a company vehicle while on an out-of-town assignment. 
The employee provided false information, both written and verbal, regarding the nature of 
his use of the vehicle. The vehicle was returned unharmed and the cost to the perpetrator’s 
company was only a few hundred dollars. Nevertheless, such unauthorized use of a 
company asset does amount to fraud when a false statement accompanies the use.  
 
One of the most common examples of the misuse of company assets occurs when an 
employee uses company equipment to do personal work on company time. For instance, an 
employee might use his computer at work to write letters, print invoices, or do other work 
connected with a business he runs on the side. In many instances, these side businesses are 
of the same nature as the employer’s business, so the employee is essentially competing with 
his employer and using the employer’s equipment to do it.  
 



:


misus of inventori and other asset
there ar basic two wai a person can misappropri a compani asset the asset can be
misus or it can be stolen simpl misus is obvious the less egregi of the two asset
that ar misus but not stolen typic includ compani vehicl compani suppli
comput and other offic equip
exampl
an employe made person us of a compani vehicl while on an outoftown assign
the employe provid fals inform both written and verbal regard the natur of
hi us of the vehicl the vehicl wa return unharm and the cost to the perpetr
compani wa onli a few hundr dollar nevertheless such unauthor us of a
compani asset doe amount to fraud when a fals statement accompani the us
on of the most common exampl of the misus of compani asset occur when an
employe us compani equip to do person work on compani time for instanc an
employe might us hi comput at work to write letter print invoic or do other work
connect with a busi he run on the side in mani instanc these side busi ar
of the same natur as the employ busi so the employe is essenti compet with
hi employ and us the employ equip to do it
