2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Characteristics of a Good Interview


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Characteristics of a Good Interview 
Good interviews share common characteristics. The interview should be of sufficient length 
and depth to uncover relevant facts. Most interviewers tend to get too little, rather than too 
much, information. 
 
A good interview includes all pertinent information and excludes irrelevant information. 
From the outset, it should be determined what information is relevant, and that information 
should be sought. Extraneous or useless facts tend to unnecessarily complicate the gathering 
and analysis of the information. 
 
The interview should be conducted as closely as possible to the event in question. With the 
passage of time, the memories of potential witnesses and respondents become faulty, and 
critical details can be lost or forgotten. A good interview is objective in scope. It should be 
aimed at gathering information in a fair and impartial manner.  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.202   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


characterist of a good interview
good interview share common characterist the interview should be of suffici length
and depth to uncov relev fact most interview tend to get too littl rather than too
much inform
a good interview includ all pertin inform and exclud irrelev inform
from the outset it should be determin what inform is relev and that inform
should be sought extran or useless fact tend to unnecessarili complic the gather
and analysi of the inform
the interview should be conduct as close as possibl to the event in question with the
passag of time the memori of potenti wit and respond becom faulti and
critic detail can be lost or forgotten a good interview is object in scope it should be
aim at gather inform in a fair and imparti manner
interview theori and applic investig
3202 2011 fraud examin manual
