2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions/Establish the Interview Theme


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Establish the Interview Theme 
The interviewer must state the purpose of the interview in some way prior to the 
commencement of serious questioning. Otherwise, the respondent might be confused, 
threatened, or overly cautious. Stating the purpose of the interview is known as establishing 
the interview theme. 
 
Additionally, the purpose of the interview should be general and not specific. The specific 
interview purpose will be conveyed to the respondent later. The stated purpose of the 
interview should be one that is logical for the respondent to accept and easy for the 
interviewer to explain, but it might be related only indirectly to the actual purpose of the 
interview. Normally, the more general the theme is the better.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I am working on a matter and I need your help.” 
OR 
“I am doing a review of procedures here at the company.” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.215 
OR 
“I am developing some information on our purchasing procedures.” 
 
The goal of the theme is to get the respondent to make a commitment for assistance. Failure 
to get a commitment to assist from the respondent is one of the common mistakes made 
even by experienced interviewers. This is a critical step in setting the tone for the interview. 
A commitment of assistance requires positive action on the part of the person being 
interviewed. Remaining silent or simply nodding the head is generally not sufficient. 
  
The interviewer should ask for the commitment before the interview commences, and 
should encourage the respondent to voice that “yes” aloud. If the interviewer encounters 
silence the first time, the question should be repeated in a slightly different way until the 
respondent verbalizes commitment. In the Linda Reed Collins case, included in the 
Appendix to this section, Bridges, the Certified Fraud Examiner, introduces himself to Mary 
Rodriguez De La Garza, who works in the purchasing department of Bailey Books 
Incorporated. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I’m Loren Bridges. I’m doing a review of our purchasing function. Do 
you have a few minutes?” 
 
Respondent: 
“ Yes.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I am gathering some information on certain company procedures. Maybe you can help me?” 
 
Respondent: 
No response. 
 
Interviewer: 
“Could I get you to help me, if you can?” 
 
Respondent : 
“Yes. What’s this about?” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.216   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Generally, the most effective interview theme is that help is being sought. Nearly all human 
beings get satisfaction from helping others. Thus, in most interviews, the interviewer should 
approach the respondent so that person is made to feel important in helping out.  
 
During this phase of the interview, the respondent must not feel threatened in any way. An 
effective approach is the “Columbo style” (although perhaps not in such a rumpled way), in 
which at least two thoughts go through the mind of Columbo’s subjects: (1) he is no threat 
to me, and (2) he really needs my help. 
 
In the following examples, the interviewer is introducing himself to a fellow employee. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I am Loren Bridges, a Certified Fraud Examiner with Bailey Books’ 
fraud examination unit. I am investigating a case of suspected fraud, and you might know 
something about it. How long have you worked here at the company?” 
 
RIGHT 
Interviewer : 
“Ms. De La Garza, I am Loren Bridges. I work here at the company. Have we met before?” 
 
Respondent: 
“I don’t think so.” 
 
Interviewer : 
“I am working on an assignment and I need your help. Do you have a few minutes I can spend 
with you?” 
 



:


establish the interview theme
the interview must state the purpos of the interview in some wai prior to the
commenc of seriou question otherwis the respond might be confus
threaten or overli cautiou state the purpos of the interview is known as establish
the interview theme
addition the purpos of the interview should be gener and not specif the specif
interview purpos will be convei to the respond later the state purpos of the
interview should be on that is logic for the respond to accept and easi for the
interview to explain but it might be relat onli indirectli to the actual purpos of the
interview normal the more gener the theme is the better
exampl
interview
i am work on a matter and i need your help
or
i am do a review of procedur here at the compani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3215
or
i am develop some inform on our purchas procedur
the goal of the theme is to get the respond to make a commit for assist failur
to get a commit to assist from the respond is on of the common mistak made
even by experienc interview thi is a critic step in set the tone for the interview
a commit of assist requir posit action on the part of the person be
interview remain silent or simpli nod the head is gener not suffici
the interview should ask for the commit befor the interview commenc and
should encourag the respond to voic that ye aloud if the interview encount
silenc the first time the question should be repeat in a slightli differ wai until the
respond verbal commit in the linda reed collin case includ in the
appendix to thi section bridg the certifi fraud examin introduc himself to mari
rodriguez de la garza who work in the purchas depart of bailei book
incorpor
exampl
interview
ms de la garza im loren bridg im do a review of our purchas function do
you have a few minut
respond
ye
interview
i am gather some inform on certain compani procedur mayb you can help me
respond
no respons
interview
could i get you to help me if you can
respond
ye what thi about
interview theori and applic investig
3216 2011 fraud examin manual
gener the most effect interview theme is that help is be sought nearli all human
be get satisfact from help other thu in most interview the interview should
approach the respond so that person is made to feel import in help out
dure thi phase of the interview the respond must not feel threaten in ani wai an
effect approach is the columbo style although perhap not in such a rumpl wai in
which at least two thought go through the mind of columbo subject 1 he is no threat
to me and 2 he realli need my help
in the follow exampl the interview is introduc himself to a fellow employe
exampl
wrong
interview
ms de la garza i am loren bridg a certifi fraud examin with bailei book
fraud examin unit i am investig a case of suspect fraud and you might know
someth about it how long have you work here at the compani
right
interview
ms de la garza i am loren bridg i work here at the compani have we met befor
respond
i dont think so
interview
i am work on an assign and i need your help do you have a few minut i can spend
with you
