2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions/Observe Reactions


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Observe Reactions 
The interviewer must be skilled in interpreting the respondent’s reactions to questions. Social 
scientists say that more than half of the communication between individuals is nonspoken. 
The interviewer must, therefore, observe systematically, though in a nondescript manner, the 
various responses the respondent gives during the course of the conversation.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.217 
To observe the respondent’s reactions, move from nonsensitive to sensitive questions. That 
is, the interview process should begin by posing nonsensitive questions while establishing 
rapport. Asking nonsensitive questions will help the interviewer find some common ground 
on which to connect with the respondent.  
 
Sensitive questions should be scrupulously avoided until well into the interview. And then 
such questions should be asked only after careful deliberation and planning. Moreover, all 
questions should be nonaccusatory. Nothing closes up the lines of communication in an 
interview like an accusatory question. If the respondent starts to become uncomfortable with 
the questioning, the interviewer should move into a different area and approach the sensitive 
question later from a different vantage point. 
 
Likewise, interviewers are encouraged to formulate their questions in a way that will not 
bring about a strong emotional reaction from the respondent, and emotive words of all types 
should be avoided during the introductory phase. Such words put people on the defensive, 
and they are more reluctant to answer and to cooperate. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of Use  
Investigation Inquiry  
Audit Review  
Interview Ask a few questions  
Embezzle/steal/theft Shortage or paperwork 
problems
  
Furthermore, some people will not volunteer information; they must be asked. The 
interviewer must not be reluctant to ask sensitive questions after the proper basis has been 
established. If the interviewer poses the question with confidence and with the attitude that 
an answer is expected, the respondent will be much more likely to furnish the requested 
information. If the interviewer is apologetic or lacks confidence in the question, the 
respondent is much less likely to answer. 
 
After the interviewer establishes rapport through normal conversation, the respondent’s 
reactions are observed. This will serve as a baseline for observing behavior when questions 
that are more sensitive are asked. If the respondent’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors are 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.218   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
inconsistent from one type of question to another, the interviewer will attempt to determine 
why.  
 
To determine why the respondent’s behaviors are inconsistent, the interviewer must be 
knowledgeable about nonverbal clues of behavior, which generally fall within one of the 
following categories: proxemics, chr onemics, kinetics, or paralinguistics. 
 



:


observ reaction
the interview must be skill in interpret the respond reaction to question social
scientist sai that more than half of the commun between individu is nonspoken
the interview must therefor observ systemat though in a nondescript manner the
variou respons the respond give dure the cours of the convers
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3217
to observ the respond reaction move from nonsensit to sensit question that
is the interview process should begin by pose nonsensit question while establish
rapport ask nonsensit question will help the interview find some common ground
on which to connect with the respond
sensit question should be scrupul avoid until well into the interview and then
such question should be ask onli after care deliber and plan moreov all
question should be nonaccusatori noth close up the line of commun in an
interview like an accusatori question if the respond start to becom uncomfort with
the question the interview should move into a differ area and approach the sensit
question later from a differ vantag point
likewis interview ar encourag to formul their question in a wai that will not
bring about a strong emot reaction from the respond and emot word of all type
should be avoid dure the introductori phase such word put peopl on the defens
and thei ar more reluct to answer and to cooper
exampl
instead of us
investig inquiri
audit review
interview ask a few question
embezzlestealtheft shortag or paperwork
problem
furthermor some peopl will not volunt inform thei must be ask the
interview must not be reluct to ask sensit question after the proper basi ha been
establish if the interview pose the question with confid and with the attitud that
an answer is expect the respond will be much more like to furnish the request
inform if the interview is apologet or lack confid in the question the
respond is much less like to answer
after the interview establish rapport through normal convers the respond
reaction ar observ thi will serv as a baselin for observ behavior when question
that ar more sensit ar ask if the respond verbal and nonverb behavior ar
interview theori and applic investig
3218 2011 fraud examin manual
inconsist from on type of question to anoth the interview will attempt to determin
why
to determin why the respond behavior ar inconsist the interview must be
knowledg about nonverb clue of behavior which gener fall within on of the
follow categori proxem chr onem kinet or paralinguist
