2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions/Establish Transitional Statement


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Establish Transitional Statement 
Once the interviewer has a commitment for assistance, he must describe in more detail the 
purpose of the interview. This is done with the transitional statement used to provide a 
legitimate basis for the inquiry and to explain to respondents how they fit into the inquiry. 
This is usually done by means of a broad description. When interviewing employees in the 
same company, most of them already presume the legitimacy of your request for assistance. 
After describing the basic nature of the inquiry with the transitional statement, the 
interviewer should seek a second commitment for assistance. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“It’s pretty routine, really. I’m gathering some information about the purchasing function and 
how it is supposed to work. It would be helpful to me if I could start by asking you to tell me 
about your job. Okay?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.221 
When interviewing strangers, the interviewer might have to describe with more particularity 
how the respondent’s assistance is needed. This can be accomplished by one or more of the 
methods illustrated below, where the interviewer is talking to an outside vendor. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ It’s pretty routine, really. As I say, I work for Bailey Books and I’ve been assigned a project 
to gather some information about some of our procedures. And because you work for one of our 
vendors, I thought it might be helpful to talk to you. Okay ?” 
OR 
“It’s pretty routine, really. I have been asked by the company to gather information on some of 
our procedures. I thought you might be able to help by answering a few questions. Okay?” 
OR 
“ It’s pretty routine, really. I have been asked by the company to gather some information, and 
they suggested I might contact you. Okay?” 
 



:


establish transit statement
onc the interview ha a commit for assist he must describ in more detail the
purpos of the interview thi is done with the transit statement us to provid a
legitim basi for the inquiri and to explain to respond how thei fit into the inquiri
thi is usual done by mean of a broad descript when interview employe in the
same compani most of them alreadi presum the legitimaci of your request for assist
after describ the basic natur of the inquiri with the transit statement the
interview should seek a second commit for assist
exampl
interview
it pretti routin realli im gather some inform about the purchas function and
how it is suppos to work it would be help to me if i could start by ask you to tell me
about your job okai
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3221
when interview stranger the interview might have to describ with more particular
how the respond assist is need thi can be accomplish by on or more of the
method illustr below where the interview is talk to an outsid vendor
exampl
interview
it pretti routin realli as i sai i work for bailei book and iv been assign a project
to gather some inform about some of our procedur and becaus you work for on of our
vendor i thought it might be help to talk to you okai
or
it pretti routin realli i have been ask by the compani to gather inform on some of
our procedur i thought you might be abl to help by answer a few question okai
or
it pretti routin realli i have been ask by the compani to gather some inform and
thei suggest i might contact you okai
