2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Informational Questions/Other Considerations


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Other Considerations 
There should be two interviewers involved in potentially volatile situations. This procedure 
provides psychological strength for the interviewers. Additionally, the second person can 
serve as a witness in the event the interview turns bad.  
 
Surprise should be employed in any interview that is considered potentially volatile. In many 
instances, the potentially volatile respondent is unaware that he is going to be questioned, 
and will therefore be off guard. If the interview is not conducted by surprise, the interviewer 
runs the risk of the respondent not showing up, showing up with a witness, or being present 
with counsel. 
 
In a potentially volatile interview, the order of questions should be out of sequence. This is 
to keep the volatile respondent from knowing exactly the nature of the inquiry, and where it 
is leading. Although the interviewer will endeavor to obtain information regarding who, 
what, why, when, where, and how, the order of the questioning will vary from that of other 
interviews. This technique is especially important in situations where the respondent might 
be attempting to protect himself.  
 
The hypothetical question is generally considered to be less threatening, and is, therefore, 
ideally suited for the potentially volatile interview. For example, if you are interviewing Mr. 
Smith regarding Mr. Jones, rather than saying, “Did Mr. Jones do it?” ask, “Is there any reason why 
Mr. Jones would have done it?” 
 



:


other consider
there should be two interview involv in potenti volatil situat thi procedur
provid psycholog strength for the interview addition the second person can
serv as a wit in the event the interview turn bad
surpris should be emploi in ani interview that is consid potenti volatil in mani
instanc the potenti volatil respond is unawar that he is go to be question
and will therefor be off guard if the interview is not conduct by surpris the interview
run the risk of the respond not show up show up with a wit or be present
with counsel
in a potenti volatil interview the order of question should be out of sequenc thi is
to keep the volatil respond from know exactli the natur of the inquiri and where it
is lead although the interview will endeavor to obtain inform regard who
what why when where and how the order of the question will vari from that of other
interview thi techniqu is especi import in situat where the respond might
be attempt to protect himself
the hypothet question is gener consid to be less threaten and is therefor
ideal suit for the potenti volatil interview for exampl if you ar interview mr
smith regard mr jone rather than sai did mr jone do it ask is there ani reason why
mr jone would have done it
