2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Closing Questions/Gather Additional Facts


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Gather Additional Facts 
The closing-questions phase also seeks to obtain facts previously unknown. It provides the 
respondent further opportunity to say whatever they want about the matter at hand.  
If appropriate, the interviewer can ask if there are other documents or witnesses that would 
be helpful to the case. Do not promise confidentiality; instead, say, “I’ll keep your name as quiet 
as possible.” Finally, the interviewer wants to leave the discussion on a positive note.  
 
People being interviewed often do not volunteer additional information regarding other 
witnesses or evidence. The theme, therefore, is to provide the respondent an opportunity to 
furnish further relevant facts or opinions. At the conclusion, attempt to determine which 
facts provided by the respondent are the most relevant. Do not attempt to go over all the 
information a second time.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“You have known Linda Reed Collins eight years, correct?” 
 
“You knew Collins had some financial problems, is that right?” 
 
“You suspected—but didn’t know for sure—th at Collins might have had an improper 
relationship with one of our vendors. Is that correct?” 
 
On absolutely vital facts provided by the respondent, add “Are you sure?”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ Ms. De La Garza, are you sure you su spected Ms. Collins falsified invoices?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.236   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
To obtain additional facts, ask the respondent if there is something else she would like to 
say. This gives the correct impression that the interviewer is interested in all relevant 
information, regardless of which side it favors. Try to actively involve the respondent in 
helping solve the case—“If you were trying to resolve this issue, what would you do?” This 
technique gives the respondent an opportunity to assist the interviewer, and it makes the 
respondent feel like a vital part of the interview. In addition, asking the witness if there is 
anything else they would like to say opens the door for them to provide additional 
information that was not specifically asked for. Similarly, asking the subject if they know of 
someone else whom you might talk to can be helpful and lead to other potential sources  
of information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, there might be someone else I should talk to. Are there documents 
available that relate to this that we haven’t already discussed? If I keep your name as quiet as 
possible, are there any suggestions you can give me  about whom else I might talk to about this?” 
OR 
“Are there any other documents or evidence I might look for?” 
OR 
“If you were in my shoes, what would you do next?” 
 



:


gather addit fact
the closingquest phase also seek to obtain fact previous unknown it provid the
respond further opportun to sai whatev thei want about the matter at hand
if appropri the interview can ask if there ar other document or wit that would
be help to the case do not promis confidenti instead sai ill keep your name as quiet
as possibl final the interview want to leav the discuss on a posit note
peopl be interview often do not volunt addit inform regard other
wit or evid the theme therefor is to provid the respond an opportun to
furnish further relev fact or opinion at the conclus attempt to determin which
fact provid by the respond ar the most relev do not attempt to go over all the
inform a second time
exampl
interview
you have known linda reed collin eight year correct
you knew collin had some financi problem is that right
you suspectedbut didnt know for sureth at collin might have had an improp
relationship with on of our vendor is that correct
on absolut vital fact provid by the respond add ar you sure
exampl
interview
ms de la garza ar you sure you su spect ms collin falsifi invoic
interview theori and applic investig
3236 2011 fraud examin manual
to obtain addit fact ask the respond if there is someth els she would like to
sai thi give the correct impress that the interview is interest in all relev
inform regardless of which side it favor try to activ involv the respond in
help solv the caseif you were try to resolv thi issu what would you do thi
techniqu give the respond an opportun to assist the interview and it make the
respond feel like a vital part of the interview in addit ask the wit if there is
anyth els thei would like to sai open the door for them to provid addit
inform that wa not specif ask for similarli ask the subject if thei know of
someon els whom you might talk to can be help and lead to other potenti sourc
of inform
exampl
interview
ms de la garza there might be someon els i should talk to ar there document
avail that relat to thi that we havent alreadi discuss if i keep your name as quiet as
possibl ar there ani suggest you can give me about whom els i might talk to about thi
or
ar there ani other document or evid i might look for
or
if you were in my shoe what would you do next
