2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Establish Rationalization


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Establish Rationalization 
Once the accusation has been made, repeated, and denials are stopped, it is time for the 
interviewer to establish a morally acceptable rationalization that will allow the accused to 
square the misdeed with his conscience. It is not necessary that this theme be related to the 
underlying causes of the misconduct. It is common and acceptable for the accused to explain 
away the moral consequences of the action by seizing onto any plausible explanation other 
than being a “bad person.” 
 
If the accused does not seem to relate to one theme, the interviewer should go on to another 
until one seems to fit. Thereafter, that theme should be developed fully. Note that the theme 
development explains away the moral?but not the legal—consequences of the misdeed. 
The interviewer is cautioned not to make any statements that would lead the accused to 
believe he will be excused from legal liability by cooperating.  
 
The questions posed in the examples, rather than being confrontational, constantly seek 
agreement from the accused. The interviewer must strike a balance between being in control 
of the interview and still appearing compassionate and understanding. Again, no matter what 
conduct the accused has supposedly committed, the interviewer should not express shock, 
outrage, or condemnation. 
 



:


establish ration
onc the accus ha been made repeat and denial ar stop it is time for the
interview to establish a moral accept ration that will allow the accus to
squar the misde with hi conscienc it is not necessari that thi theme be relat to the
underli caus of the misconduct it is common and accept for the accus to explain
awai the moral consequ of the action by seiz onto ani plausibl explan other
than be a bad person
if the accus doe not seem to relat to on theme the interview should go on to anoth
until on seem to fit thereaft that theme should be develop fulli note that the theme
develop explain awai the moralbut not the legalconsequ of the misde
the interview is caution not to make ani statement that would lead the accus to
believ he will be excus from legal liabil by cooper
the question pose in the exampl rather than be confront constantli seek
agreement from the accus the interview must strike a balanc between be in control
of the interview and still appear compassion and understand again no matter what
conduct the accus ha supposedli commit the interview should not express shock
outrag or condemn
