2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Establish Rationalization/FAMILY PROBLEMS


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


FAMILY PROBLEMS 
Some people commit fraud because of family problems — financial woes caused by divorce, 
an unfaithful spouse, or demanding children. Men especially — who have been socially 
conditioned to tie their masculinity to earning power — might hold the notion that wealth 
connotes family respect. For their part, women have been found to commit white-collar 
crime in the name of their responsibility to the needs of their husbands and children. The 
skillful interviewer can convert this motive to his advantage by applying one of the following 
approaches. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know you have had some family problems. I know your recent divorce has been 
difficult for you. And I know how it is when these problems occur. You never would have done 
this if it hadn’t been for family problems; isn’t that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., someone in your position and with your ethics just doesn’t do things like this without a 
reason. And I think that reason has to do with trying to make the best possible life for your 
family. I know it would be difficult for me to admit to my family that we’re not as well off as we 
were last year. And that’s why you did this, isn’t it, E. J.?” 
    
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.258   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


famili problem
some peopl commit fraud becaus of famili problem financi woe caus by divorc
an unfaith spous or demand children men especi who have been social
condit to tie their masculin to earn power might hold the notion that wealth
connot famili respect for their part women have been found to commit whitecollar
crime in the name of their respons to the need of their husband and children the
skill interview can convert thi motiv to hi advantag by appli on of the follow
approach
exampl
interview
linda i know you have had some famili problem i know your recent divorc ha been
difficult for you and i know how it is when these problem occur you never would have done
thi if it hadnt been for famili problem isnt that right linda
or
e j someon in your posit and with your ethic just doesnt do thing like thi without a
reason and i think that reason ha to do with try to make the best possibl life for your
famili i know it would be difficult for me to admit to my famili that were not as well off as we
were last year and that why you did thi isnt it e j
interview theori and applic investig
3258 2011 fraud examin manual
