2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Diffuse Alibis/DISPLAY PHYSICAL EVIDENCE


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


DISPLAY PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
It is common for most guilty people to overestimate the amount of physical evidence. The 
interviewer wants to try and reinforce this notion in the way the evidence is laid out to the 
accused. The physical evidence — usually documents in fraud matters — generally should be 
displayed one piece at a time, in reverse order of importance. In this way, the full extent of 
the evidence is not immediately known by the accused. When the accused no longer denies 
culpability, the interviewer should stop displaying evidence.  
 
Each time a document or piece of evidence is laid out to the accused, its significance should 
be noted by the interviewer. During this phase, the accused is still trying to come to grips 
with being caught. The interviewer should, therefore, expect that the accused will attempt to 
lie his way out of the situation. Like denials, the interviewer should stop the alibis and other 
falsehoods before they are fully articulated.  
 
Once the alibis are diffused, the interviewer should return to the theme being developed. 
The following is an example of this technique used on Linda Reed Collins, who set up a 
fictitious company and embezzled money by approving payments from her employer to a 
shell corporation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t have done this. I am not responsible for paying invoices.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Here is one of the invoices in question [display document]. We never received the merchandise.” 
(Don’t mention whether you have talked to the accounts payable department or 
whether you have subjected the invoice to any document analysis.)  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.262   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“Look, Linda, it is useless for you to try to deny the truth. We have lots of evidence. Let’s just 
try to work this out, but you’ve got to help me, okay?” (Don’t accuse the person of 
lying — this just prolongs the process.) 
 



:


displai physic evid
it is common for most guilti peopl to overestim the amount of physic evid the
interview want to try and reinforc thi notion in the wai the evid is laid out to the
accus the physic evid usual document in fraud matter gener should be
displai on piec at a time in revers order of import in thi wai the full extent of
the evid is not immedi known by the accus when the accus no longer deni
culpabl the interview should stop displai evid
each time a document or piec of evid is laid out to the accus it signific should
be note by the interview dure thi phase the accus is still try to come to grip
with be caught the interview should therefor expect that the accus will attempt to
lie hi wai out of the situat like denial the interview should stop the alibi and other
falsehood befor thei ar fulli articul
onc the alibi ar diffus the interview should return to the theme be develop
the follow is an exampl of thi techniqu us on linda reed collin who set up a
fictiti compani and embezzl monei by approv payment from her employ to a
shell corpor
exampl
respond
i couldnt have done thi i am not respons for pai invoic
interview
here is on of the invoic in question displai document we never receiv the merchandis
dont mention whether you have talk to the account payabl depart or
whether you have subject the invoic to ani document analysi
interview theori and applic investig
3262 2011 fraud examin manual
look linda it is useless for you to try to deni the truth we have lot of evid let just
try to work thi out but youv got to help me okai dont accus the person of
ly thi just prolong the process
