2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Verbal Confession/SPECIFICS OF EACH OFFENSE


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


SPECIFICS OF EACH OFFENSE 
Once the major hurdles are overcome, the intervie wer should return to the specifics of each 
offense. Generally, this should simply start with the first instance and work through 
chronologically in a logical fashion.  
 
Because these questions are information seeking, they should be openly phrased so that the 
answer is independent of the question. It is best to seek the independent recollections of the 
confessor first before displaying physical evidence. If the confessor cannot independently 
recall, documents can be used to refresh his recollection. It generally is best to resolve all 
issues on each instance before proceeding to the next. In determining the specifics of the 
offense, the interviewer should usually ask: 
• Who has knowledge of this transaction? 
• What does this document mean? 
• When did this transaction occur? 
• Where did the proceeds of the transaction go? 
• Why was the transaction done? 
• How was the transaction covered up? 
 
Interviewing is a difficult act, seldom mastered without considerable practice. The preceding 
techniques, when properly employed, can immeasurably aid in developing truthful, reliable, 
and legally valid information. 
 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.272   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


specif of each offens
onc the major hurdl ar overcom the intervi wer should return to the specif of each
offens gener thi should simpli start with the first instanc and work through
chronolog in a logic fashion
becaus these question ar inform seek thei should be openli phrase so that the
answer is independ of the question it is best to seek the independ recollect of the
confessor first befor displai physic evid if the confessor cannot independ
recal document can be us to refresh hi recollect it gener is best to resolv all
issu on each instanc befor proceed to the next in determin the specif of the
offens the interview should usual ask
who ha knowledg of thi transact
what doe thi document mean
when did thi transact occur
where did the proce of the transact go
why wa the transact done
how wa the transact cover up
interview is a difficult act seldom master without consider practic the preced
techniqu when properli emploi can immeasur aid in develop truth reliabl
and legal valid inform
interview theori and applic investig
3272 2011 fraud examin manual
