2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Criteria-Based Statement Analysis/Peculiarities of Content


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Peculiarities of Content 
• Unusual details: The appearance of quirky but believable details lends credibility to the 
subject. Fabricated statements rarely contain these types of descriptions. 
• Superfluous details: A subject who provides details that are not essential or even related 
to the recalled event are most often speaking truthfully. A deceitful subject is so 
preoccupied with not telling the truth that he will excise this type of information from 
the story. 
• Accurately reported details misunderstood: When a witness describes details that he does 
not understand or comprehend, but that make sense to the interviewer, the witness is 
most often telling the truth. 
• Related external associations: In this criterion, the interviewer looks for points at which 
the interview subject relates the particular experience with some personal or external 
experiences. When the subject makes a relationship between the event and something 
that has previously occurred in his life, he is very likely being honest. 
• Accounts of subjective mental state: The subject who fills the interview with descriptions 
of feelings and emotions is very likely being truthful. When a subject cannot provide 
such feelings during the interview, this suggests that the subject has not thought through 
his deceptive story very thoroughly. 
• Attribution of perpetrator’s mental state:  The honest subject will often recount the 
perceived mental state of the perpetrator, suggesting what they believe the perpetrator 
was thinking or feeling at the time of the event. 
• Spontaneous corrections: An interview subj ect may often correct himself during the 
course of the interview, making alterations to earlier details or events. When a subject 
does this, he is most often giving truthful testimony. The deceptive subject wants to 
project as honest a façade as possible and do es not want to correct himself, because in 
his mind this gives the appearance of deceit. 
• Admitting lack of memory: This criterion works closely with the previous one, in that an 
honest interviewee will often admit to not remembering certain details. When the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.280   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
interviewee is lying to the interviewer, he wants to be as complete as possible in covering 
the fraudulent tracks. 
• Raising doubts about one’s own testimony: A deceitful interviewee will almost never 
raise any concerns about whether the testimony given is absolutely correct. If the subject 
raises concerns that he is correct, he is probably telling the truth. 
• Self-deprecation: The mention of any self-incriminating or personally unflattering details 
during the interview suggests that the interviewee is credible. A person who attempts to 
fabricate a story will not want to paint an unsavory picture of himself. 
• Pardoning the perpetrator: Should the intervi ewee attempt to excuse the perpetrator or 
avoid “bashing” the fraudster, the interviewee is likely being honest. 
 
 



:


peculiar of content
unusu detail the appear of quirki but believ detail lend credibl to the
subject fabric statement rare contain these type of descript
superflu detail a subject who provid detail that ar not essenti or even relat
to the recal event ar most often speak truthfulli a deceit subject is so
preoccupi with not tell the truth that he will excis thi type of inform from
the stori
accur report detail misunderstood when a wit describ detail that he doe
not understand or comprehend but that make sens to the interview the wit is
most often tell the truth
relat extern associ in thi criterion the interview look for point at which
the interview subject relat the particular experi with some person or extern
experi when the subject make a relationship between the event and someth
that ha previous occur in hi life he is veri like be honest
account of subject mental state the subject who fill the interview with descript
of feel and emot is veri like be truth when a subject cannot provid
such feel dure the interview thi suggest that the subject ha not thought through
hi decept stori veri thoroughli
attribut of perpetr mental state the honest subject will often recount the
perceiv mental state of the perpetr suggest what thei believ the perpetr
wa think or feel at the time of the event
spontan correct an interview subj ect mai often correct himself dure the
cours of the interview make alter to earlier detail or event when a subject
doe thi he is most often give truth testimoni the decept subject want to
project as honest a faad as possibl and do es not want to correct himself becaus in
hi mind thi give the appear of deceit
admit lack of memori thi criterion work close with the previou on in that an
honest interviewe will often admit to not rememb certain detail when the
interview theori and applic investig
3280 2011 fraud examin manual
interviewe is ly to the interview he want to be as complet as possibl in cover
the fraudul track
rais doubt about on own testimoni a deceit interviewe will almost never
rais ani concern about whether the testimoni given is absolut correct if the subject
rais concern that he is correct he is probabl tell the truth
selfdeprec the mention of ani selfincrimin or person unflatt detail
dure the interview suggest that the interviewe is credibl a person who attempt to
fabric a stori will not want to paint an unsavori pictur of himself
pardon the perpetr should the intervi ewe attempt to excus the perpetr or
avoid bash the fraudster the interviewe is like be honest
