2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Characteristics of a Good Interviewer


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Characteristics of a Good Interviewer 
All good interviewers share certain characteristics. Above all, they are “people persons,” and 
are talented at human interaction. Successful interviewers are the type of people with whom 
others are willing to share information. The good interviewer does not interrupt the 
respondent with unnecessary questions. During the interview, much pertinent information 
results from volunteered information, as opposed to responses to a specific question. The 
good interviewer displays interest in his subject and in what is being said. 
 
The respondent must understand that the interviewer is attempting to obtain only the 
relevant facts and is not “out to get” someone. This can best be done by phrasing questions 
in a nonaccusatory manner. Little is accomplished when the interviewer is formal, 
ostentatious, or attempts to impress the respondent with his authority. Information 
gathering is best accomplished by approaching the interview in an informal and low- 
key fashion. 
 
If the respondent perceives that the interviewer is biased or is attempting to confirm 
foregone conclusions, the respondent will be less likely to cooperate. Accordingly, the 
interviewer should make every effort to demonstrate a lack of bias. 
 
Professionalism in the interview often involves a state of mind and a commitment to 
excellence. The interviewer should be on time, be professionally attired, and be fair in all 
dealings with the respondent. It is absolutely vital that the interviewer not appear to be a 
threat. If people perceive that they are the target of an inquiry, they will be less likely  
to cooperate. 
 
 



:


characterist of a good interview
all good interview share certain characterist abov all thei ar peopl person and
ar talent at human interact success interview ar the type of peopl with whom
other ar will to share inform the good interview doe not interrupt the
respond with unnecessari question dure the interview much pertin inform
result from volunt inform as oppos to respons to a specif question the
good interview displai interest in hi subject and in what is be said
the respond must understand that the interview is attempt to obtain onli the
relev fact and is not out to get someon thi can best be done by phrase question
in a nonaccusatori manner littl is accomplish when the interview is formal
ostentati or attempt to impress the respond with hi author inform
gather is best accomplish by approach the interview in an inform and low
kei fashion
if the respond perceiv that the interview is bias or is attempt to confirm
foregon conclus the respond will be less like to cooper accordingli the
interview should make everi effort to demonstr a lack of bia
profession in the interview often involv a state of mind and a commit to
excel the interview should be on time be profession attir and be fair in all
deal with the respond it is absolut vital that the interview not appear to be a
threat if peopl perceiv that thei ar the target of an inquiri thei will be less like
to cooper
