2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Introductory Questions/Observe Reactions/CHRONEMICS


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


CHRONEMICS 
Chronemic communication refers to the use of time in interpersonal relationships to convey 
meaning, attitudes, and desires. If the respondent is late in keeping an appointment, for 
example, this might convey a lack of interest in or an avoidance of the interview.  
 
The most important chronemic technique used by interviewers is in the timing of questions. 
The interviewer can control the length of pauses and the rate of his speech. This is called 
pacing. The interviewer can also control the length of time after the respondent has finished a 
sentence before another question is posed. This is called the silent probe. 
 
Pacing is one of the principal nonverbal methods of setting an appropriate mood. The tense 
interviewer often communicates anxiety by a rapid-fire rate of speech, which in turn might 
increase anxiety in the respondent. To establish the more thoughtful, deliberative mood 
usually needed to stimulate free association, the interviewer must take the initiative in setting 
a more relaxed, deliberate pace. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.219 



:


chronem
chronem commun refer to the us of time in interperson relationship to convei
mean attitud and desir if the respond is late in keep an appoint for
exampl thi might convei a lack of interest in or an avoid of the interview
the most import chronem techniqu us by interview is in the time of question
the interview can control the length of paus and the rate of hi speech thi is call
pace the interview can also control the length of time after the respond ha finish a
sentenc befor anoth question is pose thi is call the silent probe
pace is on of the princip nonverb method of set an appropri mood the tens
interview often commun anxieti by a rapidfir rate of speech which in turn might
increas anxieti in the respond to establish the more thought delib mood
usual need to stimul free associ the interview must take the initi in set
a more relax deliber pace
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3219
