2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Theme Development


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


Theme Development 
People rarely confess voluntarily. People will confess to matters when they perceive that the 
benefits of confession outweigh the penalties. A good interviewer, through the application of 
sophisticated techniques, will be able to convince the respondent that the confession is in his 
best interest.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.251 
People generally will not confess if they believe that there is doubt in the mind of the accuser 
regarding their guilt. The interviewer must convey absolute confidence in the admission-seeking — 
even if not fully convinced. The inter viewer must make the accusation in the form 
of a statement of fact. Accusatory questions do not ask “Did you do it?” They ask, “Why did 
you do it?” 
 
An innocent person generally will not accept the question’s premise.  People confessing need 
adequate time to come to terms with their guilt; obtaining admissions and confessions takes 
patience. Therefore, admission-seeking interviews should be done only when there is 
sufficient privacy and time is not a factor. The interviewer must not express disgust, outrage, 
or moral condemnation about the confessor’s actions. To do so goes against the basic logic 
of obtaining confessions, which can be summed up as maximize sympathy and minimize the 
perception of moral wrongdoing.   
 
The interviewer must offer a morally acceptable reason for the confessor’s behavior. The 
interviewer cannot convey to the accused that he is a “bad person.” Guilty people will 
almost never confess under such conditions. To obtain a confession, the interviewer must be 
firm but must project compassion, understanding, and sympathy. The interviewer must 
attempt to keep the confessor from voicing a denial. Once the accused denies the act, 
overcoming that position will be very difficult. 
 
The threat of a lawsuit is always present when allegations of wrongdoing are made against 
certain employees. It is therefore important that examiners understand exactly what actions 
are permitted so that they can avoid potential liability. It is generally legal to accuse innocent 
people of misdeeds they did not commit as long as: 
• The accuser has reasonable suspicion or predication to believe the accused has 
committed an offense. 
• The accusation is made under conditions of privacy. 
• The accuser does not take any action likely to make an innocent person confess. 
• The accusation is conducted under reasonable conditions. 
 



:


theme develop
peopl rare confess voluntarili peopl will confess to matter when thei perceiv that the
benefit of confess outweigh the penalti a good interview through the applic of
sophist techniqu will be abl to convinc the respond that the confess is in hi
best interest
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3251
peopl gener will not confess if thei believ that there is doubt in the mind of the accus
regard their guilt the interview must convei absolut confid in the admissionseek
even if not fulli convinc the inter viewer must make the accus in the form
of a statement of fact accusatori question do not ask did you do it thei ask why did
you do it
an innoc person gener will not accept the question premis peopl confess need
adequ time to come to term with their guilt obtain admiss and confess take
patienc therefor admissionseek interview should be done onli when there is
suffici privaci and time is not a factor the interview must not express disgust outrag
or moral condemn about the confessor action to do so goe against the basic logic
of obtain confess which can be sum up as maxim sympathi and minim the
percept of moral wrongdo
the interview must offer a moral accept reason for the confessor behavior the
interview cannot convei to the accus that he is a bad person guilti peopl will
almost never confess under such condit to obtain a confess the interview must be
firm but must project compass understand and sympathi the interview must
attempt to keep the confessor from voic a denial onc the accus deni the act
overcom that posit will be veri difficult
the threat of a lawsuit is alwai present when alleg of wrongdo ar made against
certain employe it is therefor import that examin understand exactli what action
ar permit so that thei can avoid potenti liabil it is gener legal to accus innoc
peopl of misde thei did not commit as long as
the accus ha reason suspicion or predic to believ the accus ha
commit an offens
the accus is made under condit of privaci
the accus doe not take ani action like to make an innoc person confess
the accus is conduct under reason condit
