2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Establish Rationalization/MINOR MORAL INFRACTION


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


MINOR MORAL INFRACTION 
The interviewer in many cases can reduce the accused’s perception of the moral seriousness 
of the matter. This is not to be confused with the legal seriousness. Fraud examiners and 
interviewers should be careful to avoid making statements that could be construed as 
relieving legal responsibility. For example, the examiner should not state: “It is not a big deal, 
legally. It’s just a technical violation.” Instead, the interviewer should play down the moral side. 
One effective way is through comparisons, such as those illustrated below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, this problem we have doesn’t mean you’re Jack the Ripper. When you compare what 
you’ve done to things other people do, this situation seems pretty insignificant, doesn’t it?” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.260   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
OR 
“E. J., everything is relative. What you’ve done doesn’t even come close to some of the other 
things that have happened. You’re not Bernie Madoff, right E. J.?” 
OR 
“I could see myself in your place. I probably wo uld have done the same thing, wouldn’t I?” 
 



:


minor moral infract
the interview in mani case can reduc the accus percept of the moral serious
of the matter thi is not to be confus with the legal serious fraud examin and
interview should be care to avoid make statement that could be constru as
reliev legal respons for exampl the examin should not state it is not a big deal
legal it just a technic violat instead the interview should plai down the moral side
on effect wai is through comparison such as those illustr below
exampl
interview
linda thi problem we have doesnt mean your jack the ripper when you compar what
youv done to thing other peopl do thi situat seem pretti insignific doesnt it
interview theori and applic investig
3260 2011 fraud examin manual
or
e j everyth is rel what youv done doesnt even come close to some of the other
thing that have happen your not berni madoff right e j
or
i could see myself in your place i probabl wo uld have done the same thing wouldnt i
