2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION/Admission-Seeking Questions/Verbal Confession/MOTIVE FOR OFFENSE


:


Investigation


:


Interviewing Suspects and Signed Statements


:


MOTIVE FOR OFFENSE 
Motive  is the moving power that prompts a person to act. Motive, however, should not be 
confused with intent, which refers to the state of mind of the accused when performing the 
act. Motive, unlike intent, is not an essential element and criminal law generally treats a 
person’s motive as irrelevant. Even so, motive is relevant for other purposes: it will often 
guide the interviewer to the proper rationalization, it further incriminates the accused, and it 
is important for a successful prosecution. Therefore, it is best that the interviewer elicit the 
suspect’s motive when obtaining a verbal confession. The motive might be the same as the 
theme the interviewer developed earlier—or it  might not. The most common response is “I 
don’t know.” The interviewer should probe for additional information, but if it is not 
forthcoming, then attribute the motive to the theme developed earlier. The motive should be 
established along the lines below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, we have discussed what might have led you to do this. But I need to hear it in your 
words. Why do you think you did this?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.268   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


motiv for offens
motiv is the move power that prompt a person to act motiv howev should not be
confus with intent which refer to the state of mind of the accus when perform the
act motiv unlik intent is not an essenti element and crimin law gener treat a
person motiv as irrelev even so motiv is relev for other purpos it will often
guid the interview to the proper ration it further incrimin the accus and it
is import for a success prosecut therefor it is best that the interview elicit the
suspect motiv when obtain a verbal confess the motiv might be the same as the
theme the interview develop earlieror it might not the most common respons is i
dont know the interview should probe for addit inform but if it is not
forthcom then attribut the motiv to the theme develop earlier the motiv should be
establish along the line below
exampl
interview
linda we have discuss what might have led you to do thi but i need to hear it in your
word why do you think you did thi
interview theori and applic investig
3268 2011 fraud examin manual
