2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Federal Government Records/U.S. Small Business Administration


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


U.S. Small Business Administration 
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) is a federal agency that provides support to 
small businesses. The SBA guarantees loans made by private lenders and makes direct loans 
for business construction, expansion, or conversion; for purchase of machinery, equipment, 
facilities, supplies, or materials; and for work ing capital. A loan applicant (sole owner, 
partnership, corporation, or other) must complete SBA forms, providing information about 
the business and its principals (owners, officers, and directors). 
 
Additionally, the SBA arranges contracts and guarantees loans for qualified, small, minority-
 owned businesses. For some of these businesses, the SBA might be the only source for 
financial and other information about the businesses, their principals, their assets, and other 
data. Because their stock is not publicly held, these businesses are not subject to public 
disclosure laws.  
 
The SBA also connects small firms owned by socially and economically disadvantaged 
Americans with contracts set aside by other federal agencies for the purposes of increasing 
opportunities for small businesses generally.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.447 



:


us small busi administr
the us small busi administr sba is a feder agenc that provid support to
small busi the sba guarante loan made by privat lender and make direct loan
for busi construct expans or convers for purchas of machineri equip
facil suppli or materi and for work ing capit a loan applic sole owner
partnership corpor or other must complet sba form provid inform about
the busi and it princip owner offic and director
addition the sba arrang contract and guarante loan for qualifi small minor
own busi for some of these busi the sba might be the onli sourc for
financi and other inform about the busi their princip their asset and other
data becaus their stock is not publicli held these busi ar not subject to public
disclosur law
the sba also connect small firm own by social and econom disadvantag
american with contract set asid by other feder agenc for the purpos of increas
opportun for small busi gener
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3447
