2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/SOURCES OF INFORMATION/Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases/Interstate Identification Index


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Interstate Identification Index 
The Interstate Identification Index (III) is an “index-pointer” system for the interstate 
exchange of criminal records. Under the III, the FBI maintains an index of people arrested 
for felonies or serious misdemeanors under state or federal law. The index includes 
identification data (name, birth date, race, sex, etc.) and the FBI and state identification 
numbers (SIDs) from all states that have information about an individual. 
 
Search queries from justice agencies nationwide are transmitted via state telecommunications 
networks and the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) lines. Searches are made 
by name and other identifiers. The III held the criminal histories of more than 64.9 million 
individuals as of September 2008. Forty-eight states participated in the III as of that date. 
Ten also participated in the National Fingerprint File (NFF). The NFF states have assumed 
responsibility for criminal and non-criminal requests.  
 



:


interst identif index
the interst identif index iii is an indexpoint system for the interst
exchang of crimin record under the iii the fbi maintain an index of peopl arrest
for feloni or seriou misdemeanor under state or feder law the index includ
identif data name birth date race sex etc and the fbi and state identif
number sid from all state that have inform about an individu
search queri from justic agenc nationwid ar transmit via state telecommun
network and the fbi nation crime inform center ncic line search ar made
by name and other identifi the iii held the crimin histori of more than 649 million
individu as of septemb 2008 fortyeight state particip in the iii as of that date
ten also particip in the nation fingerprint file nff the nff state have assum
respons for crimin and noncrimin request
