2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Investigating with the Internet


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Investigating with the Internet 
A great deal of information can be accessed through the Internet for little or no cost. This 
section explains some Internet basics, as well as how to use its services to obtain information 
about people, businesses, and fraud in general. 
 
The Internet is a decentralized global network of millions of diverse computers and 
computer networks. These networks can all “talk” to each other because they have agreed to 
use a common communications protocol called TCP/IP, which is named after its two most 
important protocols: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP). 
 
Essentially, the Internet is a tool for communications between people and businesses. In 
general, the Internet is a giant network linking together millions of computers worldwide. 
 
The Internet is not organized by any uniform system, such as libraries’ Dewey Decimal 
System. Instead, it remains a free-floating, loosely-strung gold mine of information, available 
to those who understand how to use it. Unless you know the exact addresses of the Internet 
sites you are looking for, it is necessary to learn how to find the information.  
 
An Internet site, or page, is a single Web address, generally introduced by a person or a 
company to post information on a topic or to generate or promote business. There are a 
number of websites that will be of use to a fraud examiner, and some are listed and 
discussed at the end of this chapter. 
 



:


investig with the internet
a great deal of inform can be access through the internet for littl or no cost thi
section explain some internet basic as well as how to us it servic to obtain inform
about peopl busi and fraud in gener
the internet is a decentr global network of million of divers comput and
comput network these network can all talk to each other becaus thei have agre to
us a common commun protocol call tcpip which is name after it two most
import protocol transmiss control protocol tcp and internet protocol ip
essenti the internet is a tool for commun between peopl and busi in
gener the internet is a giant network link togeth million of comput worldwid
the internet is not organ by ani uniform system such as librari dewei decim
system instead it remain a freefloat looselystrung gold mine of inform avail
to those who understand how to us it unless you know the exact address of the internet
site you ar look for it is necessari to learn how to find the inform
an internet site or page is a singl web address gener introduc by a person or a
compani to post inform on a topic or to gener or promot busi there ar a
number of websit that will be of us to a fraud examin and some ar list and
discuss at the end of thi chapter
