2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Limitations of Online Public Database Searches


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Limitations of Online Public Database Searches 
There are, however, limitations to online public database searches, including: 
• Online coverage varies widely from state to state. The fraud examiner should determine 
whether specific information is available for each investigation. 
• Searches are limited in the area they cover. Fortunately for the crook, most of his public 
record “evidence” is generally filed at the county level. If he is smart enough to know 
how to conduct transactions outside his normal locality, then he can be tough to track 
without using multijurisdictional online sources. Making sure you are looking in the right 
county is important. You can be off by one county and miss pertinent land holdings, 
divorce records, liens, and so forth. 
• All online public records are brief abstracts of the original public record. 
• The source of the information compiled in a vendor’s database must be reliable. 
• Information must be checked to determine if it is accurate and current.  
• The records or publications that have been compiled in an electronic format may not go 
back very far. 
• Also, Internet search engines are notoriously erratic in their retrieval. 
 



:


limit of onlin public databas search
there ar howev limit to onlin public databas search includ
onlin coverag vari wide from state to state the fraud examin should determin
whether specif inform is avail for each investig
search ar limit in the area thei cover fortun for the crook most of hi public
record evid is gener file at the counti level if he is smart enough to know
how to conduct transact outsid hi normal local then he can be tough to track
without us multijurisdict onlin sourc make sure you ar look in the right
counti is import you can be off by on counti and miss pertin land hold
divorc record lien and so forth
all onlin public record ar brief abstract of the origin public record
the sourc of the inform compil in a vendor databas must be reliabl
inform must be check to determin if it is accur and current
the record or public that have been compil in an electron format mai not go
back veri far
also internet search engin ar notori errat in their retriev
