2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE/Online Public Database Searches/Newspaper/Media Databases


:


Investigation


:


Sources of Information


:


Newspaper/Media Databases 
Newspapers, periodicals, and journals can be excellent sources of information in a fraud 
investigation, particularly when searching for background information on an individual or a 
business. For example, in a Texas case, a person accused of insider trading was cleared using 
materials from an media database search. Defense attorneys gathered more than 300 
published comments about the company’s financial prospects and showed that someone 
following the advice distributed freely in the press would have made more money than  
the accused.2 
                                                 
2 Bernstein, Paul. Computers for Lawyers: A Complete Guide to Law Office Automation. 2nd ed. Chicago: ATLA Press, 
1997. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.530   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Searchable databases containing information from literally hundreds of published sources 
can usually be accessed for free at most libraries. There are also a number of online 
databases that deal specifically with news and media resources. These databases compile a 
number of different media resources and allow the user to search for a specific topic, 
returning articles or transcripts that pertain to the requested subject. Most publications allow 
users to search their archives for free; the full text of articles is available, but usually for a fee. 
Using one of the following services allows users to search many publications at once. 
 



:


newspapermedia databas
newspap period and journal can be excel sourc of inform in a fraud
investig particularli when search for background inform on an individu or a
busi for exampl in a texa case a person accus of insid trade wa clear us
materi from an media databas search defens attornei gather more than 300
publish comment about the compani financi prospect and show that someon
follow the advic distribut freeli in the press would have made more monei than
the accused2
2 bernstein paul comput for lawyer a complet guid to law offic autom 2nd ed chicago atla press
1997
access inform onlin investig
3530 2011 fraud examin manual
searchabl databas contain inform from liter hundr of publish sourc
can usual be access for free at most librari there ar also a number of onlin
databas that deal specif with new and media resourc these databas compil a
number of differ media resourc and allow the user to search for a specif topic
return articl or transcript that pertain to the request subject most public allow
user to search their archiv for free the full text of articl is avail but usual for a fee
us on of the follow servic allow user to search mani public at onc
