2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Civil Litigation/Pre-trial Motions in Civil Court


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Pre-trial Motions in Civil Court 
As noted above, there may be a series of pre-trial conferences in which the parties to the suit sit 
down with the judge. These exchanges are designed to narrow the dispute to as few 
contested points as possible, and to remove procedural obstacles that could delay a trial. 
Judges also may encourage parties to settle during this stage.  
 
Once one party files a motion, the other side can object and file an opposing motion. There 
generally will be a hearing in person before the judge on the motion. Sometimes a judge 
reviews the material in each side’s motion papers and will issue a tentative ruling  just before the 
hearing to indicate which way the opinion is likely to go. This gives each side an idea of how 
to prepare their arguments for the hearing. At the hearing, each side argues its case to the 
judge and answers questions from the bench. The judge may announce a decision 
immediately or take the matter “under submission,” making the final ruling later.  
 
Some common pre-trial motions are listed below, but please note that the actual names of 
the motions vary among jurisdictions. 
 



:


pretrial motion in civil court
as note abov there mai be a seri of pretrial confer in which the parti to the suit sit
down with the judg these exchang ar design to narrow the disput to as few
contest point as possibl and to remov procedur obstacl that could delai a trial
judg also mai encourag parti to settl dure thi stage
onc on parti file a motion the other side can object and file an oppos motion there
gener will be a hear in person befor the judg on the motion sometim a judg
review the materi in each side motion paper and will issu a tent rule just befor the
hear to indic which wai the opinion is like to go thi give each side an idea of how
to prepar their argument for the hear at the hear each side argu it case to the
judg and answer question from the bench the judg mai announc a decis
immedi or take the matter under submiss make the final rule later
some common pretrial motion ar list below but pleas note that the actual name of
the motion vari among jurisdict
