2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation


:


Investigation


:


ZZ_Miscellaneous


:


Investigation
 
ANALYZING DOCUMENTS 
 
The fraud examiner will usually obtain a great deal of documentary evidence. It is critical that 
the examiner understand the relevance of this evidence and how it should be preserved and 
presented. Always keep in mind that documents can either help or hurt a case, depending on 
which ones are presented and how they are presented. The goal is to make certain that all 
relevant documents are included, and all irrelevant documents are eliminated. Many 
examiners pay too much attention to documents. It is easy to get bogged down in detail 
when examining records and to lose sight of a simple fact: documents do not make cases; 
witnesses make cases. The documents make or break the witness. So-called paper cases often 
confuse and bore a jury. 
 
Basic procedures in handling evidence are required for it to be accepted by the court.  
Proof must be provided that the evidence is relevant and material. Evidence submitted  
must be properly identified, and it must be established that the proper chain of custody  
was maintained. 
 
The relevance of documents cannot be easily determined early in a case. For that reason, all 
possible relevant documents should be obtained. If they are not needed, they can always be 
returned. Here are a few general rules regarding the collection of documents: 
• Obtain original documents where feasible. Make working copies for review, and keep the 
originals segregated. 
• Do not touch originals any more than necessary; they might later have to undergo 
forensic analysis. 
• Maintain a good filing system for the documents. This is especially critical when large 
numbers of documents are obtained. Losing a key document is an unpardonable sin, and 
can mortally damage the case. Documents can be stamped sequentially for easy 
reference. 
 
 
Obtaining Documentary Evidence 
Documentary evidence may be obtained in a number of ways. If both parties agree, it is 
possible to obtain evidence by consent. This is the preferred method. Consent can be oral or 
written. When information is obtained from possible adverse witnesses, or the target of the 
examination, it is recommended that the consent be in writing. Sample forms are contained 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in the Appendix to the “Report Writing” chapter. In many cases, however, the investigator 
will not wish to alert the suspect to his intentions and other routes must be taken.  
 
If the evidence is owned by and in the control of the party that requests the information 
(e.g., in an employee’s desk drawers at the office), then the investigator is usually able to 
obtain the documents as required.  
 
If, however, evidence is held by other parties or in uncontrolled locations, specific legal 
action is required. Most often, the legal process used takes the form of a subpoena or other 
court order to produce the documents and records (including electronic records). Other 
forms of court orders can be used to obtain witness evidence and statements.  
  
Under no circumstances should the investigator attempt to obtain documents by other 
means, as this can lead to charges of theft, trespass, and other sanctions. Further details are 
provided in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual. 
 
Types of Evidence 
There are two basic types of admissible evidence: direct or circumstantial. Direct evidence  
shows prima facie the facts at issue; it proves the fact directly. What constitutes direct 
evidence depends on the factors involved. For example, in the Linda Reed Collins case 
involving possible kickbacks, which is included in the Appendix to this section, direct 
evidence might be a check from the vendor to her. 
 
Circumstantial evidence  is that which indirectly shows culpability. In the case of a kickback 
allegation against Collins, cash deposits of unknown origin deposited to her account around 
the time of the suspect transaction could be considered circumstantial evidence.  
 
Organization of Evidence 
Keeping track of the amount of paper generated is one of the biggest problems in fraud 
cases. It is essential that documents obtained be properly organized early on in an 
examination, and that they be continuously reorganized as the case progresses. Remember, it 
is usually difficult to ascertain the relevance of the evidence early in the case. Good 
organization in complex cases includes the following: 
• Segregating documents by either witness or transaction. In the first method, the 
examiner takes the list of names, whether employee, associate, or witness, and begins 
assembling collected documents by witness. Alternatively, the fraud examiner might find 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.103 
it easier to organize the information by grouping evidence of the same or similar 
transactions together. Chronological organization, however, is the least preferred 
method. 
• Making a key document file — a separate file that contains copies of certain important pieces 
of information for quick access — for easy access to the most relevant documents. 
Periodically review the key documents. Move the less important documents to backup 
files and keep only the most relevant documents in the main file. 
• Establish a database early if there is a large amount of information to process. This 
database can be manual or computerized and accessed by keywords or Bates Stamp 
numbering. The database should include, at a minimum, the date of the document, the 
individual from whom the document was obtained, the date obtained, a brief 
description, and the subject to whom the document pertains. 
 
Chronologies 
A chronology of events should be commenced early in the case. The purpose of maintaining 
a chronology is to establish the chain of events leading to the proof. The chronology might 
or might not be made a part of the formal report; at a minimum, it can be used for analysis 
of the case and placed in a working paper binder. Keep the chronology brief and include 
only information necessary to prove the case. By making the chronology too detailed, you 
defeat its purpose. The chronology should be revised as necessary, adding new information 
and deleting  
the irrelevant. 
 
To-Do Lists 
Another indispensable aid is the to-do list. The list, which must be updated frequently, 
should be kept in a stenographer’s pad or other permanent ring binder to allow a cumulative 
record. In a very complex case, the list can be broken into long- and short-term objectives: 
that which must be done eventually (e.g., prove elements of a particular count), and that 
which should be done tomorrow (e.g., conduct an interview or draft a subpoena). However 
organized, some sort of list must be kept, otherwise important points will be forgotten in the 
lengthy case. A sample checklist is included in the “Report Writing” chapter. 
 
 
Examining Fraudulent Documents 
Forged, altered, fabricated, and other suspicious documents are regularly encountered in 
fraud cases. Most business, legal issues, or financial transactions will produce a substantial 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
amount of paper, including contracts, agreements, wills, order forms, invoices, and 
statements. These documents can be evidence in establishing that a fraud was committed, in 
determining the nature and scope of the fraud, and in identifying the parties responsible. 
  
The fraud examiner is not expected to be a document expert. He should, however, be aware 
of ways to spot phony documents and have knowledge of the capabilities and limitations of 
forensic examinations. In addition, if the fraud examiner suspects that significant documents 
are phony, he should consider consulting with an expert. Expert forensic examinations 
conducted as a part of a fraud investigation can contribute to its success in several ways: 
• Expert examination results can assist in developing and proving the fraud theory: who 
did what and when they did it. 
• Expert examination results can corroborate or refute statements by witnesses or fraud 
suspects. 
• Having the results of expert examinations before interviews can provide significant 
leverage for the examiner during his interviews with fraud suspects, even resulting in 
admissions of guilt from suspects who are confronted with the factual evidence. 
• Forensic handwriting examinations and comparisons can result in the positive 
identification of the writer or signer of a document. Since writing is a conscious act, the 
identification might serve to prove that a particular act is intentional or willful. Proof of 
intent is usually necessary to prosecute a wrongdoer successfully. 
 
 
Early Consultation with an Expert Can Prove Valuable 
An expert’s assistance can be of value early in an investigation, not just in preparation for a 
trial. Fraud examiners should consider consulting with experts early in their investigation or 
inquiry if they suspect that significant documents are phony or have been forged, altered, or 
otherwise manipulated. Many times the scope of an investigation can be narrowed or 
directed by eliminating multiple suspects through handwriting examinations. The expert’s 
findings might solidify the fraud examiner’s theories of how the fraud was committed, or 
they can prevent wasted effort by proving theories incorrect at an earlier stage. See the end 
of this section for more information about finding help in document examinations. 
 
 
Types of Forensic Document Examinations 
There are many different types of forensic document examinations. However, most 
examinations (more than 95 percent of all U.S. Federal Bureau of Investigation Laboratory 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.105 
document examinations, for example) concern signatures, handwriting, hand printing, or 
documents created by a typewriter or word processor. Additionally, issues concerning 
photocopies and determining when a document was prepared frequently arise. Fraud 
examiners should be aware that many different types of forensic examinations are possible, 
but that the following forensic examinations could be of particular value when a fraud 
involves documents: 
• Detection of forged signatures 
• Identification of the writers of signatures, handwriting, and hand printing 
• Detecting altered documents 
• Detecting and restoring erasures and eradications 
• Determining when a document was or was not prepared 
• Detecting counterfeited documents and examining printed documents 
• Detecting and restoring faint indented writings 
• Comparisons of paper and inks 
• Determining whether two sheets of paper came from the same tablet or pad of paper 
• Examinations of paper folds and sequence of folds 
• Comparisons of torn or cut paper edges 
• Restoration of charred and partially burned documents 
• Identifying the machine that made a photocopy and whether two copies were made on 
the same machine 
• Examinations of facsimile (fax) copies 
• Identifying the source of, or alterations to, notary seals, wax seals, and cachets 
• Detecting the opening and resealing of sealed documents and examining adhesives 
• Detecting inserted text in typewritten, printed, or handwritten documents 
• Determining the sequence of handwritten text, signatures, and typewriting 
• Identifying rubber stamp impressions 
• Identifying mechanical check-writer and numbering-device impressions 
 
 
Handling Documents as Physical Evidence 
A document can be a piece of physical evidence and not just a source of information. As a 
piece of evidence it should be handled carefully and stored properly in a sealed, initialed, and 
dated paper folder or envelope to avoid damage or contamination. If necessary, make a 
working copy and preserve the original document for submission to a forensic document 
examiner. Most forensic examinations will require the original document, not a copy of it, 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
since most photocopies do not reproduce original writings, typewriting, or other features 
with sufficient clarity or detail to allow adequate examination. 
 
When initialing a document for future identification, do it in a non-critical area and use a 
different type of writing instrument than was used for the questioned writings on the 
document. The examiner should never write or make markings on the original document 
other than his unobtrusive initials for identification. Do not add new folds, staple it, place 
paper clips on it, crumple it, or do anything else that would affect or change its original 
condition. If stored in an envelope, be careful not to write on the envelope and cause 
indentations on the original document inside. Photocopies and laser-printed documents 
should always be stored in paper folders or envelopes, not transparent plastic envelopes, 
which can result in the copies sticking to the plastic and destroying some features of the 
document. 
 
Chain of Custody 
From the moment evidence is received, its chain of custody  must be maintained for it to be 
accepted by the court. This means that a record must be made when the item is received or 
when it leaves the care, custody, or control of the fraud examiner. This is best handled by a 
memorandum of interview with the custodian of the records when the evidence is received. 
The memorandum should state: 
• What items were received 
• When they were received 
• From whom they were received 
• Where they are maintained 
 
If the item is later turned over to someone else, a record of this should be made—preferably 
in memorandum form. All evidence received should be uniquely marked so that it can be 
identified later. The preferable way is to initial and date the item; however, this can pose 
problems in the case of original business records furnished voluntarily. For them, a small tick 
mark or other nondescript identifier can be used. If it is not practical to mark the original 
document, it should be placed in a sealed envelope, which should then be initialed and dated. 
 
Preserving for Fingerprint Examinations 
If fingerprint examinations are anticipated, use gloves to handle the documents (be careful if 
tweezers are used because they can leave indentations that might obscure faint indented 
writings or the identifiable indentations that are sometimes left by photocopy and fax 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.107 
machines). If you or other known people have inadvertently handled the documents with 
bare hands, your names should be provided to the fingerprint specialist. It might be 
necessary to provide the expert with sets of inked fingerprints of these people for 
elimination purposes. (See the “Fingerprints” section for additional information.) 
 
Charred or Partially Burned Documents 
These documents might contain valuable evidence if restored by experts, but they are very 
fragile and should be handled with extreme care. For proper preservation and storage, 
trained experts might use special polyester film sheets and envelopes, which are not readily 
available to the fraud examiner. The examiner can best preserve such evidence for 
submission to the forensic expert by using a sturdy crush-proof container into which he 
places layers of cotton (available in rolls at fabric and sewing materials shops). Carefully slide 
a sheet of paper or thin cardboard under the burned fragments, lift them and place them on 
the layers of cotton, then remove the paper used for lifting. Gently place additional layers of 
cotton over the fragments until the container is filled. Do not compress the cotton. Seal the 
container, initial and date it, add an identifying contents label or exhibit number, and clearly 
write or stamp “Fragile” on the container. 
 
Recognizing Phony Documents 
Forensic document examiners apply scientific methods and use a variety of technical 
instruments in conducting examinations and comparisons of documents. Individual minute 
characteristics in handwriting and typewriting are examined and compared with genuine 
comparison standards. Detailed analyses are made of document features for proof of 
changes or modifications. Instruments used include sensitive measuring devices, low-power 
magnifying glasses, several types of microscopes, ultraviolet and infrared lighting, optical 
filters, micro and macro photography, computerized image-enhancement systems, sensitive 
instruments to detect faint indented writings, and numerous others. Various chemical 
analyses are also conducted. 
 
Although not expected to be a documents expert, an observant fraud examiner might be 
able to recognize some features of documents that could alert him to their fraudulent nature: 
• Signature forgeries  might be recognized by irregularities noticeable in the written letters 
and/or by their differences in size from a genuine signature. A side-by-side comparison 
with a genuine signature might reveal the differences. However, remember that advanced 
age, poor health, temporary injury, and the use of drugs and alcohol can result in similar 
discrepancies and might mislead the examiner. Genuine comparison samples should be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
obtained, and a forensic document examiner consulted to make an expert determination. 
(See the “How to Obtain Handwriting Samples” section.) 
• Substituted pages  in multiple-page documents, such as contracts and wills, can often be 
spotted by holding each page in front of a bright light. Differences in the whiteness, 
density, thickness, opacity, and paper-fiber patterns of the substituted sheets might be 
apparent. 
• Some ink differences, alterations, erasures, and obliterations are also revealed by holding the 
paper in front of a bright light or holding a light over the writings at different angles and 
observing differences in the color and reflectivity of the inks or disturbances to the paper 
surface. 
• Counterfeited printed documents, such as checks, stock and bond certificates, business forms 
and stationery, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and other identification documents, are 
sometimes readily disclosed by side-by-side comparisons with corresponding genuine 
documents. Be alert for the use of incorrect or different versions or form revisions of 
the documents. For forensic examinations, it will be necessary to obtain and furnish 
genuine comparison samples of the printed documents to the document examiner. (See 
the “Counterfeit Printed Documents” section.) 
• Suspicious indented writings might be revealed by reducing the light in the room and holding 
a bright beam of light (a narrow-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp will do the 
job) low and parallel to the page surface. (See the “Indented Writings” section.) 
 
 
Identifying Writings 
The development of a person’s handwriting usually begins at an early age as part of his 
formal education. So-called copy-book styles are taught, and the students are instructed 
through exercises to emulate as nearly as possible those letter formations. However, from 
the very beginning, the students’ writing skills vary considerably due to their differing 
physical and mental capabilities. These differences between individuals increase with age; 
physical development; and the acquisition of skills, differing aesthetic values, differences in 
education, and differences in the personal and professional usage of writing. As a result, each 
person’s writings contain a unique and identifiable combination of acquired individual 
personal characteristics and shared “class” characteristics. Forensic document examiners are 
trained and experienced in examining and comparing writings and assessing this combination 
of individual and class characteristics in making expert determinations of identity or  
non-identity. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.109 
Class Characteristics 
Fraud examiners should not be misled in developing suspects by mistaking similar class 
characteristics in different writing samples. Samples that seem to look alike are not necessarily 
from the same individual. The writings of some people might share superficial similarities in 
appearance and style and look the same to the layman when, in fact, they are very different. 
Forensic document examiners can correct this mistake. 
 
Copy-Book Styles  
Some of a writer’s letter shapes, handwritings tyle, and other characteristics might be shared 
by other writers because they were taught the same original copy-book system. In the United 
States, different states and different school districts within the states teach several different 
copy-book systems. Internationally, different systems are also taught. Writers might retain 
remnants of the system they learned as children. As an example, second-language writings of 
people taught in a Cyrillic (Russian) alphabet style will be influenced by Cyrillic letter styles 
and might contain some similarities. As another example, the hand printing and numeral 
styles taught to draftsmen, architects, and engineers might result in apparent similarities in 
the hand printing of people trained in those professions. 
 
“Copycat” Styles  
Some writers, especially adolescents, the young, and the easily influenced, might adopt the 
general handwriting style or some individual letter designs of a respected teacher or parent, 
or one shared by their peers. An example is the exaggerated rounded letter forms and 
circular “i” dots and periods that form the so-called bubble writings of some adolescent 
females. This style is usually abandoned as the person matures.  
 
Natural Variations, Disguise, Distortions, and Forgeries 
Variations  
No one signs his signature or writes exactly the same way twice because writing is a human 
act of coordinated mental and muscular activity, not the precise, repetitive action of a 
machine. However, each writer has his own fairly specific range of natural variation. Several 
examples of writing are necessary for a forensic document examiner to establish if a 
questioned writing is, or is not, within the range of natural variation of a particular writer. If 
fraud examiners find two signatures that are exactly alike, then at least one is a forgery, 
probably a tracing.  
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Disguise  
Disguise is the conscious, intentional effort by a person to change or conceal his normal 
writings. Disguise is attempted in an effort to prepare writings that can later be disclaimed or 
that the writer hopes will be anonymous and cannot be traced to the source. The success of 
an attempt to disguise writings depends on the writer’s skill and knowledge of writings. Most 
attempts at disguise involve one or more of the following: change in slant, change in size, 
change in shapes of capital (upper-case) letters, changes in the shapes and sizes of loops in 
letters that contain them, use of bizarre letter designs, or block (squared) hand printing. Only 
rarely is the opposite, non-writing hand used. Fraud examiners should be aware that it is 
possible to successfully disguise writings to the point that they cannot be positively 
identified, even by experts.  This is especially true when only limited amounts of writings  
are involved. 
 
Distortions  
Distortions are unintentional changes to a person’s writings that are beyond his range of 
natural variation. Distortion can be caused by temporary impairment due to illness, injury to 
the writing hand or arm, substance abuse, extreme physical weakness, unusual writing 
environment, irregular or unusual writing surface, or unfamiliar writing materials, or might 
be permanent due to extreme age and feebleness. Fraud examiners should be aware that 
distortions in writings can, on occasion, be so severe that positive identifications of a 
person’s writings might not be possible, even by experts.  
 
Forgeries 
A forgery is defined as any writing prepared with the intent to deceive or defraud. Most 
forgeries are signatures. Forgery can be done by simulation, by tracing, or by freehand preparation.  
 
SIMULATED AND TRACED FORGERIES  
A simulated or traced forgery is a writing, usually a signature, prepared by carefully copying 
or tracing a model example of another person’s writings. Although identifiable as a forgery, a 
simulated or traced signature forgery often does not contain enough normal handwriting 
characteristics of the forger to permit expert identification. 
 
Remember, no one writes his signature exactly the same way twice. If two signatures look 
exactly alike, try superimposing the signature areas of the two documents by holding them in 
front of a bright light. If they precisely match, then one or both are traced forgeries. Be 
aware that in some instances it might be possible to locate the original document bearing the 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.111 
genuine signature that was traced. This regularly occurs in employee fraud and 
embezzlement cases in banks and other financial institutions where the account holder’s 
signature card on file served as the source for the tracing. If the forged signature(s) precisely 
superimposes over the genuine signature, then it is also likely that faint indentations might 
be present in the signature area of the original genuine document. Also, ink traces from the 
genuine signature might be transferred to the reverse side of the traced signature(s). Latent 
fingerprint treatment of the original source document might reveal the fingerprints of  
the suspect. 
  
FREEHAND FORGERIES  
A freehand forgery occurs when a writer signs the name of another person without knowing 
what the real person’s signature looks like. The writers of freehand forgeries can usually be 
identified by experts. 
 
AUTOFORGERIES  
The true-name signature of a person, prepared by him in a distorted or disguised fashion in 
order to later deny it and disclaim it as genuine. This attempt at fraud has occurred in falsely 
reported traveler’s check theft cases, in cases involving disputed home mortgage and other 
loan documents, credit card frauds, and others.  
 
 
The Document Expert’s Findings 
A forensic document examiner cannot determine with accuracy the writer’s age, sex, race, 
which hand was used, physical or mental condition, personality, or character from 
handwriting examinations. There are three basic outcomes of forensic handwriting 
comparisons. 
 
Non-Identification  
The suspected person did not write the signature or other writings on the questioned 
document. 
 
Identification  
The suspected person did write the signature or other writings on the questioned document. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.112   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Inconclusive  
No definite determinations were possible as to whether the suspected person did or did not 
write the signature or other writings on the questioned document. This outcome is often the 
result of insufficient or inadequate handwriting samples of the suspect or when a photocopy 
rather that the original document is submitted to the expert for examinations.  
 
Though inconclusive, some writings might contain sufficient characteristics in common to 
indicate possible identity, or sufficient differences to indicate that the suspected person 
might not have prepared the writings. The expert might suggest additional leads for the 
fraud examiner that could resolve the inconclusive results of the comparisons. 
 
 
How to Obtain Handwriting Samples 
Positive results from forensic handwriting examinations and comparisons often depend on 
how well the fraud examiner has assembled adequate handwriting and signature samples of 
the suspects for submission to the forensic expert. The samples must be comparable to the 
writings on the evidence documents. Hand printing cannot be compared with handwriting. 
Capital letters cannot be compared with small letters. The samples must contain the same 
letters and combinations of letters, whether undictated or dictated. For example: “John” 
cannot be compared with “Susan,” “hot” with “c old,” “black” with “white,” or “July” with 
“September.” 
  
Undictated Writing Samples 
Try to obtain samples of a suspect or victim’s signature or other writings that were not 
prepared by him specifically for comparison purposes, but that can be authenticated. Courts 
will accept as authentic comparison documents any writings that were witnessed by others. 
Also acceptable are documents that were created “in the normal course of business,” such as 
canceled checks; signed or written documents in employee personnel records; applications 
for employment, licenses, or home utilities installations; and many others. The fraud 
examiner should use personal experiences and knowledge of the suspect’s routine activities 
in locating sources for these types of samples. 
 
When the evidence documents include suspected forged signatures, several genuine samples 
of the forgery victim’s signature should be obtai ned for submission to the expert. If possible, 
include any documents bearing genuine signatures of the victim’s that the suspect might 
have had access to and that might have served as a model for tracing or simulation. 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.113 
 Undictated writing samples should: 
• Be as contemporaneous as possible to the date of the evidence documents; if the 
questioned writings were prepared in the 1970s, writings recently prepared by a suspect 
might not be adequate for comparisons. However, except for infirmity or extreme age, 
the writings of most adults usually do not change much except over long periods of time.  
• Consist of the same signature or words containing many of the same letters and 
combinations of letters as the questioned writings on the evidence documents. 
• Consist of the same type of writings as on the evidence documents, such as hand printed 
or handwritten, capital letters or small letters or a combination of both. 
• Consist, if possible, of the same kinds of writings. A person’s informal writings, such as 
hastily prepared signatures on credit card receipts, might be very different from more 
formal writings, such as a signature on a contract or other legal document. 
 
Dictated Writing Samples 
Try to obtain dictated samples of a suspect’s or victim’s signature or writings specifically for 
comparison purposes, either voluntarily or by obtaining a legal order. 
 
Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples by Court Order 
When obtaining a legal order for samples, the investigator and/or attorney should ensure 
that the order specifies that the samples should be provided in the writer’s normal 
handwriting and in sufficient quantity, text, and form, at the interviewer’s discretion, to 
permit a determination of identity or non-identity. A court order with these specifications 
will permit an inference of guilt, or might allow pursuit of contempt of court charges if the 
suspect refuses to comply or attempts to prevent identification by intentionally disguising his 
writings, limiting the amount of writings, or failing to follow the interviewer’s instructions 
and dictations. 
  
Preparation for Taking Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Since expert handwriting identifications can truly prove the case, adequate pre-interview 
preparation by the fraud examiner is essential. At the time of the interview session to obtain 
dictated writing samples, the investigator should have all of the proper writing materials and 
should have the original or copies of the evidence documents to serve as a guide for 
dictating the sample text. Do not rush through the interview. Take as much time as 
necessary. Take short comfort breaks if the suspect tires. Do not allow the suspect to see the 
evidence documents before or during the taking of the samples. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Directions for Obtaining Dictated Handwriting Samples 
Dictated writing samples should be obtained by using the same types of materials as the 
evidence document: writing instrument (ball-point pen, fountain pen, pencil, etc.), paper 
(lined, unlined, size of sheet), and forms (check forms, business forms, etc.). For purposes of 
the samples, an investigator can use a genuine form of the same or similar kind, make many 
photocopies of it, and have the samples prepared on the blank copies. 
 
To help the suspect relax, begin by having him write miscellaneous innocuous text, such as 
his name, the date, and a statement as to the voluntary nature of the samples being prepared. 
This statement will also assist later in getting the samples admitted in court.  
 
Patiently dictate to the suspect the same text or text containing the same letters and 
combinations of letters of the same type (hand printed, handwritten, capital, or small letters) 
as the questioned writings on the evidence document. Do not assist the suspect in the 
spelling of words, punctuation, or grammar. 
 
Obtain one sample at a time on separate sheets or forms. Once a sample is complete, 
remove it from the suspect’s sight before the next sample is prepared. To ensure that the 
suspect’s range of normal variation is displayed, several samples of each text should  
be obtained.  
 
Be alert for any attempts to disguise normal writings, such as exaggerated slant, very rapid 
writing, very slow and awkward writing, unusually large or small writing, or bizarre letter 
formations. (See the “Natural Variation, Disguise, Distortion, and Forgeries” section.)  
 
 
Typewriters and Computer Printers 
Typewriting prepared on traditional typebar/segment-shift typewriters, both manual and 
electric, can often be positively identified by experts from mechanical defects unique to each 
machine. Typewritten texts prepared on later-model typewriters equipped with 
interchangeable daisy wheel, ball, or basket-type elements are difficult, if not impossible to 
identify. Computerized dot matrix, ink jet, thermal transfer, or laser (electrostatic) printers 
are rarely identifiable. Usually, the only expert determinations concerning these typewriters 
and printers are that the same typeface design and size (font), letter spacing, and print 
process were used. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.115 
Typewriter Ribbons Could Be Evidence 
Old-style fabric typewriter ribbons are rarely of any value in determining whether a particular 
typewriter was used to prepare a questioned document. Fortunately for investigators, most 
modern manual and electric typewriters, regardless of whether typebar or single element, are 
equipped with single-use ribbons. If it is suspected that an evidence document was recently 
prepared on such a machine, removal and examination of the ribbon might reveal the text of 
the document. Expert examination of the ribbon might positively prove that the typewriter 
and ribbon were used to produce the document. 
 
Avoid Taking Unnecessary Samples 
Fraud examiners do not have to be experts to make preliminary eliminations of some 
suspect typewriters and narrow down the number of typewriters they might have to take 
samples from. Although there are hundreds of different fonts in use on computer printers, 
traditional manual and some electronic typewriters might be eliminated by differences in 
their typeface designs. 
  
Although fonts might appear to be very similar, the observant fraud examiner can 
differentiate between them by concentrating on those letters and numerals that most often 
differ. Note first whether the letter styles on the evidence document and the typewriter are 
serif (the letters have small horizontal bars at the top and bottom of the letters, like little feet) 
or sans serif (no small bars). If they differ, then the typewriter is not the one used. Next, look 
at the shapes of the letters and numerals. Pay particular attention to the small letters f, g, r, t, 
and w, and the numerals 2, 3, 4, and 5. If any of those differ in shape, then the typewriter is 
not the one used.  
 
Taking Typewriter Samples 
Always remove, retain, and preserve the original ribbon first, before taking any samples. 
Place it in a sealed envelope and initial it for later identification. After removing and 
preserving the original ribbon, replace it with a new one and type the samples in the same 
text as the questioned document. Repeat portions of the questioned text several times. After 
taking samples with a ribbon, shift the ribbon adjustment to the “stencil” position.  
 
Insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directly onto the carbon 
paper, using it as a “ribbon” to make typed text on the sheet of paper. Again, type the 
questioned text several times. As each specimen is made, record the brand name, model, and 
serial number of the typewriter used and initial and date each sheet. Place the ribbon and 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
specimens in a plastic or heavy envelope and submit them to the expert along with the 
questioned evidence documents in separate envelopes. 
 
 
Photocopies 
Increasingly, photocopies are retained as “original” records of documents (particularly in 
outgoing correspondence files) and can become the only evidence of a document because 
the original document cannot be located or, in some cases, cannot be released, such as in the 
case of official public records 
 
Fraud examiners and other investigators sometimes submit a copy of a document for 
examination because they do not wish to part with the original. As a result, the document 
examiner will probably not be able to determine features and reach conclusions that could 
have been made from the original document. When at all possible, the fraud examiner 
should obtain the original document for the document examiner and should not submit  
a copy. 
 
Identifying the Source of a Photocopy 
Photocopies can be the actual original evidence in the case of: 
• Anonymous letters 
• Unauthorized “leaks” of information in the fo rm of copies of letters, memoranda, files, 
and other records 
• Copies made to conceal forgeries or to insert or manipulate text 
• Spurious “disinformation” dissemination of phony official documents 
 
Locating the source of a copy can be crucial in some investigations. It is sometimes possible 
to determine what kind of copier was used to produce the copy in question. Some types of 
machines leave minute markings, indentations, and other features on the copy that will assist 
the expert in determining the brand and model of the machine used. It is also possible to 
identify the particular machine used by examining the pattern of unique and identifiable 
“trash marks” (specks, spots, streaks, edge markings, etc.) it leaves on copies and comparing 
them with copies from a known machine. The fraud examiner should be aware, however, 
that some of these markings have permanence while others are transient and temporary. 
 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.117 
Permanent “Trash Marks”  
These uniquely identifiable markings on copies are usually caused by accidental deep 
scratches and imperfections in the copier’s glass surface or document cover, in the printing 
element surface, or other permanent machine parts that are not readily replaced or changed 
during servicing of the machine. These marks can be reproduced on copies for years until 
the machine is repaired or the part replaced. 
 
Transient “Trash Marks”  
Trash marks are uniquely identifiable markings on copies. They are usually caused by dirt, 
smudges, or small bits of foreign matter on or in machine surfaces that will appear until the 
machine is cleaned or serviced. These markings prove not only that a particular machine was 
used to produce the copy, but that documents that share the same transient trash marks 
might have been produced at approximately the same time. This is one of several ways to 
determine when a document was prepared. 
 
Taking Photocopier Samples 
First, without placing any document in the machine, make six “blank” copies. As the 
machine produces each “copy,” remove it, turn it over and on the reverse side initial and 
number each copy in the same sequence they were produced by the machine (these copies will 
reproduce all “trash marks” made by the machine, including the entire document cover, glass 
surface, and internal printing element surface. Six sample copies are needed since different 
models of machines have varying printing element surface sizes, usually ranging in size from 
one to three sheet impressions before repeating on the same area of the surface). 
 
Second, place a ruler or other calibrated measuring device on the glass document surface, 
close the cover, and make six copies. (These copies will permit a determination of the 
standard amount of reduction or enlargement the machine makes when in the “actual size” 
or one-to-one mode.) If the machine requires documents to be fed into it, rather than having 
a glass document surface, use any sample document available as an “original” and include 
that sample document along with the copies of it. On the reverse of each copy, initial and 
number the copies in the same sequence they were produced by the machine, as outlined in 
the first step. 
 
Third, place a sample document containing both typewritten and handwritten text on the 
glass document surface in the standard position, close the document cover, and again print 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.118   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
six copies, initialing and numbering as previously directed. Also include the sample 
document with the copy samples. 
 
Place all of the sample copies and sample documents into a large sturdy paper or cardboard 
envelope or folder (do not use a plastic envelope) on which you have previously noted the 
make, model, and location of the machine. Initial, date, and seal the envelope and submit it 
to the document examiner along with the questioned evidence documents. 
 
 
Dating a Document 
Is the document genuine, or a back-dated fabrication? This question sometimes arises during 
fraud inquiries, and the answer can be determined through scientific examinations of the 
document by forensic experts. The fraud examiner should be alert for this type of fraud and 
have some knowledge of what can be done, as well as an awareness of the limitations. 
  
The “Alibi” Document 
These documents suddenly appear “from out of nowhere” and often late in the course of  
an investigation, inquiry, or trial. They are always favorable to the suspect and refute 
previously developed information or evidence that is damaging to the suspect. Many prove 
to be fabricated. 
 
The “Long Lost” Will 
The sudden appearance of a new will that post-dates and supersedes all other wills is all too 
common. Amazingly, it often leaves large portions of the estate to the person who found it, 
and only a photocopy can be located. Many prove to have been fabricated using the cut-and-paste 
method. Although not involving photocopies, the much publicized fabricated and 
forged “Mormon Will” of Howard Hughes in the mid-1970s is a prime example. 
 
Valuable Historical and Collectible Documents 
The production of phony historical and collectible documents, artworks, and antiques has 
been a lucrative field for fraud artists for hundreds of years and continues to the present. 
Recent major frauds involving losses of millions of dollars have involved such diverse phony 
documents as the fake “Hitler Diaries,” counterfeited rare baseball cards, forged autographs 
of historical figures and celebrities, fake old treaties with Native American tribes, newly 
discovered handwritten “rough drafts” of the U.S. Declaration of Independence, Lincoln’s 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.119 
Gettysburg Address and other famous historical documents, several counterfeited and 
forged “Mormon” documents, counterfeited “first edition” books, and many others. 
 
Anachronisms in Documentary Materials 
Exposure of fraudulent historical documents often relies upon the combined skills of 
investigators, historical experts, scientific laboratories, and forensic document examiners. 
Accurate handwriting comparisons are rarely possible in the absence of adequate 
contemporaneous genuine writings of the purported author. Instead, examinations are made 
of the materials used to produce the documents, such as paper, ink, printing, adhesives and 
seals, bindings, and covers. Detection of backdated contemporary documents usually relies 
upon diligent investigation and the techniques of the forensic document examiner. 
 
When adequate handwriting or signature samples are available, expert comparisons can 
expose the forgery. Otherwise, in order to disprove the purported date of the document, 
analyses of the materials might prove that they did not exist at the time the document was 
supposedly prepared. Expert examinations of contemporary documentary materials include: 
• Ink analyses and comparisons with a library of ink standards maintained by the U.S. 
Secret Service Laboratory in Washington, D.C., to determine the kind of ink and when it 
was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of typewriting and comparisons with collections of typewriter reference 
standards maintained by forensic laboratories to determine the kind of typewriter that 
was used and when the typewriter was first manufactured. 
• Examinations of paper, especially watermarked paper, and searches of reference 
materials to determine who manufactured the paper and when it was first produced. 
• Examinations of photocopies and fax copies and comparisons with reference standards 
to determine what kind of machine was used and when those machines were first 
produced. 
• Comparisons of questioned photocopies with photocopies known to have been 
produced on a particular machine on a particular date can prove or disprove the date of 
the questioned copy. 
 
Fraud examiners should note that there are currently no methods for accurately determining 
how long ink, typewriting, or photocopier/printer toner have been on paper. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.120   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Indented Writings 
Fraud examiners should be alert for the presence of incriminating indented writings, or the 
absence of logical indentations, both of which can be valuable in proving fraud. In some 
situations, documents are routinely kept in multiple-page sets, such as in legal forms, 
multiple-copy invoices, notebooks, tablets, pads, clipboards, and so on. In these situations 
the writings on one sheet should correspond to indentations on the following sheet. The 
absence of corresponding indented writings on the following sheet, or the presence of 
indented writings on one sheet that do not correspond with the text of the writings on the 
preceding sheet, could provide proof that pages have been removed and substituted. 
 
Developing Indented Writings 
Never attempt to develop indented writings by shading or scratching on the surface of a 
sheet of paper with a pencil. This will reveal deep indentations, but it will not reveal the faint 
ones and will permanently prevent expert examinations from developing them. Other types 
of technical examinations might also be prevented by this defacing of the document. 
 
Some indented writings can be visualized by taking the document to an area with subdued 
overhead lighting, placing the document on a flat surface, and shining a bright beam of light 
from a small-beam flashlight or small high-intensity lamp across the paper surface at a low 
oblique angle or parallel to the surface. Since shadows in the indentations will only show at 
right angles to the beam of light, it will be necessary to move the light around in several 
positions and note the changing shadows as they form the text of the indentations. 
 
Document experts use special lighting and photographic techniques and sensitive 
instruments such as the electrostatic detection apparatus (ESDA) to detect and permanently 
record extremely faint indented writings that cannot be visualized by the oblique-lighting 
method.  
 
 
Counterfeit Printed Documents 
Most documents that have monetary value, such as currency, bank checks, traveler’s checks, 
money orders, bearer bonds, postage stamps, gift certificates, or lottery tickets, have all been 
counterfeited at one time or another. Identity documents are also often counterfeited, for 
example, passports, birth certificates, drivers’ licenses, and government and commercial 
employee identity cards. Other counterfeited documents include commercial product labels, 
business stationery and forms, business logos, motor vehicle titles and registration forms, 
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.121 
and safety inspection stickers. Despite most preventive measures, if a document has any 
value it can be, and probably has been, counterfeited. Counterfeiting has become big 
business, especially in some third-world countries, where the latest developments in printing 
technology are being used to produce large quantities of high-quality counterfeit documents 
and “knock-off” phony products in violation of international copyright and trademark laws. 
 
Counterfeiting Methods 
The days of old-style counterfeiters — who were skilled artisans who carefully etched 
counterfeit printing plates — are over. Today most counterfeit documents are prepared by 
various photo-reproduction processes such as the photo-offset printing process 
(lithography) and flexography, which uses rubberized printing “plates.” These processes 
begin with the photographic reproduction of a genuine document. The photographic 
negatives are then carefully retouched to remove the filled-in text, serial numbers, and other 
distinguishing features that appeared on the genuine document. Printing plates are then 
made from the retouched negatives, and counterfeit copies are printed from the plates.  
 
Rapidly advancing technology now allows larcenous novices with no commercial printing 
experience to use sophisticated computerized scanners, computer graphics software, 
multicolor computer printers, and full-color photocopy machines to produce relatively high-quality 
counterfeit documents. 
 
Detecting Counterfeits 
Many counterfeits can be detected by making a side-by-side comparison with a 
corresponding genuine document. Be alert for different versions or form revisions. Look for 
subtle differences in ink colors and brilliance, different types of paper substrate, the use of 
different typestyles and type sizes (fonts), and evidence of the retouching the text on the 
genuine document used in the reproduction. The retouching will be most evident in areas 
where text, serial numbers, and the like are superimposed on a background design, especially 
if they are printed in black ink. 
 
When furnished with genuine documents for comparisons with suspected counterfeits, 
forensic document examiners can also make expert differentiations between the printing 
processes, ink formulations, and paper substrates used. In some instances it has been 
possible for the experts to reconstruct portions of the filled-in text or serial numbers that 
appeared on the genuine document, but were removed in the retouching process. In this 
fashion the specific original document used by the counterfeiter can sometimes be 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.122   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
determined. By tracing the history of the document’s ownership, the counterfeiter can be 
located and identified. Treatment of the original genuine document for latent  
fingerprints might positively identify the counterfeiter and other people who handled the 
genuine document. 
 
 
Fingerprints 
Latent (non-visible) prints are left on surfaces by the body oils, salts, and amino acids 
clinging to or exuded by friction ridges in the skin on fingers, palms of the hands, and soles 
of the feet and are unique personal identifiers. Latent prints might also be deposited on 
surfaces by hands, fingers, and bare feet through the transfer of oils and greases. Patent 
(visible) prints are sometimes deposited on surfaces by hands, fingers, and bare feet through 
the transfer of materials such as blood, paint, soot, and soil. 
  
Latent prints absorbed into protected porous sur faces, such as paper in files or pages in 
books, have been known to survive for decades and still be identifiable after chemical 
development. However, latent fingerprints on hard, non-porous surfaces can be destroyed or 
deteriorate rapidly if handled; not protected fr om the environment; or exposed to high 
temperatures, humidity, or water. 
 
Fraud examiners should wear protective gloves or carefully use tweezers when handling 
latent fingerprint evidence to avoid smudging and contamination. Tweezers should not be 
used on documents if indented writing or photocopier examinations are planned.  
 
Fingerprints on Paper or Other Absorbent Porous Surfaces 
Fraud examiners should never try to develop latent fingerprints that have been absorbed into 
paper or other porous materials by dusting with fingerprint powder or any other means. 
 
Such efforts will not only be unsuccessful, but will prevent additional examinations. Preserve 
the evidence by placing the item into a plastic bag or cellophane protector. Label the 
container with the examiner’s initials, the date, and an identifying exhibit number. Experts 
will use various methods on these materials, including iodine fuming and brushing or 
spraying silver nitrate solution or ninhydrin spray, which reacts with the body chemicals and 
other substances in the latent print that have soaked into the absorbent surface. Some of 
these methods will permanently discolor a document.  
  
Investigation  Analyzing Documents 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.123 
Fingerprints on Hard, Non-Porous Surfaces 
Items with hard, non-porous surfaces, such as plastic, metal, and glass, can be dusted for the 
presence of latent fingerprints left on their surfaces. Special fingerprint dusting powders and 
lifting materials are available from law enforcement suppliers. The dry, powdered toner used 
in some photocopy machines has also been used successfully for fingerprint dusting. 
 
After dusting the surface and locating a suspected print or partial print, blow or gently brush 
off the excess powder. Remove the developed print with adhesive lifting tape and place the 
tape on an index card that contrasts in color with the dusting powder used. Mark the card 
with initials, the date, an identifying exhibit number, and where the print was found.  
 
Some latent prints on non-porous surfaces might not be developed by the dusting method. 
If possible, rather than dusting the item, the fraud examiner should retain it; place it in a 
protective container; initial, date, and label the container with an identifying exhibit number; 
and submit it to a fingerprint expert for processing. Rather than dusting, fingerprint experts 
might use cyanoacrylate (“super-glue”) fuming or a laser to successfully develop and 
photograph the latent prints on some materials, such as black plastic bags.  
 
Fingerprint Comparison Standards 
The fingerprints of millions of people are on record in repositories of fingerprint cards 
maintained by law enforcement agencies throughout the world. These cards contain the 
inked fingerprints of people who have been arrested, served in the military, applied for 
employment at various levels of government, and volunteered their fingerprints to assist in 
personal identification in the event of their deaths. Many of these fingerprint databases have 
been computerized and are linked by networks. However, millions of people do not fit in 
any of these categories and have never been fingerprinted. 
  
If a suspect has never been fingerprinted or refuses to voluntarily furnish inked print 
samples, it might be necessary for the fraud examiner to obtain a legal court order directing 
the suspect to furnish inked prints for identification purposes. Even though the evidence 
items might have been handled by several people, they might still bear latent prints of the 
guilty party. If the items have been inadvertently handled by other known people, including 
the fraud examiner, then inked prints of all of those people should also be obtained and 
submitted to the fingerprint expert along with the evidence items and the inked prints  
of suspects. 
 
Analyzing Documents  Investigation  
3.124   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources for Expert Document Examinations 
 
Law Enforcement Laboratories 
In cases where criminal prosecutions are likely, there are excellent forensic laboratories 
available through law enforcement agencies at the local, state, and national levels of the 
criminal justice system. 
 
Forensic Document Experts in Private Practice 
When an expert’s services are needed, a fraud examiner can identify and locate fully 
qualified, court-certified, expert forensic document examiners available in a particular 
geographical area by contacting the following organizations: 
 
American Board of Forensic Document Examiners 
7887 San Felipe, Suite 122 
Houston, Texas 77063 
(713) 784-9537 
www.abfde.org 
 
American Academy of Forensic Sciences 
410 North 21st Street 
Colorado Springs, Colorado 80904-2798 
(719) 636-1100 
www.aafs.org 
 
Graphologists (Graphoanalysts) 
Graphology (graphoanalysis) has been described as a pseudoscience whose practitioners 
have the purported ability to determine a person’s character, moral traits, personality, and 
mental state based upon an analysis of that person’s handwriting. Graphology is often 
erroneously confused with forensic document examinations, especially by the media. Fraud 
examiners should be aware that some people who practice graphological analyses might have 
little academic and scientific training. They might be self-taught or graduates of a 
correspondence course. Since a conclusive accuracy level has not been established for those 
examinations, expert testimony by graphologists is often rejected by the courts. Fraud 
examiners should be cautious in relying on handwriting identifications made by some of 
these “handwriting experts.”  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.201 
INTERVIEW THEORY AND APPLICATION 
 
An interview is a question-and-answer session designed to elicit information. It differs from an 
ordinary conversation in that the interview is structured, not free-form, and is designed for a 
purpose. An interview might consist of only one question or a series of questions. 
 
 
Preparation 
Before embarking on an interview, the examiner should review the case file to ensure that it 
does not contain important information that has been overlooked. In addition, the examiner 
should review the case file to learn what information is known to the witness. The 
hypothesis should be reviewed to make sure it reflects the obtained documents. 
 
The examiner should consider what type of information can be supplied by each of the 
potential witnesses. Generally, the most vulnerable witness should be interviewed after the 
more reluctant witnesses. This will provide the examiner with a broader base of information 
that can be used to formulate later questions. However, the timing of interviews is at the 
discretion of the examination team. 
 
 
Characteristics of a Good Interview 
Good interviews share common characteristics. The interview should be of sufficient length 
and depth to uncover relevant facts. Most interviewers tend to get too little, rather than too 
much, information. 
 
A good interview includes all pertinent information and excludes irrelevant information. 
From the outset, it should be determined what information is relevant, and that information 
should be sought. Extraneous or useless facts tend to unnecessarily complicate the gathering 
and analysis of the information. 
 
The interview should be conducted as closely as possible to the event in question. With the 
passage of time, the memories of potential witnesses and respondents become faulty, and 
critical details can be lost or forgotten. A good interview is objective in scope. It should be 
aimed at gathering information in a fair and impartial manner.  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.202   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Characteristics of a Good Interviewer 
All good interviewers share certain characteristics. Above all, they are “people persons,” and 
are talented at human interaction. Successful interviewers are the type of people with whom 
others are willing to share information. The good interviewer does not interrupt the 
respondent with unnecessary questions. During the interview, much pertinent information 
results from volunteered information, as opposed to responses to a specific question. The 
good interviewer displays interest in his subject and in what is being said. 
 
The respondent must understand that the interviewer is attempting to obtain only the 
relevant facts and is not “out to get” someone. This can best be done by phrasing questions 
in a nonaccusatory manner. Little is accomplished when the interviewer is formal, 
ostentatious, or attempts to impress the respondent with his authority. Information 
gathering is best accomplished by approaching the interview in an informal and low- 
key fashion. 
 
If the respondent perceives that the interviewer is biased or is attempting to confirm 
foregone conclusions, the respondent will be less likely to cooperate. Accordingly, the 
interviewer should make every effort to demonstrate a lack of bias. 
 
Professionalism in the interview often involves a state of mind and a commitment to 
excellence. The interviewer should be on time, be professionally attired, and be fair in all 
dealings with the respondent. It is absolutely vital that the interviewer not appear to be a 
threat. If people perceive that they are the target of an inquiry, they will be less likely  
to cooperate. 
 
 
Question Typology 
When conducting an interview, there are five general types of questions an interviewer can 
ask: introductory, informational, assessment, closing, and admission-seeking.  
 
Because fraud examinations move in a linear order, starting with the general and working to 
the specific, the first interviews should be with those that are least likely to be involved, 
working towards those that are more likely to be involved. The first interviews are 
conducted for the purpose of gathering information, and therefore they should be non-confrontational, 
non-threatening, and should encourage open communication. In these 
routine interview situations, only three of the five types of questions will normally be asked: 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.203 
introductory, informational, and closing questions. If the interviewer has reasonable cause to 
believe the respondent is not being truthful, assessment questions can be asked. Finally, if 
the interviewer decides with reasonable cause that the respondent is responsible for 
misdeeds, admission-seeking questions can be posed. 
 
Introductory Questions 
Introductory questions are designed to meet the four objectives below: to provide an 
introduction, establish rapport, to get the respondent to verbally agree to cooperate in the 
interview (i.e., establish the interview theme), and to observe the respondent’s reactions to 
questions. 
 
Informational Questions 
Once the proper format for the interview is set, the interviewer then turns to the fact-gathering 
portion. Typically, the interviewer will ask three types of questions during this 
stage: open, closed, and leading. These question types are discussed in more detail below. 
Each type is used in a logical sequence to maximize the development of information. If the 
interviewer has reason to believe that the respondent is being untruthful, then assessment 
questions can be posed. Otherwise, the interview is brought to a logical close.  
 
Closing Questions 
Closing questions seek to close the interview positively. In routine interviews, closing 
questions serve the following purposes: reconfirm facts, gather additional facts, and 
conclude to interview and maintain goodwill.  
 
Assessment Questions 
If the interviewer has reason to believe the respondent is being deceptive, he should begin 
asking assessment questions. These are questions specifically designed to establish the 
respondent’s credibility. When assessing credibility, the interviewer must observe the 
subject’s verbal and nonverbal responses. By observing the verbal and nonverbal responses 
of the respondent to these questions, the interviewer can assess the respondent’s credibility 
with some degree of accuracy. That assessment will form the basis of the interviewer’s 
decision about whether to pose admission-seeking questions to obtain a legal admission  
of wrongdoing.  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.204   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Admission-Seeking Questions 
The choice of when to conduct an admission-seeking interview of a suspect is critical. 
Admission-seeking interviews are reserved specifically for individuals whose culpability is 
reasonably certain; all other reasonable investigative steps have been completed and as much 
information as possible has been developed from other sources; and the interviewer can 
reasonably control the place, time, and subject matter of the interview.  
 
Admission-seeking questions serve at least two purposes: (1) to clear an innocent person or 
(2) to encourage the culpable person to confess. However, the interviewer must be careful to 
pose these questions in a way that does not violate the rights and privileges of the person 
being interviewed. 
 
 
Legal Considerations When Conducting an Interview 
Interviews, and especially admission-seeking interviews, may expose the company and the 
fraud examiner to certain legal risks. Thus, before engaging in an interview, fraud examiners 
must understand the ramifications of their actions. This requires an understanding of certain 
legal issues and how they limit or affect the ways in which an interview may be conducted. 
However, because employee rights vary from case to case, fraud examiners should always 
consult with an attorney regarding the specific laws and regulations for their state or locality. 
 
Legal Authority to Conduct Interviews 
In most instances, legal authority is not required to interview people or to inquire into 
matters. The federal constitution gives any citizen the authority to inquire into virtually any 
subject area, as long as the rights of individuals are not transgressed in the process. 
Generally, no license is required to conduct interviews; however, if the interviewer 
represents himself as an investigator, some states require a license. 
 
False Imprisonment 
False imprisonment is the restraint by one person of the physical liberty of another without 
consent or legal justification. In the context of employee interviews, a claim of false 
imprisonment may be made if the interviewer locks the interview room, stands in front of 
the exit, or refuses to let the suspect leave.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.205 
Use of Deception in Interviews 
Surprisingly, the use of deception to gain information can sometimes be employed legally. 
The theory is that information can be obtained by nearly any means, with the exception of 
force or threats. The interviewer, however, might not employ any deception likely to cause 
an innocent person to confess. The use of deception is not justified regarding promises of 
leniency, promises of confidentiality, or to obtain a monetary or business advantage. 
 
Frazier v. Cupp  
In Frazier v. Cupp, 394 U.S. 731 (1961), the U.S. Supreme Court indirectly recognized the 
necessity of using deception during interviews. In this case, the suspect confessed to a 
homicide after the interrogator falsely told him that his alleged accomplice had confessed to 
the crime. On appeal, the Supreme Court ruled that the deception alone was insufficient to 
invalidate the confession.  
 
Recording Interviews 
In some circumstances, recording an interview might be illegal. Both state and federal law 
limit an employer’s right to record employee interviews during an investigation. In fact, in 
some states, audio recording an interview is permitted only with the consent of all parties to 
the communication. Thus, fraud examiners should always consult with an attorney when 
deciding whether to record an interview.  
 
If recording an interview without the respondent’s consent is legal, consider tape recording 
the interview covertly. Covertly recording offers an advantage in that it provides an accurate 
record without disturbing the flow of the interview. If there is to be a covert tape recording 
and the subject asks if the interview is being recorded, do not lie. Explain that it is in the 
subject’s best interest that an accurate recording be made and that he can have a copy when 
completed. 
  
 
Elements of Conversations 
Since an interview is essentially a structured conversation, it is helpful to understand the 
basic elements of communications. Whenever two or more human beings are conversing, 
several types of communication occur — either one at a time or in combination.  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.206   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Expression 
A common function of conversation is self-expression. One or more of the 
conversationalists might need to express ideas, feelings, attitudes, or moods. The illusion of 
an audience is central to a personal expression. The urge for spontaneous expression can be 
a vital asset in interviewing, and it should be encouraged in the respondent. It can be 
directed by the interviewer toward information-gathering objectives, but the interviewer 
should not give way to the urge for personal self-expression. 
 
One of the most common errors made by novice interviewers is to yield to the temptation to 
impress the respondent with their knowledge of the subject of the interview. In doing so, 
interviewers run the risk of making the respondent feel threatened, with the resultant 
tendency for respondents to guard responses rather than express their feelings frankly. 
Experienced interviewers will have the discipline to control their own responses. 
 
Persuasion 
The concepts of persuasion and expression differ in that persuasion is essentially aimed at 
convincing the other person. There are times when persuasion can be used effectively in the 
interview. This is mostly through convincing the person of the legitimacy of the interview. 
 
Therapy 
Making people feel good about themselves is often a function of conversation. In an 
ordinary conversation with a friend, a person often expresses ideas and feelings to remove 
emotional tension. This release is called catharsis, and is encouraged, for example, in 
psychiatric interviews. There are many times when the information sought in an interview is 
closely related to the respondent’s inner conflicts and tensions. For example, in the area of 
fraud, a person embezzling money from the company will typically feel guilty. A skillful 
interviewer will know the therapeutic implication of such a feeling when attempting to 
develop information.  
 
Ritual 
Some aspects of conversation are ritualistic; that is, they are merely a form of verbal behavior 
that has no real significance other than to provide security in interpersonal relations. 
Examples include “Good Morning!” and “How are you today?” In interviewing, we must 
learn to detect ritualistic answers by the respondent, and avoid giving them ourselves. The 
interviewer must be aware of the danger of engaging in ritualistic conversation and then 
confusing the results with valid information.  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.207 
Information Exchange  
Information exchange is the central purpose of the interview. The word exchange reminds us 
that the flow of information in an interview goes both ways. Too frequently, interviewers 
become so concerned with the information they wish to obtain that they do not properly 
exchange information with the respondent. Although details of what the interviewer says 
should be carefully measured, don’t be cagey.  This tactic rarely works. Two basic problems 
occur in the exchange of information. First, the information sought by the interviewer is not 
of equal importance to the respondent. Second, there is often a communication barrier 
between people of diverse backgrounds. These barriers are common between people who 
don’t know one another.  
 
 
Inhibitors of Communication 
To be an effective interviewer, one must understand that certain matters inhibit 
communication, while others facilitate it. It is the interviewer’s task to minimize inhibitors 
and maximize facilitators. An inhibitor is any social-psychological barrier that impedes the 
flow of relevant information by making the respondent unable or unwilling to provide the 
information to the interviewer. Eight inhibitors to communication are listed below. The first 
four tend to make the respondent unwilling; the last four make the respondent unable to 
give the information, even though willing.  
 
Competing Demands for Time 
The respondent might hesitate to begin an interview because of other time demands. The 
subject does not necessarily place a negative value on being interviewed, but weighs the value 
of being interviewed against doing something else. The successful interviewer must convince 
the respondent that the interview is a good use of time.  
 
Ego Threat 
The respondent in some cases might withhold information because of a perceived threat to 
his self-esteem. There are three broad categories of ego threats: repression, disapproval, and 
loss of status. 
 
Repression 
The strongest ego threat is repression. Respondents might not only refuse to admit 
information to the interviewer, they might also refuse to admit the information inwardly. 
They are being honest when answering that they do not know or that they have forgotten. 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.208   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Embezzlers, for example, might repress memory of the act because it does not conform to 
their moral code.  
 
Disapproval 
A less intense but more common effect of ego threat is found when respondents possess 
information but are hesitant to admit it because they anticipate disapproval from the 
interviewer. If respondents are made to feel that the interviewer will not condemn them, 
they might welcome the opportunity to divulge information. A generally accepting and 
sympathetic attitude toward the respondent goes far toward eliciting candid responses.  
 
Loss of Status 
Sometimes respondents fear losing status if the information provided becomes public. This 
can sometimes be overcome by the interviewer’s assurance that the information will be 
handled confidentially. 
 
Etiquette 
The etiquette barrier operates when an answer to the interviewer’s question contains 
information perceived by the respondent as inappropriate. Answering candidly would be 
considered in poor taste or evidence of a lack of proper etiquette. For example, there are 
certain things that men do not discuss in front of women and vice versa, things that students 
do not tell teachers, and things that doctors do not tell patients. The desire to avoid 
embarrassing, shocking, or threatening answers is distinct from the fear of exposing oneself. 
Often, the negative effects of the etiquette barrier might be forestalled by selecting the 
appropriate interviewer and setting for the interview.  
 
Trauma 
Trauma denotes an acutely unpleasant feeling associated with crisis experiences. The 
unpleasant feeling is often brought to the surface when the respondent is reporting the 
experience. Trauma is common when talking to victims, and can usually be overcome by 
sensitive handling of the issue.  
 
Forgetting 
A frequent inhibitor to communication is the respondent’s inability to recall certain types of 
information. This is not a problem if the objectives of the interview deal only with current 
attitudes, beliefs, or expectations. The natural fading of the memory over time makes it 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.209 
easier for the ego-defense system to reconstruct one’s own image of the past by omission, 
addition, or distortion.  
 
The memory problem is a much more frequent obstacle than is generally expected by 
interviewers. Even some of the most simple and obvious facts cannot be elicited because of 
the respondent’s memory problems. There are three factors that contribute to recollection of 
an event. 
 
First, the vividness of the person’s recall is related to the event’s original emotional impact, 
its meaningfulness at the time, and the degree to which the person’s ego is involved. A 
second factor is the amount of time that has elapsed since the event. Third is the nature of 
the interview situation, including the interviewer’s techniques and tactics.  
 
Knowledge of these factors will help the inter viewer anticipate problems that might occur. 
And there are certain techniques, discussed later, that will help the interviewer overcome 
many of these memory problems.  
 
Chronological Confusion 
Chronological confusion is commonly encountered in interviews seeking case history 
information. This term refers to the respondent’s tendency to confuse the order of 
experiences and can occur in two ways: two or more events might be correctly recalled, but 
the respondent is unsure of the sequence, or only one event might be recalled, and it is 
incorrectly assumed to have been true at an earlier point. 
 
Inferential Confusion 
Inferential confusion denotes confusion and inaccuracies resulting from errors of inference. 
These errors generally fall into two categories: induction or deduction. Induction occurs when 
the respondent is asked to convert concrete experiences into a higher level of generalization. 
Deduction occurs when the respondent is asked to give concrete examples of certain 
categories of experience. 
 
Unconscious Behavior 
Often the interview process reveals information about a person’s unconscious behavior. 
There are three types of unconscious behavior: customs or habits, circular reactions, and 
reactions to acute emotional crises. A custom or habit is a settled tendency or usual pattern of 
behavior; it is the behavior that an individual engages in regularly. A circular reaction  is the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.210   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
immediate, unwitting response of one person to the subliminal, nonverbal clues of another. 
A response to an acute emotional crisis does not follow a habitual pattern or result from a 
reaction to others. It arises only in special circumstances when the interviewee is 
experiencing an emotional dilemma.  
 
 
Facilitators of Communication 
Facilitators of communication are those social-psychological forces that make conversations, 
including interviews, easier to accomplish. These facilitators require a basic understanding of 
what motivates people.  
 
Fulfilling Expectations 
One of the important forces in social interaction is the tendency of one person to 
communicate, verbally or nonverbally, his expectations to the other person. The second 
person then tends to respond, consciously or unconsciously, to those expectations. This 
might be viewed as one manifestation of the more general human tendency to conform to 
the group and to the anticipations of higher-status people. It is in this conformity to group 
norms that security is sought. 
 
In the interview setting, the interviewer communicates expectations to the respondent. The 
interviewer should be able to transmit both a general expectation of cooperation and a more 
specific expectation that the respondent will answer the questions truthfully. The interviewer 
must clearly distinguish between asking for information and expecting it. The former is 
mainly achieved with verbal communication, while the latter is accomplished through 
nonverbal behavior. The interviewer who expects the respondent to cooperate will likely be 
more successful than one who only asks questions.  
 
Recognition 
All human beings need the recognition and the esteem of others. Social interaction often 
depends on an exchange of social goods. People will “perform” in exchange for recognition 
and other social rewards. The need for recognition can be fulfilled by attention from people 
outside the individual’s social circle. The skillful and insightful interviewer takes advantage of 
every opportunity to give the respondent sincere recognition.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.211 
Altruistic Appeals 
There seems to be a need for humans to identify with some higher value or cause beyond 
immediate self-interest. This might sometimes take the form of identification with the 
objectives of a larger group. Altruistic deeds usually increase self-esteem, whether or not the 
deeds have been made public. This distinguishes altruism from publicity. Altruism is of 
major importance in motivating many respondents. Interviewers who understand the 
respondent’s value system can use strategy and techniques that appeal to altruism.  
 
Sympathetic Understanding 
Human beings need the sympathetic response of others. They like to share their joys, fears, 
successes, and failures. This need for understanding differs from the need for recognition 
that requires success and increased status. Interviewers who reflect a sympathetic attitude 
and who know how to direct that attitude toward the objectives of the interview will find 
their percentages of success much higher than those who do not.  
 
New Experience 
People welcome new experiences. Although variety might not be the only spice of life, 
escape from the dreary routine is sought by everyone. Sometimes the respondent is 
motivated by curiosity regarding the interviewer. Interviewers should consider this when 
deciding what to say about themselves. One must not assume that just because an interview 
is a new experience, it will satisfy the respondent’s needs. Aspects of the respondent’s 
perception of the new experience can be ego threatening. The respondent might be anxious 
about the impression left with the interviewer. This apprehensiveness can often be detected 
by the interviewer at the beginning of the contact. Once these fears are dispelled, the 
respondent frequently finds the interview a new and interesting experience.  
 
Catharsis 
Catharsis is the process by which a person obtains a release from unpleasant emotional 
tensions by talking about the source of these tensions. We often feel better by talking about 
something that upsets us. Although we are all familiar with the frequent necessity for 
catharsis in ourselves, we do not always perceive the same need in others. The need for 
sympathetic understanding and the need for catharsis are related, but they are not the same 
thing. The interviewer who does not have time to listen to what he considers inconsequential 
or egocentric talk will often find the respondent unwilling to share important consequences.  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.212   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Need for Meaning 
Another general trait common to people is the need for meaning. Every society has a set of 
assumptions, values, explanations, and myths lending order to the society. The concept of 
need for meaning is related to cognitive dissonance. Psychological tension is created when an 
individual becomes aware of incongruence of facts, assumptions, and interpretations. This 
tension is painful, and its reduction is rewarding to the individual. In cases where the 
interview topic deals directly with the sources disturbing a person’s system of meaning, there 
is a strong motivation for the respondent to talk it through, if he is convinced of the 
interviewer’s interest.  
 
Extrinsic Rewards 
Extrinsic rewards are rewards the interviewee receives that are not directly related to the 
interview experience, and they cause the respondent to see the interview as a means to an 
end. Extrinsic rewards for interviewees can include money, job advancement, and retention 
of privileges. What is irrelevant to the interviewer might not be to the respondent. A 
sensitive interviewer will be able to recognize what extrinsic rewards the respondent receives, 
if any, from being interviewed.  
 
 
Interview Mechanics 
As with all other phases of a fraud examination, an interview will be most successful if the 
investigator is thoroughly prepared, which requires that the interviewer understands the 
mechanics of interviewing.  
 
Note-Taking 
The interviewer will frequently need to take notes during the interview. Start each interview 
on a separate sheet of paper. This procedure can be especially helpful should documents 
from a particular interview be subpoenaed. Do not try to write down all the information you 
are given during an interview, only the pertinent facts. Taking too many notes will make the 
interview process cumbersome and might inhibit the respondent. If a quote is particularly 
relevant, try to write it down verbatim. Enclose all direct quotes in quotation marks. 
 
Do not slow down the interview process for note taking. Instead, jot down key words or 
phrases, and then go back over the details at the end of the interview. In general, it is better 
to err on the side of taking too few notes rather than too many. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.213 
Maintain Eye Contact 
The interviewer should maintain eye contact with the respondent as much as possible during 
note taking. Just as eye contact personalizes all human communication, it creates a more 
comfortable environment and facilitates the flow of information during the interview 
process. 
 
Opinions 
Avoid making notes regarding your overall opinions or impressions of a witness. Such notes 
can cause you problems with your credibility if they are later produced in court. Be careful 
not to show excitement when taking notes. During interviews of targets and adverse 
witnesses, take notes in a manner that does not indicate the significance of the information; 
that is, never allow note taking to “telegraph” your emotions. 
 
Writing Down Questions 
Whenever possible, do not write down a list of interview questions. Let the interview flow 
freely. Inadvertently allowing the respondent to read a written list of questions can provide 
an opportunity to fabricate an answer. However, writing down key points the interviewer 
wants to discuss might be appropriate. 
 
Documenting Results  
Expound the notes from the results of questioning as soon as possible after concluding the 
interview — preferably immediately afterward. If this procedure is followed, the examiner will 
not have to take copious notes during the interview. Law enforcement officials are generally 
required to maintain notes. In the private sector, the notes can usually be destroyed once a 
memorandum has been prepared summarizing the interview. (See the Law section of the 
Fraud Examiners Manual  for more information.) 
 
 
Introductory Questions 
One of the most difficult aspects of an inter view is getting started. Indeed, the introduction 
might be the hardest part. The interviewer and the respondent, in many instances, have not 
met before. The interviewer has a tall order: meet the person, state a reason for the 
interview, establish necessary rapport, and get the information. The introduction is 
accomplished through questions as opposed to statements. The questions allow the 
interviewer to assess feedback from the respondent. This is an important aspect of the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.214   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
introduction. If the respondent is reluctant to be interviewed, that fact will come out  
through the introductory questions.  
  
Four Objectives 
Introductory questions are designed to meet the four objectives below.  
 
Provide the Introduction 
Obviously, the interviewer must introduce himself before the interview commences. The 
interviewer should generally indicate his name and company, avoiding titles. This is not 
always the case, but the more informal the interview, generally the more relaxed  
the respondent. 
 
Establish Rapport 
Webster’s defines rapport as a “relation marked by harmony, conformity, accord, or affinity.” 
In other words, there must be some common ground established before questioning begins. 
This is usually accomplished by the interviewer spending a few minutes with the respondent 
in “small talk.” This aspect, however, should not be overdone. Most people are aware that 
the interviewer is there for a meaningful purpose and not to chitchat.  
 
Establish the Interview Theme 
The interviewer must state the purpose of the interview in some way prior to the 
commencement of serious questioning. Otherwise, the respondent might be confused, 
threatened, or overly cautious. Stating the purpose of the interview is known as establishing 
the interview theme. 
 
Additionally, the purpose of the interview should be general and not specific. The specific 
interview purpose will be conveyed to the respondent later. The stated purpose of the 
interview should be one that is logical for the respondent to accept and easy for the 
interviewer to explain, but it might be related only indirectly to the actual purpose of the 
interview. Normally, the more general the theme is the better.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I am working on a matter and I need your help.” 
OR 
“I am doing a review of procedures here at the company.” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.215 
OR 
“I am developing some information on our purchasing procedures.” 
 
The goal of the theme is to get the respondent to make a commitment for assistance. Failure 
to get a commitment to assist from the respondent is one of the common mistakes made 
even by experienced interviewers. This is a critical step in setting the tone for the interview. 
A commitment of assistance requires positive action on the part of the person being 
interviewed. Remaining silent or simply nodding the head is generally not sufficient. 
  
The interviewer should ask for the commitment before the interview commences, and 
should encourage the respondent to voice that “yes” aloud. If the interviewer encounters 
silence the first time, the question should be repeated in a slightly different way until the 
respondent verbalizes commitment. In the Linda Reed Collins case, included in the 
Appendix to this section, Bridges, the Certified Fraud Examiner, introduces himself to Mary 
Rodriguez De La Garza, who works in the purchasing department of Bailey Books 
Incorporated. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I’m Loren Bridges. I’m doing a review of our purchasing function. Do 
you have a few minutes?” 
 
Respondent: 
“ Yes.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I am gathering some information on certain company procedures. Maybe you can help me?” 
 
Respondent: 
No response. 
 
Interviewer: 
“Could I get you to help me, if you can?” 
 
Respondent : 
“Yes. What’s this about?” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.216   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Generally, the most effective interview theme is that help is being sought. Nearly all human 
beings get satisfaction from helping others. Thus, in most interviews, the interviewer should 
approach the respondent so that person is made to feel important in helping out.  
 
During this phase of the interview, the respondent must not feel threatened in any way. An 
effective approach is the “Columbo style” (although perhaps not in such a rumpled way), in 
which at least two thoughts go through the mind of Columbo’s subjects: (1) he is no threat 
to me, and (2) he really needs my help. 
 
In the following examples, the interviewer is introducing himself to a fellow employee. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I am Loren Bridges, a Certified Fraud Examiner with Bailey Books’ 
fraud examination unit. I am investigating a case of suspected fraud, and you might know 
something about it. How long have you worked here at the company?” 
 
RIGHT 
Interviewer : 
“Ms. De La Garza, I am Loren Bridges. I work here at the company. Have we met before?” 
 
Respondent: 
“I don’t think so.” 
 
Interviewer : 
“I am working on an assignment and I need your help. Do you have a few minutes I can spend 
with you?” 
 
Observe Reactions 
The interviewer must be skilled in interpreting the respondent’s reactions to questions. Social 
scientists say that more than half of the communication between individuals is nonspoken. 
The interviewer must, therefore, observe systematically, though in a nondescript manner, the 
various responses the respondent gives during the course of the conversation.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.217 
To observe the respondent’s reactions, move from nonsensitive to sensitive questions. That 
is, the interview process should begin by posing nonsensitive questions while establishing 
rapport. Asking nonsensitive questions will help the interviewer find some common ground 
on which to connect with the respondent.  
 
Sensitive questions should be scrupulously avoided until well into the interview. And then 
such questions should be asked only after careful deliberation and planning. Moreover, all 
questions should be nonaccusatory. Nothing closes up the lines of communication in an 
interview like an accusatory question. If the respondent starts to become uncomfortable with 
the questioning, the interviewer should move into a different area and approach the sensitive 
question later from a different vantage point. 
 
Likewise, interviewers are encouraged to formulate their questions in a way that will not 
bring about a strong emotional reaction from the respondent, and emotive words of all types 
should be avoided during the introductory phase. Such words put people on the defensive, 
and they are more reluctant to answer and to cooperate. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of Use  
Investigation Inquiry  
Audit Review  
Interview Ask a few questions  
Embezzle/steal/theft Shortage or paperwork 
problems
  
Furthermore, some people will not volunteer information; they must be asked. The 
interviewer must not be reluctant to ask sensitive questions after the proper basis has been 
established. If the interviewer poses the question with confidence and with the attitude that 
an answer is expected, the respondent will be much more likely to furnish the requested 
information. If the interviewer is apologetic or lacks confidence in the question, the 
respondent is much less likely to answer. 
 
After the interviewer establishes rapport through normal conversation, the respondent’s 
reactions are observed. This will serve as a baseline for observing behavior when questions 
that are more sensitive are asked. If the respondent’s verbal and nonverbal behaviors are 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.218   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
inconsistent from one type of question to another, the interviewer will attempt to determine 
why.  
 
To determine why the respondent’s behaviors are inconsistent, the interviewer must be 
knowledgeable about nonverbal clues of behavior, which generally fall within one of the 
following categories: proxemics, chr onemics, kinetics, or paralinguistics. 
 
PROXEMICS 
Proxemic communication is the use of interpersonal space to convey meaning. The relationship 
between the interviewer and respondent is both a cause and effect of proxemic behavior. If 
the distance between the interviewer and the respondent is greater, there is more of a 
tendency for them to watch each other’s eyes for clues to meaning.  
 
It is important to position the respondent’s chair and the interviewer’s chair at an acceptable 
distance. The correct conversational distance varies from one culture to another. In the 
Middle East, the distance is quite short; in Latin America, equals of the same sex carry on a 
conversation at a much closer distance than in North America. Often, as the subject matter 
of the interview changes, the interviewer can note the changes in the proxemic behavior of 
the respondent. If the person is free to back away, he might do so when the topic becomes 
unpleasant or sensitive.  
 
CHRONEMICS 
Chronemic communication refers to the use of time in interpersonal relationships to convey 
meaning, attitudes, and desires. If the respondent is late in keeping an appointment, for 
example, this might convey a lack of interest in or an avoidance of the interview.  
 
The most important chronemic technique used by interviewers is in the timing of questions. 
The interviewer can control the length of pauses and the rate of his speech. This is called 
pacing. The interviewer can also control the length of time after the respondent has finished a 
sentence before another question is posed. This is called the silent probe. 
 
Pacing is one of the principal nonverbal methods of setting an appropriate mood. The tense 
interviewer often communicates anxiety by a rapid-fire rate of speech, which in turn might 
increase anxiety in the respondent. To establish the more thoughtful, deliberative mood 
usually needed to stimulate free association, the interviewer must take the initiative in setting 
a more relaxed, deliberate pace. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.219 
KINETICS 
Kinetic communication involves the use of body movement to convey meaning. Even though 
posture, hands, and feet all communicate, interviewers tend to focus attention on the face 
and are more accurate in their judgments of others if they can see facial movements and 
expressions. When the interviewer concentrates on facial expressions, the primary interest is 
eye contact. Eye contact primarily communicates the desire to make or avoid 
communication. A person who feels shame normally will drop the eyes to avoid the glance 
of another. This is not only to avoid seeing disapproval, but to conceal personal shame  
and confusion. 
 
PARALINGUISTICS 
Paralinguistic communication involves the use of volume, pitch, and voice quality to convey 
meaning. One of the basic differences between  written and verbal communication is that 
oral speech gives the full range of nonverbal accompaniment. For example, a “yes” response 
might not mean complete agreement; it depends on the way in which the “yes” is said. 
 
The interviewer must learn to listen and observe changes in the nonverbal accompaniment 
and whether the verbal and nonverbal are harmoniously reinforcing or tend to give 
conflicting signals, as in cases where the respondent is trying to deceive the interviewer. Ten 
emotions have been studied by social scientists: anger, fear, happiness, jealousy, love, 
nervousness, pride, sadness, satisfaction, and sympathy. Some emotions, like anger and 
nervousness, can be more reliably identified than the others. 
 
Methodology 
Respondents must perceive that they have something in common with the interviewer, and 
should feel good about the situation. This is best accomplished when respondents perceive 
the interviewer as being open and friendly. The following techniques promote this 
perception. 
 
Physical Contact 
Make physical contact with the person being interviewed by shaking hands. Making  
physical contact helps break down psychological barriers to communication. The interviewer 
should not invade the respondent’s personal space, however, as this might make the  
person uncomfortable. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.220   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The interviewer uses body language to create the impression of trust during the interview by 
gesturing openly with the arms, clasping hands together, and leaning forward in a manner to 
indicate interest. Rapport can be established through verbal techniques, such as using soft 
words, agreeing with the respondent, and avoiding negative terms. 
 
When contacting a respondent for the first time, the interviewer must identify himself. This 
is best accomplished by stating your name. Unless a specific reason exists, the interviewer 
should generally omit a title. The less formality in general, the better. In some instances, 
stating a title cannot be avoided. In those cases, the title used should not conjure up emotion 
or possible fear in the mind of the respondent.  
 
Don’t Interview More Than One Person 
One of the basic rules is to question only one person at a time. The testimony of one 
respondent will invariably influence the testimony of another. There are few hard and fast 
rules, but this is one of them.  
 
Privacy 
Another basic rule is to conduct interviews under conditions of privacy. The interview is 
best conducted out of the sight and sound of friends, relatives, or fellow employees. People 
are very reluctant to furnish information within the hearing of others. 
 
Establish Transitional Statement 
Once the interviewer has a commitment for assistance, he must describe in more detail the 
purpose of the interview. This is done with the transitional statement used to provide a 
legitimate basis for the inquiry and to explain to respondents how they fit into the inquiry. 
This is usually done by means of a broad description. When interviewing employees in the 
same company, most of them already presume the legitimacy of your request for assistance. 
After describing the basic nature of the inquiry with the transitional statement, the 
interviewer should seek a second commitment for assistance. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“It’s pretty routine, really. I’m gathering some information about the purchasing function and 
how it is supposed to work. It would be helpful to me if I could start by asking you to tell me 
about your job. Okay?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.221 
When interviewing strangers, the interviewer might have to describe with more particularity 
how the respondent’s assistance is needed. This can be accomplished by one or more of the 
methods illustrated below, where the interviewer is talking to an outside vendor. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ It’s pretty routine, really. As I say, I work for Bailey Books and I’ve been assigned a project 
to gather some information about some of our procedures. And because you work for one of our 
vendors, I thought it might be helpful to talk to you. Okay ?” 
OR 
“It’s pretty routine, really. I have been asked by the company to gather information on some of 
our procedures. I thought you might be able to help by answering a few questions. Okay?” 
OR 
“ It’s pretty routine, really. I have been asked by the company to gather some information, and 
they suggested I might contact you. Okay?” 
 
Seek Continuous Agreement 
Throughout the interview process — from the introduction to the close — the interviewer 
should attempt to phrase questions so that they can be answered “yes.” It is easier for people 
to reply in the affirmative than the negative. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“Okay?” 
 
“Can you help me?” 
 
“That’s okay, isn’t it?” 
 
Do Not Invade Body Space 
During the introductory part of the interview, the interviewer generally should remain at a 
distance of four to six feet. Do not invade the personal zone (closer than about three feet), 
as it might make the respondent uncomfortable.  
 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.222   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Informational Questions 
Informational questions are nonconfrontational, nonthreatening, and are asked for 
information-gathering purposes. The great majority of the interviewer’s questions fall into 
this category. These types of questions may be asked during any of the following types of 
interviews: 
• Interviews to gain an understanding of accounting control systems 
• Interviews concerning documents 
• Interviews to gather information regarding business operations or systems 
• Pre-employment interviews 
  
Informational questions seek to elicit unbiased factual information. The interviewer will be 
alert to inconsistency in facts or behavior.  
 
Question Sequences 
As a general rule, questioning should proceed from the general to the specific; that is, it is 
best to seek general information before seeking details. A variation is to “reach backward” 
with the questions, by beginning with known information and working toward unknown 
areas. An efficient method of doing this is to recount the known information and then frame 
the next question as a logical continuation of the facts previously related. 
 
It is common, especially in accounting and fraud-related matters, for figures or numbers to 
be critical. Unfortunately, some witnesses are unable to recall specific amounts. The 
interviewer can jog the memory of the respondent by comparing unknown items with items 
of known quantity. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“Was the amount of money involved more than last year’s figure?” 
 
Questioning Techniques 
Asking the right question is necessary to conduct an effective interview. By using the right 
questions, the interviewer can improve a whole range of communications skills. 
Informational questions — as well as others — fall into several general categories. But 
generally, informational questions will be one of three types: open, closed, or leading. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.223 
Open Questions 
Open questions are those worded in a way that makes it difficult to answer “yes” or “no.” 
The answer is also not dependent on the question. The typical open question calls for a 
monologue response, and it can be answered in several different ways. During the 
information phase of the interview, the interviewer should endeavor to ask primarily  
open questions. This is to stimulate conversation. Some of the best open questions are 
subtle commands. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Please tell me about your job.” 
 
“Please tell me about the operation of your department.” 
 
“What do you think about this problem?” 
 
“Please describe the procedures to me.” 
 
Closed Questions 
Closed questions are those that require a precise answer: usually “yes” or “no.” Closed 
questions also deal with specifics, such as amounts, dates, and times. As far as possible, 
closed questions should be avoided in the informational part of the interview. They are used 
extensively in closing questions. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“Do you work here?” 
 
“What day of the week did it happen?” 
 
Leading Questions 
Leading questions contain the answer as a part of the question. Most commonly, they are 
used to confirm facts already known. This type of question gives the subject much less room 
to maneuver than an open or closed question because they direct the subject to answer in a 
particular way. Leading questions imply that the interviewer already knows the answer, 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.224   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
asking the subject to confirm what is already known, and they can be particularly effective in 
interview situations. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer : 
“So there have been no changes in the operation since last year?” 
 
“Are you still employed by the Bailey Books Corporation?” 
 
“You got promoted, right?” 
 
“Don’t you get your income from various sources?” 
 
Double-Negative Questions 
Questions or statements containing double-negatives are confusing and often suggest an 
answer opposite to the correct one. They should not be used. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Didn’t you suspect that something wasn’t right?” (What does a negative answer  
mean here?)  
 
Complex Questions 
Complex questions and statements are too complicated to be easily understood, cover more 
than one subject or topic, require more than one answer, and/or require a complicated 
answer. They should be avoided. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What are your duties here, and ho w long have you been employed?” 
 
Attitude Questions 
The attitude of the interviewer can be conveyed by the structure of the question or 
statement, and by the manner in which the question is asked. When the interviewer wishes 
to establish a friendly mood, these questions can be employed. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.225 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“How are you doing this morning, Ms. De La Garza?” 
 
“Do you like sports?” 
 
It is always a good idea, however, to ask a question for which you know beforehand 
that the answer will be “yes.”  
 
Controlled Answer Techniques 
Controlled answer techniques or statements might be used to stimulate a desired answer or 
impression. These techniques direct the interview toward a specific point. For example, it 
might be possible to get a person to admit knowledge of a matter by phrasing the question 
like this, “I understand you were present when the internal controls were developed; would you please describe 
how they were constructed?” This phrasing provides a stronger incentive for the respondent to 
admit knowledge than does, “Were you present when the internal controls were developed?” 
 
To stimulate the person to agree to talk or provide information, you might use a prompt, 
such as, “Because you are not involved in this matter, I am sure you would not mind discussing it with me.” 
This provides a stronger incentive to cooperate than, “Do you have any objections to telling me 
what you know?” Avoid negative construction, such as, “I don’t guess you would mind answering a 
few questions?” 
 
Free Narratives 
The free narrative is an orderly, continuous account of an event or incident, given with or 
without prompting. It is used to get a quick résumé of what is known about a matter. Be 
sure to designate specifically the occurrence that you wish to discuss. 
 
Sometimes the respondent must be controlled to prevent unnecessary digression. Otherwise, 
use a minimum of interruptions, and do not stop the narrative without good reason. The 
respondent will sometimes provide valuable clues when talking about things that are only 
partially related to the matter under inquiry. 
 
Suggestions 
Below are suggestions to improve the quality of the interview during the information-gathering 
phase. 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.226   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Begin by asking questions that are not likely to cause the respondent to become 
defensive or hostile. 
• Ask the questions in a manner that will develop the facts in the order of their 
occurrence, or in some other systematic order. 
• Ask only one question at a time, and frame the question so that only one answer  
is required. 
• Ask straightforward and frank questions; generally avoid shrewd approaches. 
• Give the respondent ample time to answer; do not rush. 
• Try to help the respondent remember, but do not suggest answers; and be careful not to 
imply any particular answer by facial expressions, gestures, methods of asking questions, 
or types of questions asked. 
• Repeat or rephrase questions, if necessary, to get the desired facts. 
• Be sure you understand the answers, and if they are not perfectly clear, have the 
respondent interpret them at the time instead of asking for more explanation later. 
• Give the respondent an opportunity to qualify his answers. 
• Separate facts from inferences. 
• Have the respondent give comparisons by percentages, fractions, estimates of time and 
distance, and other such comparisons to ascertain accuracy. 
• Get all of the facts; almost every respondent can give you information beyond what was 
initially provided. 
• After the respondent has given a narrative account, ask questions about every item that 
has been discussed. 
• Upon conclusion of the direct questioning, ask the respondent to summarize the 
information given. Then summarize the facts as you understand them, and have the 
respondent verify that these conclusions are correct. 
 
Methodology  
Once the introduction has been completed, the interviewer needs a transition into the body 
of the interview. This is usually accomplished by asking people an easy question about 
themselves or their duties.  
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.227 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“As I said, I am informally gathering information about Bailey’s operations. I don’t know if 
you can really help me. Can you give me an idea of what you do here?” 
 
Begin with Background Questions 
Assuming the respondent does not have a problem answering the transitional question, the 
interviewer should then ask a series of easy, open questions designed to get the respondent 
to talk about himself. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What is your exact title?” 
 
“What do your responsibilities involve?” 
 
“How long have you been assigned here?” 
 
“What do you like best about your job?” 
 
“What do you like least about your job?” 
 
“What would you eventually like to do for the company?” 
 
“Overall, how do you like your current job?” 
 
Observe Verbal and Nonverbal Behavior 
During the period when the respondent is talking about himself, the interviewer should 
discreetly observe verbal and nonverbal behavior. 
 
Ask Nonleading (Open) Questions 
Open questioning techniques are used almost exclusively in the informational phase of the 
interview. The questions must be inquisitory and not accusatory. Remember, the most 
effective question is constructed as a subtle command. 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.228   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Please tell me about ________.” 
 
“Please tell me about your current job procedures.” 
 
“Please tell me what paperwork you are responsible for.” 
 
“Please explain the chain of command in your department.” 
 
“Please tell me what procedures are in effect to prevent errors in the paperwork.” 
 
“Please explain what you understand to be the system of checks and balances (or internal 
controls) in your department.” 
 
“Please explain where you see areas that need to be improved in the system of checks and 
balances in your department.” 
 
Once the respondent has answered open questions, the interviewer can go back and review 
the facts in greater detail. If the answers are inconsistent, try to clarify them. But the 
interviewer should not challenge the honesty or integrity of the respondent at this point. 
 
Approach Sensitive Questions Carefully  
Words such as “routine questions” can be used to play down the significance of the inquiry. 
It is important for information-gathering purposes that the interviewer does not react 
excessively to the respondent’s statements. The interviewer should not express shock, 
disgust, or similar emotions during the interview. Following are examples of ways to  
discuss fraud within a company. The questions are posed in a hypothetical way to avoid 
being accusatory. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Part of my job is to prevent and uncover waste, fraud, and abuse. You understand that, don’t 
you?” 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.229 
“Please tell me where you think the company is wasting assets or money.” 
 
“Where do you think the company is vulnerable to someone here abusing their position?” 
 
Dealing with Resistance 
There is always the possibility that the respondent will refuse a request for interview. When 
the respondent and the interviewer have no connection, studies show that as many as 65 
percent of the respondents will refuse an interview if contacted first by telephone. In 
contrast, one study concluded that only one-third of respondents will be reluctant to be 
interviewed when contacted in person. The more unpleasant the topic, the more likely the 
respondent is to refuse.  
 
With inexperienced interviewers, there is a danger that the interviewer will perceive 
resistance when there is none. As a result, the interviewer might become defensive. It is 
incumbent upon the interviewer to overcome such feelings to complete the interview. The 
following are specific examples of the types of resistance that will be encountered and how 
to try to overcome them. 
 
“I’m Too Busy” 
When the interviewer contacts the respondent without a previous appointment, there is a 
possibility that the respondent will be too busy at the moment to cooperate. “I’m too busy” 
is also used as an excuse for the real source of the person’s resistance, which might be 
lethargy, ego threat, or a dislike of talking to strangers. These situations can be diffused by 
the interviewer stressing that: 
• The interview will be short. 
• The interviewer is already there. 
• The project is important. 
• The interview will not be difficult. 
• The interviewer needs help. 
 
“I Don’t Know Anything About It” 
The interviewer will sometimes get this response immediately after stating the purpose of the 
interview. This resistance is typically diffused by accepting the statement, and then 
responding with a question. For example, if a person says, “I don’t know anything,” a typical 
response would be: 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.230   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I see. What do your duties involve, then?” 
OR 
“Well, that was one of the things I wanted to find out. Do you know about internal controls, 
then?” 
 
“I Don’t Remember” 
Usually, this is not an expression of resistance. Instead, it is an expression of modesty, 
tentativeness, or caution. One of the best ways to respond is to simply remain silent while 
the person is deliberating. He is saying, in effect, “Give me a moment to think.” If this is not 
successful, the best way to counter is to pose an alternate, narrower question. As with other 
symptoms of resistance, the resistance is accepted and diffused, and an alternate question  
is posed. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Mr. McGuire, I understand you might not remember the entire transaction. Do you remember 
if it was more than $10,000?” 
OR 
“It’s okay if you don’t remember the details. Do you remember how it made you react at the 
time?” 
 
“What Do You Mean by That?” 
When the respondent asks this question, it might represent a symptom of mild resistance 
with which the respondent is attempting to shift the attention from himself to the 
interviewer. It also might be a way for the respondent to stall for time while deliberating. Or 
it could be that the respondent is not sure what the interviewer’s question means. The 
interviewer should typically react to such a question by treating it as a mere request for 
clarification. The interviewer should not become defensive; to do so generally will escalate 
the resistance.  
 
Difficult People 
The interviewer will invariably encounter a few difficult people. There are five common-
 sense steps to take with such people.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.231 
Don’t React 
Sometimes a respondent will insist on giving the interviewer a “hard time” for no apparent 
reason, though, in reality, there can be a multitude of reasons why the person refuses to 
cooperate. There are three natural reactions for the interviewer verbally assailed by the 
respondent: to strike back, to give in, or to terminate the interview. None of these tactics is 
satisfactory, as none leads to a productive interview. Instead, the interviewer should 
consciously ensure that he does not react to anger with hostility.  
 
Disarm the Person 
A common mistake is to try to reason with an unreceptive person. You must disarm the 
hostile person. The best tactic is surprise. If the person is stonewalling, he expects the 
interviewer to apply pressure; if attacking, the person expects the interviewer to resist. To 
disarm the person, listen, acknowledge the point, and agree wherever you can. 
 
Change Tactics 
In some situations, changing tactics to reduce hostility might be the only viable option. This 
means casting what the respondent says in a form that directs attention back to the problem 
and to the interests of both sides. This normally means asking the respondent what he would 
do to solve the problem. 
 
Make It Easy to Say “Yes” 
In trying to negotiate with difficult people, the usual tactic is for the interviewer to make a 
statement and attempt to get the respondent to agree with it. A better choice is to agree with 
one of the respondent’s statements  and go from there. It is better to break statements into 
smaller ones that would be difficult to disagree with. This helps the difficult person  
save face.  
 
Make It Hard to Say “No” 
One way of making it difficult to say “no” is by asking re ality-based (what-if) questions. 
These types of questions are used to get the respondent to think of the consequences of  
not agreeing.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What do you think will happen if we don’t agree?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.232   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“What do you think I will have to do from here?” 
 
“What will you do?” 
 
Volatile Interviews 
A volatile interview  is one that has the potential to bring about strong emotional reactions in 
the respondent. Typical volatile interviews involve close friends and relatives of a miscreant, 
co-conspirators, and similar individuals. 
 
The personality characteristics of those involved in the volatile interview vary. The types 
listed represent the most common personality characteristics associated with volatile 
interviews. Some individuals, by nature, are resentful of authority figures, such as fraud 
examiners and law enforcement officers. 
 
Friends, relatives, and romantic interests of a target often make for a difficult interview. They 
perceive that the examiner is “out to get” someone close to them.  
 
Physical Symptoms 
In volatile interviews, the individual typically reacts, rather than thinks; and frequently the 
individual is openly hostile to the interviewer. Individuals experiencing heightened emotions 
frequently have a dry mouth and tend to lick their lips and swallow more frequently than 
normal. Throat clearing is also an audible sign of emotion. Restlessness can be indicated by 
fidgeting, shifting in a chair, and foot-tapping. People under emotional stress frequently 
perspire more than normal. 
 
Under stress, a person’s complexion frequently changes. People might look red or flushed, 
or might appear to be pale. During stress, the heart beats more frequently, and a keen 
observer can see the carotid artery actually pulsate. The carotid artery is the large artery on 
each side of the neck. 
 
If an individual in a normal situation maintains eye contact, an avoidance of eye contact 
could indicate that he is under stress. It is important to realize that symptoms are not present 
in all emotional situations.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.233 
Other Considerations 
There should be two interviewers involved in potentially volatile situations. This procedure 
provides psychological strength for the interviewers. Additionally, the second person can 
serve as a witness in the event the interview turns bad.  
 
Surprise should be employed in any interview that is considered potentially volatile. In many 
instances, the potentially volatile respondent is unaware that he is going to be questioned, 
and will therefore be off guard. If the interview is not conducted by surprise, the interviewer 
runs the risk of the respondent not showing up, showing up with a witness, or being present 
with counsel. 
 
In a potentially volatile interview, the order of questions should be out of sequence. This is 
to keep the volatile respondent from knowing exactly the nature of the inquiry, and where it 
is leading. Although the interviewer will endeavor to obtain information regarding who, 
what, why, when, where, and how, the order of the questioning will vary from that of other 
interviews. This technique is especially important in situations where the respondent might 
be attempting to protect himself.  
 
The hypothetical question is generally considered to be less threatening, and is, therefore, 
ideally suited for the potentially volatile interview. For example, if you are interviewing Mr. 
Smith regarding Mr. Jones, rather than saying, “Did Mr. Jones do it?” ask, “Is there any reason why 
Mr. Jones would have done it?” 
 
Overcoming Objections 
Volatile witnesses voice numerous objections to being interviewed. Some of the most 
common objections (along with suggested responses) are listed below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I don’t want to be involved.” 
 
Interviewer: 
The interviewer should answer this question by pointing out that he would not be 
there, asking questions, if the respondent were not involved. Point out that you are 
saving the respondent trouble by discussing the matter “informally” (do not say “off 
the record”). 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.234   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Respondent : 
“Why should I talk to you?” 
 
Interviewer: 
The interviewer should answer that he is trying to clear up a problem, and that the 
respondent’s assistance is important. 
 
Respondent : 
“You can’t prove that!” 
 
Interviewer: 
The interviewer should tell the person that he is not trying to prove or disprove; you 
are simply gathering information. 
 
Respondent : 
“ You can’t make me talk!” 
 
Interviewer: 
Tell the person that you are not attempting to make him do anything; you are trying 
to resolve a problem, and would deeply appreciate help.  
 
 
Closing Questions 
In routine, informational interviews, closing the interview on a positive note is a must. 
During interviews, closing questions are asked for the following purposes: to reconfirm 
facts, to gather additional facts, and to conclude the interview.  
 
Reconfirm Facts 
It is not unusual for the interviewer to have misunderstood or misinterpreted statements of 
the respondent. Therefore, to ensure that the interviewer understood the information that 
the witness provided, he should review the key facts during the closing phase of the 
interview. However, the interviewer should not attempt to revisit all the information 
provided by the subject, only the facts that are most relevant.  
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.235 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I want to make sure I have my information straight. Let me take a 
minute and summarize what we’ve discussed.” 
 
Go over each of the key facts in summary form. The questions should be closed, so that the 
witness can respond either “yes” or “no.” 
 
Gather Additional Facts 
The closing-questions phase also seeks to obtain facts previously unknown. It provides the 
respondent further opportunity to say whatever they want about the matter at hand.  
If appropriate, the interviewer can ask if there are other documents or witnesses that would 
be helpful to the case. Do not promise confidentiality; instead, say, “I’ll keep your name as quiet 
as possible.” Finally, the interviewer wants to leave the discussion on a positive note.  
 
People being interviewed often do not volunteer additional information regarding other 
witnesses or evidence. The theme, therefore, is to provide the respondent an opportunity to 
furnish further relevant facts or opinions. At the conclusion, attempt to determine which 
facts provided by the respondent are the most relevant. Do not attempt to go over all the 
information a second time.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“You have known Linda Reed Collins eight years, correct?” 
 
“You knew Collins had some financial problems, is that right?” 
 
“You suspected—but didn’t know for sure—th at Collins might have had an improper 
relationship with one of our vendors. Is that correct?” 
 
On absolutely vital facts provided by the respondent, add “Are you sure?”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ Ms. De La Garza, are you sure you su spected Ms. Collins falsified invoices?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.236   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
To obtain additional facts, ask the respondent if there is something else she would like to 
say. This gives the correct impression that the interviewer is interested in all relevant 
information, regardless of which side it favors. Try to actively involve the respondent in 
helping solve the case—“If you were trying to resolve this issue, what would you do?” This 
technique gives the respondent an opportunity to assist the interviewer, and it makes the 
respondent feel like a vital part of the interview. In addition, asking the witness if there is 
anything else they would like to say opens the door for them to provide additional 
information that was not specifically asked for. Similarly, asking the subject if they know of 
someone else whom you might talk to can be helpful and lead to other potential sources  
of information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, there might be someone else I should talk to. Are there documents 
available that relate to this that we haven’t already discussed? If I keep your name as quiet as 
possible, are there any suggestions you can give me  about whom else I might talk to about this?” 
OR 
“Are there any other documents or evidence I might look for?” 
OR 
“If you were in my shoes, what would you do next?” 
 
Conclude the Interview 
Establishing rapport with the subject is important because it helps ensure future 
cooperation. Ask if the respondent has anything else to say. This gives the respondent one 
final time chance to make any statement. Also ask if the interviewer can call with any 
additional questions. It leaves the door open to additional cooperation. 
 
To maintain good will, it is also a good idea to ask respondents if they have been treated 
fairly. It is especially helpful to ask this when the respondent has not been cooperative, or at 
the conclusion of an admission-seeking interview. The interviewer generally should ask the 
question as if it were perfunctory. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, this is just a standard que stion. Do you feel that I have treated you fairly 
in this interview?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.237 
In addition, leave the respondent a business card or a telephone number. Invite the 
respondent to call about anything else relevant.  
 
Also, in some cases, the interviewer should attempt to obtain a commitment that the 
respondent will not discuss the matter. However, this step is not recommended with adverse 
or hostile respondents, it may give them the idea to share the information. Here is an 
example of the proper approach. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“In these kinds of situations, innocent people ca n have their reputation hurt because of rumor 
and innuendo. We don’t want that to happen and neither do you. Therefore, I’d like your 
cooperation. Can I count on you not to discuss this until all the facts are out?” 
 
Finally, the interviewer should shake hands with the respondents and thank them for their 
time and information.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Ms. De La Garza, I know you have given your time and effort to help me. I appreciate it. 
Good-bye.”  
 
 
Assessment Questions 
The closer you get to the admission-seeking interview, the greater chance of facing 
deception. Witnesses might try to cover up what they know, and the target may lie to try to 
convince you that they are not guilty. When you believe the respondent’s answers may be 
deceptive, you should begin asking assessment questions. 
 
Assessment  questions  seek to establish the credibility of the respondent. They are used only 
when the interviewer considers previous statements by the respondent to be inconsistent 
because of possible deception.  
 
Once the respondent has answered all questions  about the event, and the interviewer has 
reason to believe the respondent is being deceptive, a theme must be established to justify 
additional questions. This theme can ordinarily be put forth by saying, “I have a few additional 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.238   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
questions.” Do not indicate in any way that these questions are for a different purpose than 
seeking information.  
 
Norming or Calibrating 
Norming  or calibrating  is the process of observing behavior before critical questions are asked, 
as opposed to doing so during questioning. Norming should be a routine part of all 
interviews. People with truthful attitudes will answer questions one way; those with 
untruthful attitudes will generally answer them differently. Assessment questions ask the 
subject to agree with matters that go against the principles of most honest people. In other 
words, dishonest people are likely to agree with many of the statements, while honest people 
won’t. Assessment questions are designed primarily to get a verbal or nonverbal reaction 
from the respondent. The interviewer will then carefully assess that reaction.  
 
Suggestions for observing the verbal and physical behavior of the respondent include: 
• Use your senses of touch, sight, and hearing to establish a norm. 
• Do not stare or call attention to the person’s behavior symptoms. 
• Be aware of the respondent’s entire body. 
• Observe the timing and consistency of behavior. 
• Note clusters of behaviors. 
 
The best way to calibrate a witness is through the use of noncritical questions on 
background information, place of employment, and the like. If the witness displays general 
nervousness or other verbal and non-verbal clues during this phase of questioning, 
subsequent indicators may not be reliable. The key is to observe changes in behavior when 
pertinent questions are asked.  
 
Based on the respondent’s reaction to the assessment questions, the interviewer then 
considers all the verbal and nonverbal responses together (not in isolation) to decide 
whether to proceed to the admission-seeking phase of the interview. No one behavior 
should be isolated or a conclusion drawn from it. They should be considered together. 
 
Physiology of Deception 
It is said that everyone lies and does so for one of two reasons: to receive rewards or to 
avoid punishment. In most people, lying produces stress. The human body will attempt to 
relieve this stress (even in practiced liars) through verbal and nonverbal clues. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.239 
Conclusions concerning behavior must be tempered by a number of factors. The physical 
environment in which the interview is conducted can affect behavior. If the respondent is 
comfortable, fewer behavior quirks might be exhibited. The more intelligent the respondent, 
the more reliable verbal and nonverbal clues will be. If the respondent is biased toward the 
interviewer, or vice versa, this will affect behavior. 
 
People who are mentally unstable, or are under the influence of drugs, will be unsuitable to 
interview. Behavior symptoms of juveniles are generally unreliable. Racial, ethnic, and 
economic factors should be carefully noted. Some cultures, for example, discourage looking 
directly at someone. Other cultures use certain body language that might be misinterpreted. 
Because professional pathological liars often are familiar with interview techniques, they are 
less likely to furnish observable behavioral clues.  
 
Verbal Clues 
Verbal clues are those relating to wordings, expressions, and responses to specific questions. 
Verbal responses include spoken words and gestures that serve as word substitutes, 
including nodding or shaking the head to indicate “yes” and “no.” The following are some 
examples of verbal clues. 
 
CHANGES IN SPEECH PATTERNS 
Deceptive people often speed up or slow down their speech, or speak louder. There might 
be a change in the voice pitch; as a person becomes tense, the vocal chords constrict. 
Deceptive people also have a tendency to cough or clear their throats during times of 
deception. 
 
REPETITION OF THE QUESTION 
Repeating the question is a means for a deceptive respondent to gain more time to think of 
what to say. The respondent may repeat the question verbatim, or he may frame the answer 
with a request to repeat the question (e.g., “What was that again?”  or similar language). 
Conversely, a truthful subject usually does not have to contemplate his answer.  
 
COMMENTS REGARDING INTERVIEW 
Deceptive people will often complain about the physical environment of the interview room, 
such as, “It’s cold in here.” They will also sometimes ask how much longer the interview  
will take. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.240   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SELECTIVE MEMORY 
In some cases, the deceptive person will have a fine memory for insignificant events, but 
when it comes to the important facts, “just can’t seem to remember.” 
 
MAKING EXCUSES 
Dishonest people will frequently make excuses about things that look bad for them, such as, 
“ I’m always nervous; don’t pay any attention to that.” 
 
EMPHASIS ON CERTAIN WORDS 
On frequent occasions, dishonest people will a dd what they believe to be credibility to their 
lies by use of emphasis.  
 
OATHS 
Dishonest persons frequently use expressions such as “I swear to God,” “Honestly,” “Frankly,” 
or “To tell the truth” to add credibility to their lies. 
 
CHARACTER TESTIMONY 
A liar will often request that the interviewer, “Check with my wife,” or “Talk to my minister.” 
This is frequently done to add credibility to a false statement. 
 
ANSWERING WITH A QUESTION 
Rather than deny the allegations outright, the liar might frequently answer with a question, 
such as, “Why would I do something like that?” As a variation, the deceptive person will 
sometimes question the interview procedure by asking, “Why are you picking on me?” 
 
OVERUSE OF RESPECT 
Some deceptive people will go out of their way to be respectful and friendly. When accused 
of wrongdoing, it is unnatural for a person to react in a friendly and respectful manner.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I’m sorry, sir, I know you’re just doing your job. But I didn’t do it.” 
 
INCREASINGLY WEAKER DENIALS 
When an honest person is accused of something he did not do, that person is likely to 
become angry or forceful in making denials. The more the innocent person is accused, the 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.241 
more forceful the denial becomes. The dishonest person, on the other hand, is likely to make 
a weak denial. Upon repeated accusations, the dishonest person’s denials become weaker, to 
the point that the person becomes silent. 
 
FAILURE TO DENY 
Dishonest people are more likely than honest people to deny an event specifically. An 
honest person might offer a simple and clear “no” while the dishonest person will qualify the 
denial: “No, I did not steal $43,500 fr om the company on June 27.” Other qualified denial phrases 
include, “To the best of my memory,” and “As far as I recall,” or similar language. 
 
AVOIDANCE OF EMOTIVE WORDS 
A liar will often avoid emotionally provocative terms such as steal, lie, and crime. Instead, the 
dishonest person frequently prefers “soft” words such as borrow, and it (referring to the deed 
in question). 
 
REFUSAL TO IMPLICATE OTHER SUSPECTS 
Both the honest respondent and the liar will have a natural reluctance to name others 
involved in misdeeds. However, the liar will frequently refuse to implicate possible suspects, 
no matter how much pressure is applied by the interviewer. This is because the culpable 
person does not want the circle of suspicion to be narrowed. 
 
TOLERANT ATTITUDES 
Dishonest people typically have tolerant attitudes toward miscreant conduct. The interviewer 
in an internal theft case might ask, “What should happen to this person when he is caught?” The 
honest person will usually say, “They should be fired/prosecuted.” The dishonest individual is 
much more likely to reply, “How should I know?” or, “Maybe he is a good employee who got into 
problems. Perhaps he should be given a second chance.” 
 
RELUCTANCE TO TERMINATE INTERVIEW 
Dishonest people will generally be more reluctant than honest ones to terminate the 
interview. The dishonest individual wants to convince the interviewer that he is not 
responsible, so that the investigation will not continue. The honest person, on the other 
hand, generally has no such reluctance. 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.242   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FEIGNED UNCONCERN 
The dishonest person will often try to appear casual and unconcerned, will frequently adopt 
an unnatural slouching posture, and might react to questions with nervous or false laughter 
or feeble attempts at humor. The honest person, conversely, will typically be very concerned 
about being suspected of wrongdoing, and will treat the interviewer’s questions seriously. 
 
Nonverbal Clues 
Nonverbal clues to deception include various body movements and postures accompanying 
the verbal reply. Some of these are discussed below. 
 
FULL-BODY MOTIONS 
When asked sensitive or emotive questions, the dishonest person will typically change his 
posture completely, as if moving away from the interviewer. The honest person will 
frequently lean forward toward the interviewer when questions are serious. 
 
ANATOMICAL PHYSICAL RESPONSES 
Anatomical physical responses are those involuntary reactions by the body to fright such as 
increased heart rate, shallow or labored breathing, or excessive perspiration. These reactions 
are typical of dishonest people accused of wrongdoing. 
 
ILLUSTRATORS 
Illustrators are the motions made primarily with the hands to demonstrate points when 
talking. During nonthreatening questions, the illustrators might be done at one rate. During 
threatening questions, the use of illustrators might increase or decrease. 
 
HANDS OVER THE MOUTH 
Frequently, dishonest people will cover the mouth with the hand or fingers during 
deception. This reaction goes back to childhood, when many children cover their mouths 
when telling a lie. It is done subconsciously to conceal the statement. 
 
MANIPULATORS 
Manipulators are motions like picking lint from clothing, playing with objects such as 
pencils, or holding one’s hands while talking. Manipulators are displacement activities that 
reduce nervousness. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.243 
FLEEING POSITIONS 
During the interview, dishonest people will often posture themselves in a “fleeing position.” 
While the head and trunk might be facing the interviewer, the feet and lower portion of the 
body might be pointing toward the door in an unconscious effort to flee from the 
interviewer. 
 
CROSSING THE ARMS 
Crossing one’s arms over the middle zones of the body is a classic defensive reaction to 
difficult or uncomfortable questions. A variation is crossing the feet under the chair and 
locking them. These crossing motions occur mostly when being deceptive. 
 
REACTION TO EVIDENCE 
While trying to be outwardly concerned, the guilty person will have a keen interest in 
implicating evidence. The dishonest person will often look at documents presented by the 
interviewer, attempt to be casual about observing them, and then shove them away, as if 
wanting nothing to do with the evidence. 
 
Most actions that are designed to interrupt the flow of speech are stress related. Examples 
include:  
• Closing the mouth tightly 
• Pursing the lips 
• Covering the mouth with the hand 
• Lip and tongue biting 
• Licking the lips 
• Chewing on objects 
 
Genuine smiles usually involve the whole mouth; false ones are confined to the upper half. 
People involved in deception tend to smirk rather than to smile. 
 
CROSSING 
The body or legs might be crossed to reduce stress. When the hands are crossing the body, it 
is a defensive gesture, to protect the “soft underbelly.” 
 
Methodology of Assessment Questions 
Assessment questions should proceed logically from the least to the most sensitive. The 
following questions illustrate the pattern that an interviewer might take in questioning a 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.244   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witness when he has some reason to believe the respondent, a company employee, has 
knowledge of a suspected fraud. In most examples, the question’s basis is explained before 
the question is asked. The initial questions seek agreement. 
 
The following questions assume the examiner has some reason to believe the respondent, a 
company employee, has knowledge of a suspected fraud. 
 
EXAMPLE  
Interviewer: 
“The company is particularly concerned about fraud and abuse. There are some new laws in 
effect that will cost the company millions if abus es go on and we don’t try to find them. Do you 
know which law I am talking about?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Most individuals will not know about the laws concerning corporate sentencing 
guidelines, and will, therefore, answer “no.” The purpose of this question is to get the 
respondent to understand the serious nature of fraud and abuse. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Congress recently passed a law last year that can levy fines of more than $200 million against 
companies that don’t try to clean their own houses.  $200 million is a lot of money, so you can 
understand why the company’s concerned, can’t you?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The majority of people will say “yes” to this question. In the event of a “no” answer, the 
interviewer should explain the issue fully and, thereafter, attempt to get the respondent’s 
agreement. If that agreement is not forthcoming, the interviewer should assess why not. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Of course, they are not talking about a loyal employee who gets in a bind. They’re talking 
more about senior management. Have you ever read in the newspapers  about what kind of 
people engage in company misdeeds?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.245 
EXPLANATION 
Most people read the newspapers and are at least generally familiar with the problem of 
fraud and abuse. Agreement by the respondent is expected to this question. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Most of them aren’t criminals at all. A lot of times, they’re just trying to save their jobs or just 
trying to get by because the company is so cheap that it won’t pay people what they are worth. 
Do you know what I mean?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Although the honest person and the dishonest person will both probably answer “yes” 
to this question, the honest individual is less likely to accept the premise that these 
people are not wrongdoers. Many honest people might reply, “Yes, I understand, but that 
doesn’t justify stealing.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Why do you think someone around here might be justified in taking  company property?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Because fraud perpetrators frequently justify their acts, the dishonest individual is more 
likely than the honest person to attempt a justification, such as, “Everyone does it,”  or “The 
company should treat people better if they don’t want them to steal.”  The honest person, on the 
other hand, is much more likely to say, “There is no justification for stealing from the company. It 
is dishonest.”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“How do you think we should deal with someone who got in a bind and did something wrong in 
the eyes of the company?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Similar to other questions in this series, the ho nest person wants to “throw the book” at the 
miscreant, while the culpable individual typically will say, “How should I know? It’s not up to 
me,” or, “If they were a good employee, maybe we should give them another chance.”  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.246   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Do you think someone in your department might have taken something from the company 
because they thought they were justified?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Most people — honest or dishonest — will answer “no” to this question. The culpable 
person, however, will more likely say “yes” wi thout elaborating. The honest person, if 
answering “yes,” will most likely provide details. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Have you ever felt yourself—even though you di dn’t go through with it—justified in taking 
advantage of your position?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
Again, most people, both honest and dishonest, will answer this question “no.” The 
dishonest person, however, is more likely to acknowledge having at least “thought” of 
doing it. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Who in your department do you feel would think they were justified in doing something against 
the company?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The dishonest person will not likely furnish an answer to this question, saying instead 
that, “I guess anyone could have a justification if they wanted to.” The honest individual, on the 
other hand, is more likely to name names—albeit reluctantly. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Do you believe that most people will tell their manager if they believed a colleague was doing 
something wrong, like committin g fraud against the company?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.247 
EXPLANATION 
The honest person has more of a sense of integrity, and is much more likely to report a 
misdeed. The dishonest person is more likely to say “no.” When pressed for an 
explanation, this person will typically say, “No, nothing would be done about it, and they 
wouldn’t believe me anyhow.”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Is there any reason why someone who works with  you would say they thought you might feel 
justified in doing something wrong?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
This is a hypothetical question designed to place the thought in the mind of a wrongdoer 
that someone has named him as a suspect. The honest person will typically say “no.” 
The dishonest person is more likely to try to explain by saying something like, “I know 
there are people around here who don’t like me.”  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“What would concern you most if you did something wrong and it was found out?” 
 
EXPLANATION 
The dishonest person is likely to say something like, “I wouldn’t want to go to jail.” The 
honest person, however, might reject the notion by saying, “I’m not concerned at all, because 
I haven’t done anything.” If the honest person does explain, it will usually be along the lines 
of disappointing friends or family; the di shonest person is more likely to mention 
punitive measures. 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.248   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
TYPICAL ATTITUDES DISPLAYED BY RESPONDENTS 
 
Truthful  Untruthful  
  
Calm Impatient 
Relaxed Tense 
Cooperative Defensive 
Concerned Outwardly unconcerned 
Sincere Overly friendly, polite 
Inflexible Defeated 
Cordial Surly 
 
 
Admission-Seeking Questions 
The choice of when to conduct an admission-seeking interview of a suspect is critical. 
Normally, the interviewer should ask accusatory or admission-seeking questions when there 
is a reasonable probability that the respondent has committed the act in question, all other 
reasonable investigative steps have been completed and as much information as possible has 
been developed from other sources, and the interviewer can reasonably control the place, 
time, and subject matter of the interview. An assessment of culpability might be based on 
verbal and nonverbal responses to interview questions, as well as documents, physical 
evidence, and other interviews.  
 
A transitional theme is necessary when proceeding from assessment-seeking questions to 
admission-seeking questions. Part of the purpose of this theme is to create in the mind of 
the miscreant that he has been caught. Under the ideal circumstance, the interviewer will 
leave the room for just a few minutes, saying this is to “check on something.” If the 
interviewer has incriminating documents, copies can be placed inside a file folder and 
brought back to the interview. If no documents exist, it might be appropriate to fill a file 
folder with blank paper. 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.249 
EXAMPLE 
 
When the interviewer returns to  the room, the file folder is placed on the desk, and the 
interviewer asks, “Is there something that  you would like to tell me about_________ _ ?” 
OR 
“Is there any reason why some one would say that you _________?” 
 
Hand the documents to the respondent and ask for “comments.” Do not introduce the 
evidence or explain it. In about 20 percent of the cases, the miscreant will admit to 
incriminating conduct. If not, proceed. Once the interviewer is reasonably convinced of 
guilt, it might be appropriate to confront the respondent.  
 
Purpose of Questions 
Admission-seeking questions have at least three purposes. The first purpose is to distinguish 
innocent people from guilty. A culpable individual will frequently confess during the 
admission-seeking phase of an interview, while an innocent person will not do so unless 
threats or coercion are used. In some instances, the only way to differentiate the culpable 
from the innocent is to seek an admission of guilt.  
 
The second purpose is to obtain a valid confession. Confessions, under the law, must be 
voluntarily obtained. The importance of a valid and binding confession to wrongdoing 
cannot be overstated. The third purpose of admission-seeking questions is to convince the 
confessor to sign a written statement acknowledging the facts. Although oral confessions are 
legally as binding as written ones, the written statement has greater credibility. It also 
discourages miscreants from later attempting to recant.  
 
Preparation 
The interview should be scheduled when the interviewer can control the situation. It 
normally should not be conducted on the accused’s turf and is best conducted by surprise. 
 
Interview Room 
When preparing a room for an admission-seeking interview, it is important that the 
interviewer consider the privacy afforded by the room. The location should establish a sense 
of privacy. The door should be closed but not locked, there should be no physical barriers 
preventing the target from leaving, and the suspect should be made aware that he is free to 
leave. This is to avoid allegations of “custodial interrogation.” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.250   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Distractions should be kept to a minimum. Ideally, there should be no photographs, 
windows, or other objects in the room. Chairs should be placed about four to six feet apart, 
and the accused should not be permitted to sit behind any physical barriers, such as chairs, 
tables, or desks. This is to prohibit a psychological barrier for the accused to “hide behind.”  
 
Note-Taking 
When conducting an admission-seeking interview, note taking should be kept to a minimum. 
In some cases, taking notes should be altogether avoided. Since the ultimate goal of the 
admission-seeking interview is to obtain a signed statement in which the suspect admits guilt, 
it is not necessary to take extensive notes, which can be distracting to the suspect and can 
reveal what points the examiner believes to be important. Notes, if taken during the 
interview, should be done in a way that does not reveal their significance. 
 
Presence of Outsiders 
It is usually not necessary to inform the subject that he may have counsel present. Of course, 
this right cannot be denied if the subject wishes to have an attorney present. If counsel is 
present, you should have an understanding that he will be an observer only; attorneys should 
not ask questions or object. Other than the subject and two examiners, no other observers 
should be permitted in the admission-seeking interview. If the accused is in a union, a union 
representative (or a union attorney) might have the right to attend. However, this might 
present legal problems in “broadcasting” the allegation to a third party. It is very difficult to 
obtain a confession with witnesses present. The examiner should therefore consider whether 
the case can be proven without the admission-seeking interview. (Please refer to the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners  Manual  for more information.) 
 
Miranda Warnings  
As a general rule, private employees conducting an internal investigation are not required to 
give Miranda  warnings; however, there are exceptions to the rule. (See the chapter on 
“Individual Rights” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for more information.) 
 
Theme Development 
People rarely confess voluntarily. People will confess to matters when they perceive that the 
benefits of confession outweigh the penalties. A good interviewer, through the application of 
sophisticated techniques, will be able to convince the respondent that the confession is in his 
best interest.  
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.251 
People generally will not confess if they believe that there is doubt in the mind of the accuser 
regarding their guilt. The interviewer must convey absolute confidence in the admission-seeking — 
even if not fully convinced. The inter viewer must make the accusation in the form 
of a statement of fact. Accusatory questions do not ask “Did you do it?” They ask, “Why did 
you do it?” 
 
An innocent person generally will not accept the question’s premise.  People confessing need 
adequate time to come to terms with their guilt; obtaining admissions and confessions takes 
patience. Therefore, admission-seeking interviews should be done only when there is 
sufficient privacy and time is not a factor. The interviewer must not express disgust, outrage, 
or moral condemnation about the confessor’s actions. To do so goes against the basic logic 
of obtaining confessions, which can be summed up as maximize sympathy and minimize the 
perception of moral wrongdoing.   
 
The interviewer must offer a morally acceptable reason for the confessor’s behavior. The 
interviewer cannot convey to the accused that he is a “bad person.” Guilty people will 
almost never confess under such conditions. To obtain a confession, the interviewer must be 
firm but must project compassion, understanding, and sympathy. The interviewer must 
attempt to keep the confessor from voicing a denial. Once the accused denies the act, 
overcoming that position will be very difficult. 
 
The threat of a lawsuit is always present when allegations of wrongdoing are made against 
certain employees. It is therefore important that examiners understand exactly what actions 
are permitted so that they can avoid potential liability. It is generally legal to accuse innocent 
people of misdeeds they did not commit as long as: 
• The accuser has reasonable suspicion or predication to believe the accused has 
committed an offense. 
• The accusation is made under conditions of privacy. 
• The accuser does not take any action likely to make an innocent person confess. 
• The accusation is conducted under reasonable conditions. 
 
Steps in the Admission-Seeking Interview 
Direct Accusation  
The accusation should not be made in the form of a question, but as a statement. Emotive 
words such as steal, fraud, and crime  should be avoided during the accusatory process. The 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.252   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
accusation should be phrased as though the accused’s guilt has already been established so 
that the accused is psychologically trapped with no way out.  
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG: 
“We have reason to believe that you ...” 
OR 
“We think (suspect) you might have ...” 
 
RIGHT: 
“Our investigation has clearly established that you: 
? made a false entry (avoid fraud) 
? took company assets without permission (avoid using theft, embezzlement, or stealing) 
? accepted money from a vendor (avoid bribe or kickback) 
? have not told the complete truth (avoid lie or fraud )” 
OR 
“ We have been conducting an  investigation into ________ _ _, and you are the only person we 
have not been able to eliminate as being responsible.” 
 
Observe Reaction 
When accused of wrongdoing, the typical guilty person will react with silence. If the accused 
does deny culpability, those denials will usually be weak. In some cases, the accused will 
almost mumble the denial. It is common for the culpable individual to avoid outright denials. 
Rather, that person will give reasons why he could not have committed the act in question. 
The innocent person will sometimes react with genuine shock at being accused. It is not at 
all unusual for an innocent person, wrongfully accused, to react with anger. As opposed to 
the guilty person, the innocent person will strongly deny carrying out the act or acts  
in question.  
 
Repeat Accusation 
If the accused does not strenuously object after the accusation is made, the interviewer 
should repeat the accusation with the same degree of conviction and strength.  
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.253 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“As I said, Linda, our examination has concluded that you are the responsible person. It is not 
so much a question of what you did, but why you did it.” 
 
Interrupt Denials 
Both the truthful and untruthful person will normally object to and deny the accusations. 
But when compared to an innocent person, a culpable person is more likely to stop short of 
an outright denial ( “I didn’t do it. ”) and is more apt to furnish the interviewer with 
explanations as to why he is not the responsible party. An innocent person is unlikely to 
allow the interviewer to prevail in stopping the denial.  
 
 EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I wasn’t even there the day  that entry was made.” 
OR 
“It could have been anybody.” 
OR 
“I don’t know what you’re talking about.” 
 
Both the innocent and the guilty person will make an outright denial if forced to do so. 
Accordingly, the interviewer should not solicit a denial at this stage of the admission-seeking 
interview. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
Interviewer:  
“Did you do this?” 
OR 
“Are you the responsible person?” 
RIGHT 
Interviewer:  
“Why did you do this?” 
 
Additionally, the interviewer must prevent the subject from making an outright denial 
because it becomes extremely difficult to change a denial once it is uttered. If the person 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.254   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
denies the accusation and later admits it, he is admitting to lying, and this type of admission 
is hard to make. Therefore, the interviewer’s job is to prevent the subject from making an 
outright denial, thereby making it easier for the subject to confess to the act.  
 
Examiners can use several techniques to stop or interrupt denials.  
 
DELAYS 
One of the most effective techniques to stop or interrupt the denial is through a delaying 
tactic. The interviewer should not argue with the accused, but rather attempt to delay the 
outright denial. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I hear what you are saying, but let me finish first. Then you can talk.” 
 
The innocent person usually will not “hold on” or let the interviewer continue to develop 
the theme. 
 
REPEAT INTERRUPTIONS 
Occasionally, it might be necessary to interrupt  the accused’s attempted denial repeatedly. 
Because this stage is crucial, the interviewer should be prepared to increase the tone of the 
interruptions to the point when he is prepared to say: “Linda, if you keep interrupting, I am going 
to have to terminate this conversation.” The guilty individual will find this threatening, because she 
wants to know the extent of incriminating evidence in the interviewer’s possession.  
 
REASONING 
If the above techniques are unsuccessful, the interviewer might attempt to reason with the 
accused, and employ some of the tactics normally used for diffusing alibis (see below). 
Under these tactics, the accused is presented with evidence implicating him. The interviewer, 
however, normally should not disclose all the facts of the case, but rather small portions here 
and there. 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.255 
 EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“I know what you say, Linda, but that doesn’t square with these invoices here in front of me. 
Look at the invoice in the amount of $102,1 36. The facts clearly show you are responsible.” 
(Do not ask the accused to explain the evidence at this point.)  
OR 
“Linda, I have talked to many pe ople before I sat down here with  you. I am not asking you if 
you’re responsible; I know you are. This is your opportunity to tell your side to someone who can 
understand.” (Do not disclose the identity or number of the witnesses who have 
been interviewed.) 
 
Establish Rationalization 
Once the accusation has been made, repeated, and denials are stopped, it is time for the 
interviewer to establish a morally acceptable rationalization that will allow the accused to 
square the misdeed with his conscience. It is not necessary that this theme be related to the 
underlying causes of the misconduct. It is common and acceptable for the accused to explain 
away the moral consequences of the action by seizing onto any plausible explanation other 
than being a “bad person.” 
 
If the accused does not seem to relate to one theme, the interviewer should go on to another 
until one seems to fit. Thereafter, that theme should be developed fully. Note that the theme 
development explains away the moral?but not the legal—consequences of the misdeed. 
The interviewer is cautioned not to make any statements that would lead the accused to 
believe he will be excused from legal liability by cooperating.  
 
The questions posed in the examples, rather than being confrontational, constantly seek 
agreement from the accused. The interviewer must strike a balance between being in control 
of the interview and still appearing compassionate and understanding. Again, no matter what 
conduct the accused has supposedly committed, the interviewer should not express shock, 
outrage, or condemnation. 
 
UNFAIR TREATMENT 
Probably the most common explanation for criminal activity in general, and internal fraud in 
particular, is unfair treatment and the accused’s attempt to achieve equity. Studies have 
shown that counter-productive employee behavior—including stealing—is motivated 
primarily by job dissatisfaction. Employees and others feel that “strik ing back” is important 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.256   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to their self-esteem. The sensitive interviewer can capitalize on these feelings by suggesting 
to the accused that he is a victim. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I feel like I know what makes you tick. And I know it isn’t like you to do something 
like this without a reason. You have worked hard here to get a good reputation. I don’t think 
the company has paid you what you’re really worth. And that’s the way you feel too, isn’t it?” 
OR 
“Linda, I’ve seen situations like this before. And I think the company brought this on 
themselves. If you had been fairly treated, this wouldn’t have happened, don’t you agree?” 
 
INADEQUATE RECOGNITION 
Some employees might feel that their efforts have gone completely without notice by the 
company. As with similar themes, the interviewer should be empathetic. 
 
 EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I have found out a few things about you. It looks to me that you have given a lot more 
to this company than they have re cognized. Isn’t that right, Linda?” 
 
FINANCIAL PROBLEMS 
Internal criminals, especially executives and upper management, frequently engage in fraud 
to conceal their true financial condition — either  personal or business. Here are examples of 
how to develop a theme involving financial problems as a motive. In the following example, 
E. J. is an executive of a company and is suspected of fraud.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“ E. J., I was astonished to find out some of your investments have taken such a beating. I don’t 
know how you managed to keep everything afloat as  well as you did. You just did this to stay 
alive financially, didn’t you, E. J.?” 
OR 
“ E. J., I have found out what you’ve been paid around here and, frankly, I was surprised. I 
thought it might be a lot more. No wonder you had to get involved in this. You pretty much 
needed to do this to survive, didn’t you?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.257 
ABERRATION OF CONDUCT 
Many miscreants believe their conduct constitutes  an aberration in their lives and that it is 
not representative of their true character. The interviewer might establish this theme by 
applying the following examples. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know this is totally out of character for you. I know that this would never have 
happened if something wasn’t going on in your life. Isn’t that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“ E. J., you’ve worked hard all your life to get a good reputation. I feel you wouldn’t normally 
have done something like this; it  just doesn’t fit unless you felt like you were forced into it. You 
felt forced to do this, didn’t you, E. J.?” 
 
FAMILY PROBLEMS 
Some people commit fraud because of family problems — financial woes caused by divorce, 
an unfaithful spouse, or demanding children. Men especially — who have been socially 
conditioned to tie their masculinity to earning power — might hold the notion that wealth 
connotes family respect. For their part, women have been found to commit white-collar 
crime in the name of their responsibility to the needs of their husbands and children. The 
skillful interviewer can convert this motive to his advantage by applying one of the following 
approaches. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know you have had some family problems. I know your recent divorce has been 
difficult for you. And I know how it is when these problems occur. You never would have done 
this if it hadn’t been for family problems; isn’t that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., someone in your position and with your ethics just doesn’t do things like this without a 
reason. And I think that reason has to do with trying to make the best possible life for your 
family. I know it would be difficult for me to admit to my family that we’re not as well off as we 
were last year. And that’s why you did this, isn’t it, E. J.?” 
    
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.258   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ACCUSER’S ACTIONS 
Don’t disclose the accuser’s identity if it is not already known. But in cases where the 
accuser’s identity is known to the accused, it can be helpful to blame the accuser for the 
problem. The accuser can be a colleague, manager, auditor, fraud examiner, or any similar 
person. Alternatively, the problem can be blamed on the company. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, you know what these auditors are like. They are hired to turn over every stone. I 
wonder how they would look if we put them under  a microscope. Compared to other things that 
are going on, what you’ve done isn’t that bad. Right, Linda?” 
OR 
“ E. J., I really blame a large part of this on the company. If some of the things that went on 
around this company were known, it would make what you’ve done seem pretty small in 
comparison, wouldn’t it, E. J.?” 
 
STRESS, DRUGS, AND ALCOHOL 
Employees will sometimes turn to drugs or alcohol to reduce stress. In some instances, the 
stress itself will lead to aberrant behavior in a few individuals. A rationalization established 
by the interviewer could be similar to the following. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know what you’ve done isn’t really you. Inside, you have been in a lot of turmoil. A 
lot of people drink too much when they have problems. I have been through periods like that 
myself. And when things build up inside, it sometimes makes all of us do something we 
shouldn’t. That’s what happened here, isn’t it, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., you’re one of the most respected men in this company. I know you have been under 
tremendous pressure to succeed. Too much pressure, really. There is only so much any of us can 
take. That’s behind what has happened here, isn’t it, E. J.?” 
 
REVENGE 
Similar to other themes, revenge can be effectively developed as a motive. In this technique, 
the interviewer attempts to blame the offense on the accused’s feeling that he must “get 
back” at someone or something. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.259 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what has happened is out of character for you. I think you were trying to get back at 
your supervisor for the time he passed you over for a raise. I would probably feel the same. 
That’s what happened, isn’t it, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., everyone around here knows that the board has not supported you in your efforts to turn 
this company around. I would understand if you said to yourself, ‘I’ll show them.’ Is that what 
happened, E. J.?” 
 
DEPERSONALIZING THE VICTIM 
In cases involving employee theft, an effective technique is to depersonalize the victim. The 
accused is better able to cope with the moral dilemma of his actions if the victim is a faceless 
corporation or agency. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, it isn’t like you took something from a friend or neighbor. I can see how you could say, 
‘Well, this would be okay to do as long as it  was against the company,  and not my coworkers.’ 
Is that right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., it’s not like what you’ve done has really  hurt one person. Maybe you thought of it this 
way: ‘At most, I’ve cost each shareholder a few cents.’ Is that the way it was, E. J.?” 
 
MINOR MORAL INFRACTION 
The interviewer in many cases can reduce the accused’s perception of the moral seriousness 
of the matter. This is not to be confused with the legal seriousness. Fraud examiners and 
interviewers should be careful to avoid making statements that could be construed as 
relieving legal responsibility. For example, the examiner should not state: “It is not a big deal, 
legally. It’s just a technical violation.” Instead, the interviewer should play down the moral side. 
One effective way is through comparisons, such as those illustrated below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, this problem we have doesn’t mean you’re Jack the Ripper. When you compare what 
you’ve done to things other people do, this situation seems pretty insignificant, doesn’t it?” 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.260   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
OR 
“E. J., everything is relative. What you’ve done doesn’t even come close to some of the other 
things that have happened. You’re not Bernie Madoff, right E. J.?” 
OR 
“I could see myself in your place. I probably wo uld have done the same thing, wouldn’t I?” 
 
ALTRUISM 
In many cases, the moral seriousness of the matter can be reduced by claiming the action 
was for the benefit of others. This is especially true if the accused views himself as a  
caring person. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I know you didn’t do this for yourself. I have looked into this matter carefully, and I 
think you did this to help your husband, didn’t you?” 
OR 
“E. J., you have a big responsibili ty in this company. A lot of people depend on you for their 
jobs. I just know you did this because you thought you were doing the right thing for the 
company, didn’t you?” 
 
GENUINE NEED 
In a very small number of cases, fraud is predicated by genuine need. For example, the 
accused might be paying for the medical care of sick parents or a child. Or some other 
financial disaster might have befallen the miscreant. In those cases, the following techniques 
might be effective. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I don’t know many people who have had so many bad things happen all at once. I can 
see where you thought this was pretty much a matter of life or death, right, Linda?” 
OR 
“E. J., you’re like everyone else: you have to put food on the table. But in your position, it is 
very difficult to ask for help. You genuinely needed  to do this to survive, didn’t you, E. J.?” 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.261 
Diffuse Alibis 
Even if the accused is presented with an appropriate rationalization, it is likely that he will 
continue to want to deny culpability. When the interviewer is successful in stopping denials, 
the accused normally will then turn to various reasons why he could not have committed the 
act in question. The purpose of this stage is to convince the accused of the weight of the 
evidence against him. Miscreants usually have a keen interest in material that tends to 
implicate them. Alibis generally can be diffused using one of the methods listed below. 
 
DISPLAY PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
It is common for most guilty people to overestimate the amount of physical evidence. The 
interviewer wants to try and reinforce this notion in the way the evidence is laid out to the 
accused. The physical evidence — usually documents in fraud matters — generally should be 
displayed one piece at a time, in reverse order of importance. In this way, the full extent of 
the evidence is not immediately known by the accused. When the accused no longer denies 
culpability, the interviewer should stop displaying evidence.  
 
Each time a document or piece of evidence is laid out to the accused, its significance should 
be noted by the interviewer. During this phase, the accused is still trying to come to grips 
with being caught. The interviewer should, therefore, expect that the accused will attempt to 
lie his way out of the situation. Like denials, the interviewer should stop the alibis and other 
falsehoods before they are fully articulated.  
 
Once the alibis are diffused, the interviewer should return to the theme being developed. 
The following is an example of this technique used on Linda Reed Collins, who set up a 
fictitious company and embezzled money by approving payments from her employer to a 
shell corporation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t have done this. I am not responsible for paying invoices.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Here is one of the invoices in question [display document]. We never received the merchandise.” 
(Don’t mention whether you have talked to the accounts payable department or 
whether you have subjected the invoice to any document analysis.)  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.262   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
“Look, Linda, it is useless for you to try to deny the truth. We have lots of evidence. Let’s just 
try to work this out, but you’ve got to help me, okay?” (Don’t accuse the person of 
lying — this just prolongs the process.) 
 
DISCUSS WITNESSES 
Another technique for diffusing alibis is to discuss the testimony of witnesses. The objective 
is to give enough information about what other people would say without providing too 
much. Ideally, the interviewer’s statement will create the impression in the mind of the 
accused that many people are in a position to contradict his story. 
 
The interviewer is again cautioned about furnishing enough information to the accused so 
that he can identify the witnesses. This might place the witness in a difficult position, and the 
accused could contact the witness in an effort to influence testimony. The accused could 
take reprisals against potential witnesses, though this is rare.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I couldn’t possibly have done this. It would require the approval of a supervisor.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“In normal situations it would. The problem is that your statement doesn’t hold up. There are 
several people who will tell a completely different story. I can understand how you would want 
me to believe that. But you’re only worsening the situation by making these statements. If you 
will help me on this, you’ll also be helping yourself. Understand?” 
 
DISCUSS DECEPTIONS 
The final technique is to discuss the accused’s de ceptions. The purpose is to appeal to the 
accused’s logic, not to scold or degrade. This technique is sometimes the only one available 
if physical evidence is lacking. As with other interview situations, the word lying  should  
be avoided.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“There is no way I could have done this. I didn’t have the opportunity.” 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.263 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, here is the situation: you know what you’ ve done, and so do I. I can understand it is 
difficult for you to admit. But if all the facts have  to be presented, everyone will reach the same 
inescapable conclusion: you are responsible. If you continue to deny  what you’ve done, you’ll just 
make the situation worse. You understand that, don’t you?” 
 
Present an Alternative Question  
After the accused’s alibis have been diffused, he normally will become quiet and withdrawn. 
Some people in this situation might cry. If so, be comforting. Do not discourage the accused 
from showing emotion. In this stage, the accused is deciding whether to confess. The 
interviewer at this point should present an alternative question to the accused. The 
alternative question forces the accused to make one of two choices. One alternative allows 
the accused a morally acceptable reason for the misdeed; the other paints the accused in a 
negative light. Regardless of which answer the accused chooses, he is acknowledging guilt.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, did you plan this deliberately, or did it just happen?” 
OR 
“Linda, did you just want extra money, or did you do this because you had financial 
problems?” 
OR 
“Linda, did you just get greedy, or did you do this because of the way the company has treated 
you?” 
 
Obtain a Benchmark Admission 
Either way the accused answers the alternative question — either yes or no — he has made a 
culpable statement, or a benchmark  admission. Once the benchmark admission is made, the 
miscreant has made a subconscious decision to confess.  
 
The questions for the benchmark admission should be constructed as leading questions so 
they can be answered “yes” or “no;” they should not be constructed so that the answer 
requires some type of explanation. That will come later. The accused might also answer in 
the negative.  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.264   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
Respondent : 
“I didn’t do it deliberately.” 
OR 
“I didn’t do it just beca use I wanted extra money.” 
OR 
“No, I’m not just greedy.” 
 
In the cases where the accused answers the alternative question in the negative, the 
interviewer should press further for a positive admission. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Then it just happened on the spur of the moment?” 
OR 
“Then you did it to take care of your financial problems?” 
OR 
“Then you did it because of the way you’ve been treated here?” 
 
Should the accused still not respond to the alternative question with the benchmark 
admission, the interviewer should repeat the questions or variations thereof until the 
benchmark admission is made. It is important for the interviewer to get a response that is 
tantamount to a commitment to confess.  
 
Reinforce Rationalization 
Once the benchmark admission is made, the interviewer should reinforce the confessor’s 
decision. Then the interviewer should make the transition into the verbal confession, where 
the details of the offense are obtained. Reinforcing the rationalization developed earlier will 
help the confessor feel comfortable, believing that the interviewer does not look down  
on him. 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.265 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I am glad to hear that you had a good  reason to do this. That reinforces what I 
thought all along — that you were caught up in extraordinary circumstances. When was the first 
time you did it?” 
 
Verbal Confession 
The transition to the verbal confession is made when the accused furnishes the first detailed 
information about the offense. Thereafter, it is the interviewer’s job to probe gently for 
additional details — preferably including those that would be known only to the miscreant. As 
with any interview, there are three general approaches to obtaining the verbal confession: 
chronologically, by transaction, or by event. The approach to be taken should be governed 
by the circumstances of the case.  
 
During the admission-seeking interview, it is best to first confirm the general details of the 
offense. For example, the interviewer will want the accused’s estimates of the amounts 
involved, other parties to the offense, and the location of physical evidence. After these basic 
facts are confirmed, the interviewer can then return to the specifics, in chronological order. 
It is imperative that the interviewer obtain an early admission that the accused knew the 
conduct in question was wrong. This confirms the essential element of intent.  
 
Because of the psychology of confessions, most confessors will lie about one or more 
aspects of the offense, even though confirming overall guilt. When this happens during the 
verbal confession, the interviewer should make a mental note of the discrepancy and 
proceed as if the falsehood had been accepted as truthful.  
 
Such discrepancies should be saved until all other relevant facts are provided by the accused. 
If the discrepancies are material to the offense, then the interviewer should either resolve 
them at the end of the verbal confession or wait and correct them in the written confession. 
If not material, such information can be omitted altogether from the written confession. The 
following items of information should be obtained during the verbal confession: 
 
THE ACCUSED KNEW THE CONDUCT WAS WRONG 
Intent (i.e., the state of mind with which something is done) is required in all matters 
involving fraud. Not only must the confessor have committed the act, he must have known 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.266   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the conduct was wrong and intended to commit it. This information can be developed as 
illustrated in the following example. 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, now that you have decided to help yourself, I can help you, too. I need to ask you some 
questions to get this cleared up. As I understand it, you did this, and you knew it was wrong, 
but you didn’t really mean to h urt the company, is that right?” 
 
(Note that the question is phrased so that the confessor acknowledges intent, but “didn’t 
mean to hurt” anyone. Make sure the question is not phrased so that the confessor 
falsely says that he “didn’t mean to do it.”) 
 
FACTS KNOWN ONLY TO CONFESSOR 
Once the intent question is solved, the questi oning turns to those facts known only to the 
confessor. These facts include—at a minimum— the accused’s estimates  of the number of 
instances of wrongful conduct as well as the total amount of money involved. The questions 
should not be phrased so that the confessor can answer “yes” or “no.” 
 
ESTIMATE OF NUMBER OF INSTANCES/AMOUNTS 
In fraud matters especially, it is common for the accused to underestimate the amount of 
funds involved as well as the number of instances. This is probably because of a natural 
tendency of the human mind to block out unpleasant matters. Take the figures with a grain 
of salt. If the accused’s response is “I don’t know,” start high with the amounts and 
gradually come down. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, how many times do you think this happened?” 
 
Respondent : 
“I don’t have any idea.” 
 
Interviewer:  
“Was it as many as 100 times?” 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.267 
Respondent : 
“No way!” 
 
Interviewer: 
“How about 75 times?” 
 
Respondent : 
“That’s still too high. Probably not more than two or three times.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Are you pretty sure, Linda?” (If the accused’s estimates are too low, gently get her 
to acknowledge a higher figure. But do not challenge the accused by calling her a 
liar.) 
 
Respondent : 
“Maybe three times, but certainly not more than that.” 
 
MOTIVE FOR OFFENSE 
Motive  is the moving power that prompts a person to act. Motive, however, should not be 
confused with intent, which refers to the state of mind of the accused when performing the 
act. Motive, unlike intent, is not an essential element and criminal law generally treats a 
person’s motive as irrelevant. Even so, motive is relevant for other purposes: it will often 
guide the interviewer to the proper rationalization, it further incriminates the accused, and it 
is important for a successful prosecution. Therefore, it is best that the interviewer elicit the 
suspect’s motive when obtaining a verbal confession. The motive might be the same as the 
theme the interviewer developed earlier—or it  might not. The most common response is “I 
don’t know.” The interviewer should probe for additional information, but if it is not 
forthcoming, then attribute the motive to the theme developed earlier. The motive should be 
established along the lines below. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, we have discussed what might have led you to do this. But I need to hear it in your 
words. Why do you think you did this?” 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.268   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
WHEN OFFENSE COMMENCED 
The interviewer will want to know the approximate date and time that the offense started. 
This is usually developed by a question similar to the following. 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I am sure you remember the first time this happened.” 
 
Respondent : 
“Yes.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Tell me about it.” 
 
Respondent : 
“Around the middle of January of last year.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, I admire you for having the courage to talk about this. You’re doing the right thing. 
Tell me in detail about the first time.”  
 
WHEN/IF OFFENSE WAS TERMINATED 
In fraud matters, especially internal fraud, the offenses are usually continuous. That is, the 
miscreant seldom stops before he is discovered. If appropriate, the interviewer should seek 
the date the offense terminated. The question is typically phrased as follows. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, when was the last  time you did this?” 
 
OTHERS INVOLVED 
Most frauds are solo ventures—committed wit hout the aid of an accomplice. Rather than 
ask if anyone else was involved, phrase the question something like this. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, who else knew about this besides you?” 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.269 
By asking who else “knew,” the interviewer is  in effect not only asking for the names of 
possible conspirators, but also about others who might have known what was going on and 
failed to report it. This question should not be worded as, “did someone else know?” but rather 
“who else knew?”  
 
OBTAIN PHYSICAL EVIDENCE 
Physical evidence — regardless of how limited it might be — should be obtained from the 
confessor. In many instances, illicit income from fraud is deposited directly in the bank 
accounts of the perpetrator. The interviewer will typically want to ask the confessor to 
surrender his banking records voluntarily for review. It is recommended that either (1) a 
separate written authorization be created, or (2) specific language be added to the  
confession noting the voluntary surrender of banking information. The first method is 
generally preferable. 
 
If there are other relevant records that can be obtained only with the confessor’s consent, 
permission to review those should be sought during the oral confession. In some instances, 
it might be advisable to delay this step until the written confession is obtained. The request 
for physical evidence from the confessor can be set up like this: 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, as a part of wrapping up the details, I will need your banking records (or other 
physical evidence). You understand that, don’t you?” 
 
Respondent : 
“No, I don’t.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, I just need to document the facts and clear up any remaining questions. You have 
decided to tell the complete story, including your side of it. I just want to make sure the facts are 
accurate and fair to you. We want to make sure you’re not blamed for something someone else 
did. And I want to report that you cooperated fully and wanted to do the right thing, 
okay? ”(Avoid the use of the word evidence or references to higher tribunals, such 
as courts or prosecutors.) 
 
  
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.270   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Respondent : 
“Okay.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“Where do you keep your bank accounts?” (If the interviewer knows of at least one 
bank where the confessor does business, the question should be phrased:  “Linda, 
where do you do business besides Florida Marine National Bank?”) 
 
Respondent : 
“Just Florida Marine.” 
 
Interviewer: 
“I’ll need to get your okay to get them from the bank if we need them. Where do you keep the 
original records?” (Do not ask the accused’s permission to look at the records; 
rather, tell her the records are needed. Let the accused object if she has a 
problem with it.) 
 
DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS 
If it has not come out earlier, the interviewer should find out in general what happened to 
any illicit income derived from the misdeeds. It is typical for the money to have been used 
for frivolous or ostentatious purposes. It is important, however, that the confessor sees his 
actions in a more positive light; the interviewer should avoid comments or questions relating 
to “high living.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what happened to the money?” (Let the accused explain; do not suggest an 
answer unless the confessor does not respond.) 
 
LOCATION OF ASSETS 
In appropriate situations, the interviewer will want to find out if there are residual assets that 
the confessor can use to reduce losses. Rather than ask the accused “is there anything left?” the 
question should be phrased as “what’s left?” 
 
  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.271 
EXAMPLE 
Interviewer: 
“Linda, what do you have left from all of this?”  
 
Respondent : 
“Not much. I used most of the money to cover my husband’s bills and financial problems. A 
little money and a boat that is paid for is all I have.”  
 
Interviewer: 
“Well, whatever it is, this whole thing will look a lot better if you vol unteered to return what 
you could, don’t you agree?” (Remember do not specifically promise the confessor 
leniency; it will typically invalidate the confession.)  
 
SPECIFICS OF EACH OFFENSE 
Once the major hurdles are overcome, the intervie wer should return to the specifics of each 
offense. Generally, this should simply start with the first instance and work through 
chronologically in a logical fashion.  
 
Because these questions are information seeking, they should be openly phrased so that the 
answer is independent of the question. It is best to seek the independent recollections of the 
confessor first before displaying physical evidence. If the confessor cannot independently 
recall, documents can be used to refresh his recollection. It generally is best to resolve all 
issues on each instance before proceeding to the next. In determining the specifics of the 
offense, the interviewer should usually ask: 
• Who has knowledge of this transaction? 
• What does this document mean? 
• When did this transaction occur? 
• Where did the proceeds of the transaction go? 
• Why was the transaction done? 
• How was the transaction covered up? 
 
Interviewing is a difficult act, seldom mastered without considerable practice. The preceding 
techniques, when properly employed, can immeasurably aid in developing truthful, reliable, 
and legally valid information. 
 
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.272   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Kinesic Interview and Interrogation 
The kinesic interview or interrogation is a method that has become more popular among the 
law enforcement community in recent years. This type of interview is different than 
traditional interview methods because the interviewer is not necessarily looking for a 
confession from the interview subject. Instead of searching for information from the 
subject, the interviewer is attempting to assess whether the subject is telling the truth by 
reading his body language and other physical manifestations of deception. 
 
In the book The Kinesic Interview Technique, authors Frederick C. Link and D. Glen Foster 
define the kinesic interview technique as: 
 
“[An interview technique] used for gaining information from an individual who is not willingly or 
intentionally disclosing it.” 
 
Link and Foster believe that the kinesic inter view technique is based entirely on the concept 
of stress — an event or circumstance that forces an individual’s mind or body out of 
psychological equilibrium. When stress occurs, humans, like any other living creature, have 
an emotional reaction. Link and Foster refer to this as the “fight or flight syndrome,” in 
which we either run from a stressful situation or brace to face it. Either way, they 
hypothesize, our animalistic tendencies dictate that we must react to stress. When this 
concept is applied to the interview situation, the kinesic interview technique is applied to 
attempt to read the interview subject’s reaction to stress.  
 
This method relies, in a broad sense, on the interviewer’s ability to observe the interview 
subject for signs or symptoms of deceit. The kinesic interview is conducted not just to 
observe what the subject says, but also how the subject says it; the subject’s gestures, 
posturing, facial expressions, and voice inflection are just a few of the traits that an 
investigator looks at. This style of interviewing assumes that when most human beings lie or 
are deceitful to others, they will reveal this deceit through their body language. 
 
These reactions are generally subconscious; in most cases, the interviewee does not even 
realize that he is acting noticeably different. The actions or signs that an interviewer is 
looking for are called meaningful behavior — activities that may suggest that an interviewee is 
under stress. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.273 
Link and Foster identify three distinct categories into which meaningful behavior can  
be divided: 
• Self-initiated verbal statements that the interviewee initiates without prompting 
• Prompted verbal responses or statements made by the interviewee in response to 
structured questions asked by the interviewer 
• Nonverbal behavior or body language, which includes body positioning movements, lack 
of movement, and observable physiological changes 
 
Self-Initiated Verbal Statements 
These responses from interviewees are made without any prompting by the interviewer. 
Examples of these statements include changes in speech pattern, overly respectful or friendly 
words directed at the interviewer, or indirect answers and statements. The subject’s speech 
speed will tend to increase, or the subject will hesitate or stammer frequently before giving 
any responses. These verbal clues are a subconscious attempt by the interviewee to dodge 
the line of questioning or suppress the guilty feelings he feels. 
 
Generally, a dishonest person is much more likely to give more self-initiated verbal signs 
than a person who is telling the truth.  
 
Prompted Verbal Responses 
Prompted verbal responses can help an interrogator to differentiate an honest person from a 
deceitful one. By utilizing a series of structured questions, we can generally get a good 
indication of how truthful the subject is. These should be woven into a casual conversation 
so that the subject is not aware of the significance of the questions. The structured questions 
must not appear to be interrogational in manner.  
 
Structured Questions 
The fraud examiner has several types of loaded question to use in the kinesic interview to 
shed light on the guilt or innocence of the interviewee.  
• Punishment question: The interviewer will casually discuss the punishment of the crime’s 
perpetrator with the subject, asking, for example, “What do you think should happen to the 
criminal?” When posed with this sort of question, generally the innocent person, having 
nothing invested in the crime, will answer that the criminal should be severely punished, 
saying something like, “Lock him up and throw away the key.” However, the interview 
subject, if guilty of the crime, will generally answer that the criminal should be treated 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.274   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
fairly, saying for example, “The person who stole that money is very sick and probably needs mental 
help.” In essence, the guilty person is more likely to answer “Don’t hurt me.”  
• Physical evidence question: This type of quest ion is meant to jar the suspect into making 
a mistake. The interviewer will suggest that there is a piece of evidence that might link 
the interviewee to a crime, asking, “Is there any reason that your fingerprints might have been 
found near the crime scene?” This question does not assert that there is any evidence. The 
innocent person, knowing that he had nothing to do with the crime, will simply answer 
“No,” unconcerned about the possible evid ence. The guilty party will often become 
concerned with this possible evidence and attempt to cover for it with another lie. 
• Crime existence question: A variation on this question would be “Do you think that this 
crime was even committed?” The guilty party will see this as a possible way out, and answer 
“no,” while the innocent person will likely answer “yes.” 
 
Nonverbal Behavior/Body Language 
The evaluation of an interview subject’s body lang uage can provide the fraud examiner with 
numerous insights into the subject’s true intentions. Quite often, while an interviewee says 
one thing, his body language tells an entirely different story. The first step in this process is 
to evaluate the “normal” body language of the subject. While we will discuss some general 
tendencies that suggest that a subject is being less than truthful, the interviewer must first 
evaluate the subject’s natural tendencies. Many  people use their hands often when they 
speak, while others do not.  
 
For most people, the head is the most expressive portion of the body. Several facial traits or 
expressions can be read by the interviewer, among them:  
• Eyes: The single most important nonverbal sign that an interviewer must look for and 
recognize are breaks in eye contact by the subject. The subject might close his eyes, 
cover his eyes, or turn or lower his head. Any of these breaks in eye contact during the 
interview can suggest a subject’s deceit. 
• Eyebrow movement: When a subject display’s disb elief or concern during an interview, it 
is often a false or deceptive reaction to the interviewer’s questioning. 
• Touching the face: Many subjects, when under stress, resort to repeatedly touching the 
tip of the nose or rubbing the chin. This is often a nervous reaction to a threatening 
situation. 
• Blushing: A person whose face or cheeks become red is generally experiencing increased 
blood pressure, indicating pressure or stress. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.275 
• Adam’s apple: The subject’s larynx will quite often move up and down when he is 
concerned or nervous. 
• Carotid arteries: Often the veins in a pe rson’s neck will become exposed when he 
becomes nervous. 
 
In addition, many interviewees will attempt to cover or defend themselves through body 
language by crossing their arms or their legs. This is generally a defensive posture.  
Several factors should be considered when applying kinesic techniques: 
• No single behavior, by itself, proves anything. 
• Behaviors must be relatively consistent when the stimuli are repeated. 
• The interviewer must establish what is normal or baseline behavior for each subject and 
then look for changes from the baseline. These observed changes in the subject’s 
baseline behavior are diagnosed in clusters, not individually. 
• Behaviors must be timely. 
• Observing behavior and interpreting it are hard work. 
• The subjects are watching us while we are watching them. 
• Kinesic interviewing is not as reliable with so me groups as with the general population. 
 
 
Criteria-Based Statement Analysis 
When collecting witness accounts or interviews concerning a particular fraud case, fraud 
examiners must continually assess how honest the interviewee has been. Criteria-based 
statement analysis can be utilized as a tool to uncover just how truthful a subject has been 
after the interview is complete. This technique is different than a kinesic interview in that the 
fraud examiner is not analyzing the body language or nonverbal clues a subject has given, but 
instead the language used by the subject.  
 
Statement analysis is based on the notion that when humans speak, whether intentionally or 
unconsciously, we specifically select the language we use. In general, the verbal clues that a 
subject offers while speaking are just as prominent as any nonverbal tip-offs. The tense that 
an interviewee uses is often the indication that the interviewee knows more than he is  
letting on.  
 
For instance, in the well-publicized case of Susan Smith in 1995, Smith claimed that a 
carjacker forced her out of her car and drove away with her two children in the back seat. 
When the children’s father spoke of the missing toddlers, he spoke of them in present tense; 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.276   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
when Smith mentioned them, investigators noticed that she continually referred to the boys 
in the past tense, indicating that she knew them to be deceased. Upon interrogation, Smith 
confessed to driving the car into a lake, killing her children. 
 
Parts of Speech 
The main items of interest to the fraud examiner during a statement analysis are the 
particular words used by the subject. Breaking down the subject’s sentences carefully may 
reveal many undetected tendencies of the subject’s speech. 
 
Pronouns 
When describing an incident or situation, a truthful subject will most likely use the pronoun 
“I.” If the subject is guilty of an offense or involved in some fashion, that person will 
attempt to distance himself from the situation by removing the “I” from his statement. 
Often, the “I” will be replaced by “we,” as though the subject had little involvement in or 
was not responsible for the situation. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“I went to the grocery store with my girlfriend, but I didn’t steal any of the items.” 
 
“We went to the grocery store, but we didn’t steal anything.”  
 
The subject’s reasoning, subconsciously, is to re move himself from the situation as much as 
possible. By swapping “we” for “I” in the sentences, the perpetrator hopes to deflect 
attention or blame. 
 
In a situation in which the subject uses “we” constantly, the subject is indicating to the 
interviewer that the subject has some sort of relationship with another party in the situation. 
If, for example, the subject continually uses impersonal pronouns, such as “my girlfriend and 
I” rather than “we,” this indicates a lack of  personal involvement with the girlfriend. Fraud 
examiners can utilize this pronoun use to determine whether the interviewee is involved in a 
fraudulent situation with other employees. 
  
Possessive Pronouns 
When an interviewee is giving bogus testimony concerning an event, he will often drop the 
possessive pronoun to shift the blame to an exterior force.  
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.277 
EXAMPLE 
“I got on my register at 10:30. I was working at my register when I was called away by my 
supervisor. When I returned to the register, the register was open and the cash was gone.” 
 
In this statement, the subject referred to the register as “my register” up until the 
controversial act took place. At that point, “my register” becomes “the register,” indicating 
that the subject no longer wants to be associated with a corrupted register. This pronoun 
switch indicates that the subject is being less than truthful. 
 
Verbs 
Verbs are very important pieces of the statement analysis puzzle; the tense that is used by the 
interviewee will shed light on whether the incident has been recalled or improvised. Because 
the subject should be recalling events from the past, the verb tense used to recount the story 
should be past also.  
 
EXAMPLE 
“My wife and I left the house at 7:00, went to dinner, and then saw a movie. We returned to 
the house after the movie was over.” 
 
However, the deceptive interviewee will often change the verb tense at precisely the moment 
at which he is no longer recalling, but rather improvising the event. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“My wife and I left the house at 7:00, went to dinner, and then saw a movie. We return to the 
house and as we pull up to it, we see shattered glass on the driveway.” 
 
Verb tense is also crucial concerning the whereabouts of another person, such as in cases of 
possible kidnapping. If the person interviewed continually refers to the missing person in the 
past tense, there is a good chance that the missing person has been harmed. Again, the Susan 
Smith case is a textbook example of how verb tense usage can lead to a confession. 
 
Balance of the Statement 
When most interview subjects recount an event, their version will be naturally balanced. The 
subject will spend a fairly equal amount of time telling what happened before the event, what 
took place during the event, and what happened during the aftermath. Fraud examiners 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.278   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
should look at the sheer amount of time or number of sentences a subject spends on each 
topic to get a rough estimate of how balanced the account is. If any of the portions of the 
account are exceptionally short, the subject is almost certainly lying. By performing this type 
of analysis, the fraud examiner can also determine what elements are absent from the story 
in a short amount of time. 
 
In the book Criteria-Based Statement Analysis, German psychologists Max Stellar and Guenter 
Koehnken identify a number of separate criteria that the fraud examiner can take into 
consideration when attempting to analyze a just-completed interview. 
 
General Characteristics 
• Logical structure: The fraud examiner first examines the statement for “plot holes,” 
checking to ensure that the recounting of events is chronologically correct and does not 
contain contradictions. 
• Unstructured production: The fraud examiner should examine this criterion at the 
beginning of the interview by allowing the subject to recount the event without influence 
or questioning. Generally, an honest person will not tell an interviewer exactly what has 
taken place in complete chronological order, from start to finish. It is much more likely 
that the initial recounting of events will be told in a scattershot fashion, but that these 
facts and details will eventually mesh into a complete version. When an interview subject 
is able to sit down and initially describe the events that have taken place in complete 
detail, from beginning to end, it is likely that the story has been rehearsed. 
• Quantity of details: An honest subject is more  likely to be able to recall many details 
within an interview than a dishonest subject. When most subjects fabricate a story, they 
are unable to bolster the story with very many details. 
 
Specific Content 
• Contextual embedding: This criterion suggests that a truthful subject’s statement will be 
tightly woven with incidental details, such as the subject’s daily routine, habits, or family 
relationships. A deceptive subject is much less likely to associate an event with seemingly 
insignificant details such as these, choosing to focus only on covering up the major event 
that is being discussed. 
• Descriptions of interaction: The truthful subject is likely to have some description of the 
actions and emotions involved with the described incident or people involved in the 
incident. 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.279 
• Reproduction of conversation: Often, the witness will become animated when repeating 
any conversation related to the incident. When this occurs, the subject is generally telling 
the truth, as it is difficult for a fraudster to create cohesive dialogue on the spot. 
• Unexpected complications during the incident: Descriptions of incidents that disrupt the 
event, such as a sudden halt or interruption of the event, indicate that the subject is 
speaking truthfully. 
 
Peculiarities of Content 
• Unusual details: The appearance of quirky but believable details lends credibility to the 
subject. Fabricated statements rarely contain these types of descriptions. 
• Superfluous details: A subject who provides details that are not essential or even related 
to the recalled event are most often speaking truthfully. A deceitful subject is so 
preoccupied with not telling the truth that he will excise this type of information from 
the story. 
• Accurately reported details misunderstood: When a witness describes details that he does 
not understand or comprehend, but that make sense to the interviewer, the witness is 
most often telling the truth. 
• Related external associations: In this criterion, the interviewer looks for points at which 
the interview subject relates the particular experience with some personal or external 
experiences. When the subject makes a relationship between the event and something 
that has previously occurred in his life, he is very likely being honest. 
• Accounts of subjective mental state: The subject who fills the interview with descriptions 
of feelings and emotions is very likely being truthful. When a subject cannot provide 
such feelings during the interview, this suggests that the subject has not thought through 
his deceptive story very thoroughly. 
• Attribution of perpetrator’s mental state:  The honest subject will often recount the 
perceived mental state of the perpetrator, suggesting what they believe the perpetrator 
was thinking or feeling at the time of the event. 
• Spontaneous corrections: An interview subj ect may often correct himself during the 
course of the interview, making alterations to earlier details or events. When a subject 
does this, he is most often giving truthful testimony. The deceptive subject wants to 
project as honest a façade as possible and do es not want to correct himself, because in 
his mind this gives the appearance of deceit. 
• Admitting lack of memory: This criterion works closely with the previous one, in that an 
honest interviewee will often admit to not remembering certain details. When the 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.280   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
interviewee is lying to the interviewer, he wants to be as complete as possible in covering 
the fraudulent tracks. 
• Raising doubts about one’s own testimony: A deceitful interviewee will almost never 
raise any concerns about whether the testimony given is absolutely correct. If the subject 
raises concerns that he is correct, he is probably telling the truth. 
• Self-deprecation: The mention of any self-incriminating or personally unflattering details 
during the interview suggests that the interviewee is credible. A person who attempts to 
fabricate a story will not want to paint an unsavory picture of himself. 
• Pardoning the perpetrator: Should the intervi ewee attempt to excuse the perpetrator or 
avoid “bashing” the fraudster, the interviewee is likely being honest. 
 
 
The Cognitive Interview Technique 
Police and fraud investigators must often rely on the testimony of witnesses to bring the 
facts of a case together. The testimony of an important witness can determine the entire 
outcome of a fraud case, so it is essential that witnesses’ words be as reliable and detailed  
as possible. 
 
Unfortunately, witnesses are human, and humans are prone to make errors. Fraud 
investigators must understand that in a time of crisis, or even in a situation in which the 
witness was simply not paying close attention, the eyewitness can easily miss acute details. 
Often witnesses have trouble recalling large portions of events simply because they didn’t 
know at the time that they needed to be looking for specific details. Dr. R. Edward 
Geiselman and Dr. Ronald P. Fisher write in the National Institute of Justice article  
Interviewing Victims and Witnesses of Crime  that “most victims and eyewitnesses ... are so 
occupied with the event that they do not have the time to try to learn or memorize details 
about a suspect at the time of the crime.”  
 
Because of these problems, different techniques for filling out the witnesses’ testimony have 
been developed to assist the investigator. One of the first techniques developed was the use 
of hypnosis on witnesses. The notion behind this approach was that an investigator could 
open the mind of a witness and pick into his subconscious for specific details. The merits of 
this technique are highly debatable and have been hotly contested in courts of law. 
 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.281 
But more recently, the cognitive interview technique was developed to serve much the same 
purpose. This approach has proven far more effective than questionable hypnosis techniques 
and has been deemed a reliable method in the court of law.  
 
The cognitive interview technique was established, researched, and fine-tuned by Dr. 
Geiselman, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, and other colleagues in 
the psychiatric profession. Geiselman and others have written numerous articles and 
governmental documents detailing the extensive research dealing with the interviewing  
of witnesses.  
 
Geiselman believes that the cognitive interview should be split into two distinct phases: the 
narrative phase and the specific-detail phase. When these phases are used in succession 
during an interview, it is likely that an investigator will come away from an interview with an 
excellent witness account of an event. The narrative phase deals more with “what happened” 
during the event; the specific-detail phase works more to track down who was involved and 
obtain specific details about the suspect. 
 
The Narrative Phase 
The first portion of the cognitive interview is the narrative phase, in which the witness tells 
the “whole story.” The investigator should first allow the witness to recount the situation, 
using several steps to guide the narrative portion. There are four primary steps in the 
narrative phase of the cognitive interview: 
• Reconstruct the circumstances of the event. 
• Instruct the eyewitness to report everything and be complete. 
• Recall the events in different orders. 
• Change perspectives. 
 
Reconstruct the Circumstances of the Event 
In this first, important step, the interviewer should ask the eyewitness to describe the context 
in which the incident occurred. The interviewer should ask the witness to describe 
everything, including the weather, time of day, and look and feel of the environment in 
which the incident took place. What did the people and/or objects in the surroundings  
look like?  
 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.282   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The objective of this step is to mentally return the witness to the scene so that he will vividly 
recall the unfolding events. Asking the witness to describe the emotional state he was in at 
the time of the occurrence often helps accomplish this first step. 
 
Instruct the Eyewitness to Report Everything and Be Complete 
In this stage, the interviewer should ask the eyewitness to recount every last detail as 
completely as possible. Geiselman says that a witness will often withhold information that he 
thinks may be relevant to the investigation. Therefore, the investigator should instruct the 
witness not to omit anything when giving testimony, no matter how trivial the information 
might seem. The small details that the witness remembers during the interview may not be 
directly beneficial to the investigation, but they will be important to helping the witness 
remember the events descriptively and thoroughly. 
 
Recall the Events in Different Orders 
Constructing the event in a different order will give the witness the freedom to completely 
recreate the event. When recounting the event in sequential order, the witness may very well 
forget minute details in an effort to describe what happened next. If the witness constructs 
the event from the single moment or thing that left the greatest impression on him, the 
interviewer may gain a foothold on the witness’s perspective. 
 
Change Perspective 
The final step of the cognitive interview process is to get the witness to alter his perspective 
of the event. The investigator should ask him to reconstruct the scenario and assume a 
different position within the situation. For instance, ask the witness to pretend to be a 
different person within the event, and recount the event from that perspective. What was the 
other person thinking or feeling? This technique may seem a bit odd, but it may allow the 
witness to consider various elements of the event that he previously had not.  
 
Specific Details 
Once the narrative portion of the interview is comp leted, it is likely that the investigator will 
have questions about specific details. Geiselman and his contemporaries have developed five 
techniques to cultivate specific details and items of information from the witness. The five 
categories are: 
• Physical appearance 
• Names 
• Numbers 
Investigation  Interview Theory and Application 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.283 
• Speech characteristics 
• Conversation 
 
Physical Appearance 
The investigator can often elicit additional information about the event by asking the witness 
to describe the suspect. A particularly effective technique is to ask the witness whether the 
suspect reminded the witness of anyone he knows. Often, physical descriptions, such as the 
type of clothing a suspect was wearing or the particular way a suspect walked or looked, will 
not be presented during the narrative phase of the interview. This additional information, 
however, can be key to linking a suspect with a specific crime. 
 
Names 
Often, the name of the suspect or another person will be spoken during an event, but many 
times the event proves too traumatic or happens too quickly for a witness to recall. If a 
witness cannot remember any names spoken during the event ask him to attempt to recall 
the first letter of the suspect’s name (or any other names spoken) by going through the 
alphabet one letter at a time.  
 
Number 
Once the witness has possibly established the first letter of the suspect’s name, the 
investigator should ask the witness how many syllables or letters were in the name. 
Establishing whether the name was long or short may effectively jar the witness’s memory.  
 
Speech Characteristics 
The investigator can also ask the witness what types of speech characteristics the suspect 
has. Geiselman again suggests asking the witness whether the suspect’s speech reminds the 
witness of anyone else. The interviewer should also determine whether the suspect had any 
specific accent, an awkward or unusual voice, or used any words repeatedly during the event. 
 
Conversation 
The witness should be asked whether anything that the suspect or anyone else said during 
the event elicited an unusual response. Did the suspect or any other witnesses react in a 
strange manner to anything that was said?  
 
The extensive research that Geiselman and his colleagues have done on the cognitive 
interview technique has shown that the technique improves the recall performance of 
Interview Theory and Application  Investigation  
3.284   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
witnesses when compared to the standard interview techniques. The emphasis is on the 
witness’s recollection of details to give investigators a more complete picture of what actually 
happened during a specific event. 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.301 
COVERT EXAMINATIONS 
 
A covert operation  is designed to obtain evidence by use of agents whose true role is 
undisclosed to the target. There are two major forms of covert operations: undercover operations  
and surveillance operations.  
 
Several distinctions define these types of covert operations. Undercover operations seek to 
develop evidence directly from people involved in the offense through the use of disguise 
and deceit. Rather than waiting for the information to come by other routes, there is a 
conscious decision to seek it out. In contrast, surveillance operations use the skills of 
observation to determine activity of individuals. The surveillance operation is designed to 
gather information.  
 
Covert operations require the highest degree of skill and planning. Used in a timely manner 
with great care, a covert operation can produce results that cannot be achieved in any other 
way. Used incorrectly or handled badly, covert operations can lead to embarrassment, 
serious financial liability, injury, and even death.  
 
Disguise and deceit in undercover operations are well recognized by the courts as a 
legitimate function of public and private law enforcement, provided the undercover 
operation is based on sufficient probable cause. Covert operations cannot be conducted as 
“fishing expeditions.” Justification for conducting the operation must be legally sound and 
defensible and must not violate a person’s reasonable expectation of privacy.  
 
Prior to an undercover operation, it is essential that the basis for the operation be committed 
to writing, preferably in a memo (see “Re port Writing”). The memorandum should clearly 
state: 
• The information upon which the covert operation will be based 
• The information that is expected to be gained from the operation 
• The identities of suspects, if known 
• Operatives under your care, custody, or control 
  
A fraud examiner is undercover when he officially abandons his identity as an examiner and 
adopts one designed to obtain information from people who do not realize his true identity. 
The assumed identity might involve only the adoption of another name or it might require 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
an elaborate cover. The aim should be to avoid being compromised, to minimize danger to 
the fraud examiner, and to ensure ultimate success of the operation. 
 
Information sought might include the location of outlets for stolen goods, the subject’s 
methods of operation, detailed personal data on all subjects, and any other relevant 
information. Information should be developed with care to avoid alerting the targets or their 
associates. Only those people who need to know should be informed of the undercover 
investigation.  
 
 
Establishing an Identity 
A cover story must be fabricated to conceal the true identity of the fraud examiner. The 
story should help the examiner gain the subject’s confidence but it should rarely, if ever, be 
wholly fictitious. The examiner should be from a city with which he is familiar, but not from 
the home city of the subject. Arrangements should be made to have key people in the 
fictitious history corroborate the undercover examiner’s claims. 
 
Particular attention should be paid to items carried by the undercover examiner, such as 
pocketbooks, watches, rings, tokens, suitcases, ticket stubs, miscellaneous papers, matches, 
letters, and sums of money. Documents and identity cards should show the appropriate 
amount of wear and tear. The fraud examiner should be able to explain how each item came 
into his possession. 
 
There should be a natural contact between the undercover examiner and the subject. The 
background story should contain elements that will bring the suspect and the examiner 
together without any contrived effort. A mutual interest in hobbies, sports, and other leisure 
activities can provide an opportunity for getting acquainted. The examiner should not pose 
as an authority on a subject unless totally qualified. Many times an examiner’s admitted lack 
of knowledge—but an interest in—a given subj ect will help make the subject feel important 
and not threatened. 
 
According to Timothy J. Walsh, a security expert, the following situations are those in which 
covert operations have traditionally worked well. 
• There is reliable information about criminal activity or asset losses, but insufficient detail 
for prevention or apprehension.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.303 
• Losses are known to be occurring in an area, but there is no information as to how they 
are occurring or who is responsible. 
• It is desirable to gather information concerning personal relationships or to identify the 
contacts made with or by certain people.  
• It is desirable to compare actual practices with supposed or required practices.  
• It is important to obtain information in an indirect manner from people believed to 
possess it.  
 
Covert operations should be used when there is no other practical way to obtain  
necessary information.  
 
 
Objectives 
According to Paul O’Connell in an article for Security Management, one of the first steps in 
initiating an undercover operation is to identify the objectives of the investigation. The 
objectives must specifically identify what the operation is designed to discover, such as the 
identity of the fraudulent worker responsible for a specific crime. 
 
The specific objectives of a covert operation depend on the type of investigation being 
conducted. The objectives in the surveillance of a warehouse would not be the same as those 
in surveillance designed to determine if Collins is receiving a kickback from Nagel. However, 
all covert operations have similar general objectives: 
• To obtain evidence of a past, current, or future crime. This evidence usually bears on the 
culpability of individuals. If an operative in a covert investigation is posing as a thief, for 
example, actual thieves might confess their involvement to him, unaware that their 
conversations were being recorded. 
• To identify those engaged in possible illegal activity. If, for example, cash is missing, a covert 
investigation or surveillance might disclose who is committing the offense. Thereafter, 
the covert operation might be discontinued, and the evidence gathered by more 
traditional means.  
• To recover illegal gains. If an accounts payable clerk has been stealing to purchase an 
automobile, locating the car might permit civil litigation to recover it.  
• To identify co-conspirators. If an employee is in collusion with another employee, a covert 
operation might lead to the identity of the second individual.  
                                                 
1 O’Connell, E. Paul. “Is a Ruse the Best Route?” Security Management. December 1995, pp. 26-30. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• To identify the modus operandi. Again, in the case of missing goods, the identity of the 
perpetrator might be known or suspected, but the internal control deficiencies 
permitting the theft might be unknown. A covert operation might discover the  
missing link. 
 
 
Problems in Covert Operations 
In addition to the legal problems a fraud examiner might encounter, a covert operation is the 
most costly and risky work an examiner can undertake. Such operations consume great 
amounts of human resources. They should be used only with extreme care, and as a last 
resort. If the case can be made any other way, the fraud examiner should stay away from 
covert operations.  
 
There are laws governing surreptitious audio and/or video recordings. In some jurisdictions, 
it is unlawful to make an audio recording or to listen in on a conversation unless you are a 
party to that conversation. In other jurisdictions, it is lawful to record any conversation as 
long as one party to the conversation consents.  
 
Recording conversations with eavesdropping devices (supersensitive microphones that listen 
from behind closed doors, for example) usually is illegal. People behind closed doors have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy. Videotaping or photographing someone in a public place 
is legal, if the person does not have a “reas onable expectation” of privacy in such a place. 
For instance, a restroom or locker room might be a “public place,” but people have a 
reasonable expectation of privacy that they will not be photographed. If operatives or 
witnesses are used to record telephone or other conversations, written consent should  
be obtained. Sample forms used for this purpose can be found in the “Reporting  
Standards” section. 
 
Although it is generally not a crime to videotape a person in public if the tape is not to be 
used for commercial purposes (i.e., you will not be selling the tape), if any part of the 
person’s conversation or words are picked up on tape, then the tape is subject to all of the 
laws and rules regarding the recording of conversations. It’s as if you were recording the 
person on the telephone; you may be prohibited fr om recording the conversation if you are 
not a party to it or you do not have the person’s consent. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.305 
In summary, the laws governing audio and video recordings can be confusing and complex. 
Please refer to the chapter on “Individual Rights” in the Law section of the Fraud Examiners 
Manual  for more information, and contact a lawyer if you have any doubts. 
 
 
Entrapment 
Entrapment occurs when law enforcement officers or government agents induce a person to 
commit a crime that he is not previously disposed to commit. Entrapment poses the biggest 
legal problem in covert operations, particularly in undercover operations. It is imperative 
that the operation be properly predicated. Again, covert operations must not be used for 
“fishing expeditions.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
A store owner was concerned because his inventory costs were unusually high in relation to sales. 
He hired a private investigator to pose as a cont ract driver and deliver and pick up merchandise 
to and from the store. The investigator proceeded to offer kickbacks to all employees in the 
shipping department if they would allow him to leave without si gning for the merchandise. One 
employee took the bait, and was subsequently arrested for theft. The case was thrown out 
because of entrapment. The courts ruled that there was no reason to believe, simply because of a 
high sales cost, that merchandise was being stolen. Furthermore, the investigator had no suspect 
in mind; he was simply “fishing.”  
 
 
Surveillance 
Surveillance is the planned observation of people, places, or objects. It is normally 
concerned with people. Places and objects observed are usually incidental to the primary 
interest of gathering information about certain people. 
 
There are two general types of surveillance: mobile and fixed. Mobile surveillance is 
sometimes referred to as “tailing” or “shadowing ,” and fixed surveillance as a “stakeout” or 
“plant.” Mobile surveillance can be done on foot or by vehicle and is carried out when 
people being observed move from location to location. A fixed surveillance is used when a 
person or activity remains in place, although the observers might move from one vantage 
point to another in the immediate area. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Surveillance, whether by foot or vehicle, is predominantly an exercise in common sense, 
skill, tact, and ingenuity on the part of the observer. Carefully planned and properly executed 
surveillance can be of tremendous value in an investigation; conversely, lack of preparation, 
poor timing, and unsound surveillance practices can destroy an otherwise good case. 
 
Surveillance can be used to locate residences, businesses, or other places of interest to  
the investigation, and places where criminal activity is conducted. It can also produce 
important evidence concerning the scope and nature of a person’s activities. Surveillance 
activities must be carefully recorded. Detailed notes and logs, film and video (often with 
special lenses and light sources), tape recordings, and miniature electronic listening devices 
must be used appropriately. 
 
Methods of Surveillance 
During loose surveillance, targets need not be kept under constant observation. The surveillance 
should be discontinued if the person becomes suspicious. In close surveillance, subjects are kept 
under observation continuously even if they appear to become suspicious. 
 
Circumstances might require a change from a loose to a close surveillance. Pre-planning 
helps, but the examiner must observe and interpret the act or circumstances to decide what 
tactic to employ. If the plan calls for loose surveillance until the completion of a specified 
act, or until a meeting with another person, after which the subject is to be put under close 
surveillance or apprehended, the observer must determine when the specific incident has 
taken place. 
 
Preparation 
The observer’s attire should fit in with the ar ea and/or group. Dress should be conservative, 
unless conservative dress is not appropriate for the area. Attire should not be loud or flashy 
so that if the subject notes the observer, he will be less likely to form any lasting impression. 
Minor changes in outer clothing or hand-carried  items might alter the overall impression and 
help prevent recognition by the subject. 
 
Two or more observers working together need complete agreement about the surveillance 
techniques and schedule. Discreet signals will help each observer understand any given 
situation. Planning is essential, but the observers’ adaptability and ingenuity are vital. 
Observers should be chosen for both aptitude and resourcefulness. They must have poise, 
patience, and endurance. Prior to the surveillance, the observer should prepare and 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.307 
document a cover story that will stand up under scrutiny. This cover story should provide 
the observer with a reasonable excuse for being in the area and for doing what has to be 
done there. 
 
Electronic Equipment 
Use of electronic surveillance equipment should be considered. For surveillance on foot, 
transmitting and receiving devices can easily be hidden on the person without arousing 
suspicion. Transmitters can be concealed in packages, briefcases, or on the person. Light-
 gathering binoculars and/or metascope equipment for night surveillance should be used if 
necessary. See the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for a description of legal 
electronic monitoring techniques. 
 
Basic Precautions 
An observer should refrain from making abrupt, unnatural moves that could attract 
attention. Disguises such as false beards are impractical, hard to maintain, and easily 
detectable. The observer should not look directly into the subject’s eyes. Inexperienced 
observers must overcome the tendency to believe that they have been “made” (identified) 
because the subject glances at them several times. The geography of the area where 
surveillance is to take place should be studied carefully. The observer should know the 
location of culs-de-sac or dead-end streets or alleys to avoid being trapped or discovered. A 
suspicious subject might suddenly reverse course, enter a dead-end street, board and 
suddenly depart from public transportation, or engage in a variety of other evasive actions. 
The observer can counter these strategies by following approved surveillance techniques.  
 
Techniques of Foot Surveillance 
One-Person Surveillance 
One-person surveillance is best for a fixed sur veillance. If a moving one-person surveillance 
must be used, the observer should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep 
fairly close. Crowd and street conditions will dictate the appropriate distance. When the 
subject turns a corner in an uncrowded area the observer should continue crossing the 
intersecting street. By glancing up the street in the subject’s direction, the subject’s position 
and actions can be noted. 
 
In a crowded area, surveillance distances might be decreased. Unless the subject is standing 
just around the corner, surveillance can be continued from the same side of the street. Do 
not turn a corner immediately behind the subject. When operating across the street from the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.308   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject, circumstances will dictate whether to operate forward, to the rear, or abreast of the 
target. The observer should be abreast of the target when he turns a corner to observe any 
contact with individuals or entry into a building. 
 
Two-Person Surveillance 
In the “A-B” surveillance technique, the observer directly behind the target is known as the 
“A” observer. A follows the target, and B follows  A either on the same side or from across 
the street. When both observers operate from the same side of the street, and the subject 
turns a corner, A continues in the original direction and crosses the intersecting street. From 
a vantage point, A signals the correct moves to B. When B is operating across the street and 
the subject turns a corner to the right, B will cross the street behind the subject and take up 
the A position. This move should be prearranged. No signals should be necessary. All visual 
signals should be discreet and consistent with the environment. Should the subject turn to 
the left and cross the street toward B, B should drop back to avoid meeting the subject. B 
should keep A in sight to observe signals indicating his next move. 
 
Three-Person Surveillance 
The “A-B-C” technique of surveillance is intended to keep two sides of the subject covered. 
A follows the subject. B follows A and concentrates on keeping him rather than the subject 
in sight. The normal position for B is behind A. C normally operates across the street from 
the subject and slightly to his rear, enabling C to observe the subject without turning his 
head. Variations, such as having both B and C ac ross the street or all three of the observers 
behind the subject on the same side of the street, might be necessary because of crowded 
conditions or traffic. In this technique, if the subject turns a corner, A continues in the 
original direction, crosses the intersecting street, and then signals instructions to the other 
observers from that vantage point. Either B or C can be given the A position and A might 
take up the original C position and continue his observation of the subject from across  
the street. 
 
In another variation of this technique, both A and B might continue in the original direction 
and cross the street. A signals C to take up the A position. B then recrosses the street and 
assumes his former B position. A assumes the C position. In the third situation, when C 
notices that the subject is about to turn a corner, C signals both A and B what positions  
to assume. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.309 
Other Techniques 
There are other ways to lessen the chance of an observer being made. First, by either pre-
 arrangement or signal, the two or more observers can change places with each other. This is 
commonly referred to as the leap-frog method.  
 
Progressive surveillance is used when extreme caution is necessary. With this technique, the 
subject is followed a certain distance and the surveillance is discontinued and the time noted. 
The next day another observer picks up the subject at the time and place where the 
surveillance was previously discontinued, and again follows the subject for a short distance. 
This continues day after day until the surveillance is completed. 
 
Techniques of Vehicle Surveillance 
General 
Vehicle surveillance demands additional preparations. A dependable vehicle similar to types 
commonly found in the area where the surveillance is to take place must be used. This can 
be a panel truck, automobile, or a large truck or trailer. The license should be of the state and 
county where the surveillance will take place. If more than one vehicle is to be used, two-way 
radio or cellular telephone conversation is usually necessary. Consideration should be given 
to gasoline, water, first-aid equipment, and road-map requirements. 
 
Whenever possible, combining foot and vehicular surveillance is an advantage. The 
observers will likely remain more alert. When a subject parks his vehicle and remains in it, an 
observer on foot can better monitor the subject’s actions and those of passersby.  
 
As in foot surveillance, vehicular surveillance requires inconspicuous actions. Observers 
should generally stay in the same lane as the target to avoid having to make turns from the 
wrong lane. If the situation allows, observers should change direction, perhaps going around 
a block in order to break continuity before the suspect becomes suspicious. It is difficult at 
night for the observers to be sure they are following the right vehicle. The target’s car can be 
kept in sight better if it is distinctive. If the opportunity arises, reflective tape can be attached 
to the rear of the subject’s car. The dome light  of the observer’s car should be disconnected 
so that the light will not show when a door is opened. Headlights and license-plate lights can 
be wired to allow them to be turned on or off. 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.310   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
One-Vehicle Surveillance 
When one vehicle is used, it must remain close enough to allow the observers to monitor the 
subject’s actions, but far enough behind to avoid detection. When a subject’s car stops, one 
observer should follow his actions on foot. The subject normally will not expect to be tailed 
by a person on foot while he is using his car. When the subject turns a corner, the observers 
can make one of two possible moves. They can continue in the original direction, cross the 
intersecting street, and make a U-turn; the subject will take little interest in a car turning into 
the street behind him coming from the opposite direction. An alternative would be to 
continue in the original direction, cross the intersecting street, and continue around  
the block.  
 
Two-Vehicle Surveillance 
This technique uses two vehicles to follow the subject at different distances on the same 
street, as in the “A-B” method of foot surveillance. This technique can be varied by having 
one vehicle going in the same direction as the subject on a parallel street while receiving 
radio-transmitted directions from the observers directly behind the subject. This technique is 
more flexible because the two vehicles can change places from time to time. 
 
Fixed Surveillance 
A fixed surveillance, or stakeout, is used when the subject remains stationary. The observer 
can move around for closer observation. When one observer is detailed to watch a place 
with more than one exit, he might have to move about considerably. When preparing for a 
stakeout, the base of operations should be well planned. It might be a store, apartment, 
house, automobile, or truck. A thorough — but cautious—area reconnaissance should be 
conducted. Necessary equipment should be readily available, such as binoculars, electronic 
investigative aids, cameras, and sound recording devices.  
 
Satellite Surveillance 
Although fraud examiners will rarely need it, satellite data are now available. For a relatively 
small amount, an examiner can buy detailed images from nearly anywhere in the world. 
 
Plant security lends itself to satellite imagery. In addition to providing much of the same 
information as conventional satellite photographs, multispectral imagery can detect muddy 
ground, paths taken by people and vehicles, and other information that might help identify 
potential security problems. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.311 
Satellite imagery can be useful in surveillance if it is combined with more traditional types of 
photographic intelligence. This is especially true for large estates or industrial sites where 
aerial photography is prohibited. It also can be beneficial in a covert operation. 
 
Satellite imagery can help to determine ways to penetrate a site, develop a map of the 
grounds, and identify important areas. In addition, satellite imagery can be used to 
investigate areas that are too remote, expensive, or dangerous to send operatives. 
 
Buying satellite imagery is simple if the latitude and longitude of the target is known. The 
products range from photographic prints of the image to magnetic tapes of geographically 
corrected data. Prints, not much different from the enlargements from a film processor, are 
usually the cheapest product. While they don’t allow sophisticated enhancement, they only 
require a magnifying glass to examine.  
 
The next most expensive product is a transparency or a negative. It allows the interpreter to 
make prints and is convenient for exhibiting with an overhead projector. Stereograms are 
pairs of images that show the same object from slightly different positions and provide a 
three-dimensional view when looked at with stereoscopic glasses. They are available as either 
prints or transparencies. Magnetic tape is the digitized version of the images. A particularly 
sophisticated analysis of the target is possible with magnetic tape. 
 
Night Surveillance Equipment 
Basically, there are two types of night viewing devices: active  and passive. The active type puts 
out its own light source, an infrared beam, which is visible to the user through the infrared 
scope that is part of the unit. The advantage of the active type of night viewing device is that 
the user can see in total darkness. Disadvantages include limited range and the fact that the 
infrared beam is visible to anyone looking through an infrared scope or through a passive 
night viewing device. 
 
The passive type of night viewing device electronically amplifies whatever existing light is in 
the environment, such as moonlight or sky glow. This is why such units sometimes are 
referred to as “starlight scopes.” Night viewing  devices have been in use since 1969. Their 
primary purpose is to allow the observation of events occurring more than one block away at 
night. Night viewing devices, with adapters, can be attached to the front of cameras to 
obtain evidence that will stand up in court. Television videotapes, movies, and still photos 
can all be obtained using night viewing devices. 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.312   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources and Informants 
Sources and informants both serve the same purpose—to provide information to help 
develop a case. However, there are notable differences between confidential sources and 
confidential informants. The terms should not be used interchangeably.  
 
A confidential source  furnishes information as a result of occupation or profession and has no 
culpability in the alleged offense. For example, confidential sources might include barbers, 
attorneys, accountants, and law enforcement personnel. A confidential informant  has a direct or 
indirect involvement in the matter under investigation, and might be culpable. The 
distinction between the two is their involvement in the offense. Informants can pose 
treacherous legal issues for the examiner.  
 
Tom Melsheimer, a former federal prosecutor, suggests from his experience that no piece of 
evidence is quite as convincing to a jury as a secretly photographed or recorded conversation 
that an informant can obtain firsthand. This information is generally accepted as a “slam 
dunk” for a criminal prosecutor, because there is  little that a white-collar criminal can dispute 
when caught in the act of a fraud. For this reason, the use of informants is likely to increase 
in future fraud investigations. 
 
Types of Informants 
In the book Criminal Investigations, authors Paul B. Weston and Kenneth M. Wells identify 
several different types of informants: the basic lead, the participant, the covert, and the 
accomplice/witness. 
  
Basic Lead Informants 
This type of informant supplies information to the police about illicit activities that they have 
encountered. The reasons that the informant decides to supply information are varied; some 
informants simply want to “do their part” to stop an unscrupulous activity, while others are 
interested in harming the criminals against whom they are informing. For instance, many 
informants in the drug, prostitution, or illegal gambling areas are involved in those areas as 
well and intend to eliminate some of their competition. Whatever the reason, these 
informants’ only role in a covert investigation is to supply law enforcement with 
information. 
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.313 
Participant Informants 
The participant informant is directly involved in gathering preliminary evidence in the 
investigation. The informant in this instance not only supplies an investigation with 
information, but the informant is also involved in setting up a “sting” operation, initiating 
contact with the criminal for arrest purposes. A participant informant is just what the name 
suggests—a participant in the investigation of fraudulent or criminal activity.  
 
Covert Informants 
A covert informant serves the same basic function that any other type of informant does by 
supplying information to authorities on criminal behavior. The difference in this category is 
that a covert informant is one who has been embedded in a situation or scenario for a 
number of years and is called upon only sporadically for tip-offs and leads. These types of 
informants are often referred to as moles, because of the nature of their insulated situation as 
inside sources. Weston and Wells identify two instances in which covert informants are 
commonly used: in organized crime and hate-extremist group investigations, covert 
informants are often culled to get information about upcoming criminal activities by  
the groups. 
 
Accomplice/Witness Informants 
The accomplice/witness informant is called upon by investigators quite often to provide 
information on criminal activity. The distinction in this category is that if the 
accomplice/witness informant were not feeding information to investigators, he would be 
liable to be prosecuted for the same offense. The accomplice informant is often persuaded 
to “spill the beans” on a co-conspirator in exchange for leniency in the prosecution phase of 
the investigation. 
 
Objectives of Source and Informant Information 
There are three essential procedures when using sources and informants. First, to keep the 
person’s identity as confidential as possible. Second, to independently verify the information 
provided by the source or informant. Third, to develop witness and documentary evidence 
from independently verified information.  
 
If the confidential source or informant has provided documents, names of potential 
witnesses, or other evidence, all reasonable steps must be taken to protect the identity of that 
source. Care should be taken to ensure that questioning of other witnesses is done in a 
manner that does not reveal its origin. This can usually be accomplished through the 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.314   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
phrasing of questions. For example, Mary Rodriguez De La Garza furnished confidential 
information about Linda Reed Collins. When the examiner confronts Collins, he does not 
want her to know that he has talked to Ms. De La Garza. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG 
“Ms. Collins, someone told me you were taking kickbacks.” 
 
RIGHT 
“Ms. Collins, I have information indicating  you are taking money from a vendor.” 
 
You have made the confrontation direct, but you have not revealed the origin of your 
information. If Collins presses to learn how you knew: 
 
Ms. Collins: 
“Who did you get that information from?”  
 
Examiner: 
“Documents I have from the company’s records, plus other inquiries conducted in this matter.” 
 
In this example, if need be, the examiner would display the evidence from witnesses and 
documents that would not reveal the source or informant’s identity. The information from 
the source or informant is basically useless unless the examiner can verify its authenticity and 
independently corroborate it. Suppose a source furnishes the examiner with copies of 
accounts payable documents showing that Bailey Books Incorporated’s cost of materials has 
increased by 16 percent since Linda Reed Collins took over the account at the Orion 
Corporation. This kind of evidence would corroborate the source’s story. If a source told the 
examiner that Collins frequently had drinks with Jim Nagel, the account representative for 
Orion, the examiner would want to find out some way to verify this report. The third 
objective when using sources is to develop the witness’s information and other evidence so 
that it makes a cohesive case.  
 
Recruitment of Sources and Informants 
Fraud examiners should recall the need to develop sources. Business and financial institution 
executives, law enforcement and other governmental personnel, medical and educational 
professionals, and internal and external auditors are good contacts for fraud examiners.  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.315 
The examiner should make contacts in the community well in advance of needing 
information; this is simply good public relations. If the fraud examiner receives an allegation 
and needs confidential information, perhaps a source cultivated earlier can assist. Sources 
need to feel confident that they can share information without being compromised. In 
theory, the source will never have to testify; he has no firsthand knowledge, his information 
comes from a witness or document. 
 
The examiner might also meet sources when tracking leads during a specific investigation. 
He might interview a stockbroker from whom the target purchased stock who does not want 
his identity revealed. The examiner should not encourage a person to provide confidential 
information, but rather try to get reports on the record. But if the source’s information must 
be kept confidential, abide by that promise.  
 
Active recruitment of informants is generally not desirable; it might appear untoward to a 
jury. It is better to encourage an informant to come forward. It is desirable to develop an 
informant relationship, but this situation must be handled carefully. The examiner must 
clearly document an adequate predication for informant’s involvement. The most serious 
question is the culpability of the informant. There have been cases where the informant is 
guiltier than the target. The court might rule that the informant’s information cannot be 
introduced.  
 
Motives of Sources and Informants 
Sources 
In some instances (but not many), the source might want money or other consideration for 
furnishing information. The examiner should not offer any compensation. It is better to 
have the source request it. This is to avoid any allegation of misconduct on the part of the 
examiner for paying for information. Sources have their reasons for informing. It might be 
the sense of importance that comes from being involved or a chance to play “detective.” In 
other cases, the source might have a grudge against the target. Other reasons include a 
feeling of moral responsibility to report information. Perhaps more than any other reason, a 
source will furnish information because he likes and trusts the examiner and wants to help. 
 
Informants 
Informants, especially incidental ones, commonly want something in return for their 
information. They take the attitude that their involvement has personal risk, and they want 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.316   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
to be paid for their “trouble.” The informant is likely to be predisposed to sell information 
to the highest bidder.  
 
Many informants—perhaps the majority—are unstable. As often as not, an informant’s 
motivation is to “get” the target, not because  of any sense of morality, but because the 
informant and the target are closely involved. In the case of drug dealing, for example, an 
informant might furnish information because the target is the competition. In other cases, 
the informant is motivated by a sense of self-importance. He is a “big man”; people take  
him seriously. 
 
Probably the most common reason informants supply information is because they are 
involved in the offense, and by furnishing information on the target (which is commonly 
false), they can diffuse suspicion from their own activities. In many instances, the examiner 
initially does not know the truth about the informant.  
 
The fraud examiner must also be aware of the overzealous informant. Melsheimer cautions 
that most of the recently catalogued cases concerning the abuse of informants were the 
result of “involved informants who are private citizens, self-motivated to satisfy their law 
enforcement sponsors at virtually any cost.” In an attempt to ingratiate themselves to 
investigators, the informant will often engage in unscrupulous activities to provide the 
information they think the investigators are looking for. The fraud examiner must lay out the 
ground rules for the informant before beginning this type of investigation or risk the 
embarrassment (and punishment) that a less-than-truthful informant can provide.  
 
Legal Considerations 
As noted, dealing with sources and informants is fraught with legal pitfalls. The examiner 
should be circumspect in all interactions with sources and informants. The examiner might 
be able to trust a source, but rarely an informant. Always document contacts with sources 
and informants in case of problems.  
 
Many jurisdictions guarantee the accused the right to confront his accuser. That is an 
absolute right of the accused; it is not possible to cross-examine someone who lurks behind 
a cloak of secrecy. The examiner will usually not be able to testify to what a source or 
informant said because of the “hearsay” rule. The witness can testify only to what he knows, 
not what someone else has said.  
 
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.317 
If a decision is made to pay an informant or source, the payment should be made in cash and 
a receipt should be secured. If the source will not sign a receipt, do not pay. There have been 
numerous instances where a receipt was not obtained and the informant subsequently denied 
receiving funds or challenged the amount. The examiner then has to defend himself without 
proof; indeed, some investigators have been accused of having embezzled the payments. 
Payments should only be on a COD basis. The information should be furnished and verified 
before turning over any money. If not, the examiner might become the victim of a scam.  
 
Entrapment is sometimes raised as a criminal defense. This is especially true when the 
informant is doing things at the behest of law enforcement. The defense is that the target is 
innocent, but was unlawfully lured into a crime that he otherwise would not have 
committed. This can best be overcome by ensuring that the source or informant only gathers 
information and plays a limited role in the case.  
 
Reporting Contacts 
It is recommended that all contact with informants and sources be reported on a 
memorandum of interview, although the confidential source or informant’s identity should 
not be included in the report. Symbols to denote the informant’s identity should be used. It 
is further recommended that sources be preceded with an “S” followed by a unique identifier 
(i.e., source #1 would be “S-1”; source #2 would be “S-2”). The symbols for informants 
would then be “I-1” and “I-2.”  
 
As a general rule, disclosure of the identities of sources and informants should be on a strict 
need-to-know basis. For that reason, the person’s identity should be maintained in a secure 
file with limited access and cross-indexed by his symbol number. The reliability of the 
source, if known, and whether the person is in a position to furnish relevant information 
should both be noted in writing. 
 
 EXAMPLE 
“A source of unknown reliability, but in a position to furnish relevant  
information (hereinafter referred to as S-1), advised as follows:” 
OR 
“An informant of known reliability and in a position to furnish relevant information 
(hereinafter referred to as I-2) advised as follows:” 
 
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.318   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The fraud examiner is not in a position to promise leniency to people involved in the 
commission of a crime or tort. To do so is serious misconduct and a violation of the 
Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics. Promises of leniency can only 
come from the prosecutor or the courts. The examiner might truthfully tell the informant 
that his cooperation will be made known to the authorities, and that people who cooperate 
are generally treated better.  
 
For reasons previously discussed, it is best not to use sources and informants in ongoing 
crimes as “double agents.” Such action is inherently risky and places the examiner in the 
position of having to defend the actions of the source or informant, actions that, in most 
cases, the examiner cannot control. This leaves the case open to attack during legal 
proceedings. If it appears critical that the source be used as an agent, get the approval of the 
prosecutor and/or attorney before proceeding.  
 
Promises of Confidentiality 
Fraud examiners are not in a position to offer unqualified confidentiality. Therefore, any 
promises made to an informant or source should be qualified. In the case of an examiner 
who is employed by a governmental agency, there might be an absolute duty not to hold 
sources and informants in confidence. In many law enforcement agencies, an investigator 
might not have informants or sources who are unknown to the agency. Governmental 
agencies also regularly share information on criminal investigations with prosecutors, 
including the identity of the source of information. The same regulations and considerations 
could govern business entities.  
 
EXAMPLE 
During the examination of Collins, you contact Roger McGuire, a coworker of Collins’s. 
McGuire will talk to you only in confidence. You know Bailey’s polici es are to prosecute all 
criminal offenses. McGuire seems to be the key to making a case against Collins. You believe 
you can independently verify the allegations McGuire furnishes, but you will not be certain until 
you talk to him. It might be necessary to call  McGuire to testify against Collins in order to 
make the case. 
 
WRONG 
 “Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell  anyone about your talking to me.” 
 
  
Investigation  Covert Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.319 
RIGHT 
“Mr. McGuire, I promise I will not tell Ms. Collins about your talking to me.” 
 
The second is a conditional promise; the examiner will not directly tell Collins, but that 
doesn’t mean someone else won’t. At some point, informants and sources often become 
witnesses. Under no circumstances should an examiner promise a source or informant that 
his identity will not become known. 
 
 
Use of Operatives 
Operatives are subject to greater control than informants. In a typical scenario, a source or 
informant advises that information exists or that a crime is currently being committed. The 
informant’s motives might or might not be altruistic. For example, a warehouse worker 
approaches the fraud examiner and says that Collins is stealing inventory. The informant 
wants money for her assistance in apprehending Collins. The examiner does not know 
whether the informant is telling the truth or whether she is trying to divert attention from 
herself.  
 
The informant suggested that she secretly record a conversation with Collins, getting Collins 
to admit to the theft. If an informant conducts the investigation under the examiner’s 
direction, he then becomes an operative. To demonstrate a worst-case scenario, consider the 
following example. Without the examiner’s k nowledge or consent, the informant plants a 
tape recorder in the break room at the warehouse, and records conversations to which he is 
not a party. This is a violation of the law regarding interception of communication. Although 
the recording was made without the examiner’s knowledge or consent, the case is 
nonetheless compromised. The informant might insist that he recorded the conversations at 
the examiner’s request, thereby placing the examiner in the unenviable position of having to 
defend himself. 
 
Most operatives lack the training to conduct an investigation, and they cannot, in many 
instances, be trusted. It is vital that operatives be properly monitored and supervised. Obtain 
background information on the operative to ensure his degree of culpability in the offense, if 
any. Make certain that the operative clearly understands the objectives of the covert 
operation, and ensure that he is regularly debriefed before and after critical meetings with the 
target. Be careful that the operative does not take any action without proper authorization.  
  
Covert Examinations  Investigation 
3.320   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sources for Satellite Imagery and Related Materials 
SPOT Image Corporation 
Sells imagery from the French SPOT satellite 
www.spot.com 
(703) 715-3100 
14595 Avion Parkway, Suite 500 
Chantilly, VA 20151 
 
U.S. Geographic Survey 
Sells aerial photographs, some radar images, and photographs from U.S. space missions 
www.usgs.gov 
(800) 233-8081 or (650) 329-5555 
U.S. Geological Survey Customer Service 
345 Middlefield Road 
Menlo Park, CA 94025 
 
The Orthoshop 
Makes maps and corrects satellite imagery 
www.orthoshop.com 
(800) 563-1740 or (403) 250-7830 
1723-27th Avenue, N.E. 
Calgary, Alberta T2E 7E1 
 
Satellite and Civil Liberties 
In the 1980s, the Supreme Court made several rulings that established the legal basis for 
satellite surveillance. Some of these key rulings are listed below. 
 
California v. Ciraolo, 106 S.Ct. 1809, 1810 (1986). The court ruled that aerial photographs did 
not interfere with a person’s expectation of privacy. 
 
United States v. Dunn, 55 U.S.L.W. 4251, 4253 (1987). The court held that open areas are not 
protected by Fourth Amendment rights. 
 
Dow Chemical Company v. United States, 106 S.Ct. 1819 (1986). The court enunciated standards 
regarding the legality of aerial photography. It expressed concern about satellite surveillance, 
but did not establish any legal distinction between aerial photography and satellite 
surveillance.
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.401 
SOURCES OF INFORMATION 
 
When external documents are needed, fraud examiners should consider accessing public and 
non-public records, commercial databases, the Internet, and other valuable sources. 
 
There is a surprising amount of information about both individuals and businesses that can 
be accessed without a subpoena or other legal process. For instance, there is an enormous 
amount of information contained in public records.  
 
This chapter explains the difference between public and non-public records and summarizes 
some important rules governing the availability of certain types of information. It also 
explains some of the different types of information available and how each type of 
information can be used in a fraud examination. Moreover, this chapter outlines where to 
find popular types of records kept by local, state, and federal sources.  
 
The fraud examiner must be certain that information obtained is done so legally. Records 
from confidential sources generally cannot be introduced as evidence; in criminal cases, 
illegally obtained documentary evidence falls under the exclusionary rule (see the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). In civil cases, using illegally obtained documentation 
might give rise to tort actions or other sanctions against the fraud examiner. Following is a 
list of information available from city, county, state, and federal agencies. 
 
 
Public Versus Non-Public Records 
 
Public Records 
Public records  are documents that a governmental agency is required to keep by law or that are 
necessary to discharge the duties imposed by law. Each agency or governmental unit is 
responsible for many different functions that may require them to maintain unique 
information.  
 
Public records, which are available to anyone who wishes to use them, can be useful for a 
number of reasons. They can supply invaluable background information on employees, 
suspects, and witnesses. Public records can also be used to corroborate or refute witness 
statements, can help investigators track the flow of stolen cash or other assets, and can be 
extremely important in a company’s efforts to recover losses. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.402   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Public records can be searched manually or online through governmental agency websites 
and online public databases. There also are many commercial search firms that will search 
public records and otherwise conduct an asset search for a fee. Business and commercial 
indexes, such as D&B (formerly Dun & Bradstreet) and Dow Jones Business Information 
Services, also can be searched for business credit and other information. But accessing 
public records through a third-party service can trigger certain notice requirements under the 
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The impact of the FCRA is discussed below. 
 
Examiners should be prepared to answer the who, what, where, and how of public record 
research to conduct the investigation. The following items are essential to a records 
investigation of an individual: 
• Name 
• Date of birth 
• Social Security number 
• Last known address 
 
The better informed you are about the subject you are investigating, the easier your search 
will be. For investigating individuals, some of the issues at the outset include: 
• What is the person’s full name? 
• Do you have a last name only? Is that na me so common that your search will return 
thousands of possibilities (14,000 Smiths)? What are some ways of narrowing possible 
first names for the individual? 
• What is the person’s approximate age or date of birth?  
• Does the person have criminal background?  
• Has the person been sued or sued someone?  
• Has the person owned a business?  
• Does the person have tax liens?  
• Does the person have a professional license (contractor, accountant)?  
 
For investigating businesses, some of the issues at the outset include: 
• Is the business incorporated? 
• Where does the company do business?  
• What type of business is it?  
• Has the business sued or been sued?  
• Does the business have real property?  
• Does the company finance equipment?  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.403 
• Does the company charge sales tax?  
• How long has the company been in business?  
 
Non-Public Records 
In addition to public records, non-public records—financial or otherwise—might be needed 
to prove fraud or to provide leads in a fraud examination. Non-public records include 
information about a person or business considered to be private and confidential. Because 
fraud examiners do not have an absolute right to see these personal records, such 
information might be difficult or impossible to obtain unless it is voluntarily turned over or a 
subpoena is issued. 
 
Some of the most valuable personal records include: 
• Banking records 
• Tax returns and related documents 
• Credit records 
• Telephone records 
• Credit card account records 
 
 
Laws Governing Access to Information 
Despite the public’s broad right of access to public records, there are numerous laws that 
limit access to certain types of information, and a number of risks to privacy are raised by 
the collection of information. Therefore, fraud examiners must be certain that any 
information obtained is done so legally. 
 
Freedom of Information Act 
The Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) is the primary Act that governs the availability of 
governmental records to the general public. The Act sets very specific guidelines regarding 
what governmental records are and are not open to the public. The records that are available 
are known as “public records,” raw records of information that are compiled and maintained 
by governmental agencies. The various records are maintained at one of the three 
governmental levels: federal, state, or county/ local. Although the FOIA is a federal Act, 
most states have adopted very similar versions of the FOIA to cover the state and local 
jurisdictions. While these versions are similar to the original FOIA, the individually passed 
state acts may differ slightly in specific legal areas from state to state.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.404   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The FOIA and its individual state counterparts regulate:  
• The type of records that a governmental agency may maintain about a person 
• The conditions under which such information may be disclosed to another governmental 
agency 
• The circumstances and methods under which an individual may obtain copies of agency 
records that pertain to him 
 
Generally speaking, governmental records about an individual are prohibited from release. 
The disclosure of these records constitutes an invasion of privacy. A person may obtain 
copies of his own records by requesting them in writing from the agency that maintains 
them. Such requests often are denied, in whole or in part, because of numerous exceptions 
to the disclosure requirements. Some of these exceptions include the pendency of an 
ongoing investigation or concerns about national security. A person denied access to records 
may appeal through that agency or through the courts.  
 
Most records are maintained at the county or local level, a fact that can seriously hamper any 
fraud investigation; it can be very difficult for the fraud examiner to catch up with a 
fraudster who understands the county filing procedures and chooses to operate in different 
counties. However, the following records are available at different levels of government. 
 
The FOIA provides for public access to the following information: 
•  Tax rolls 
•  Voter registration 
•  Assumed names  
•  Real property records 
•  Divorce/probate suits 
 
Information NOT deemed to be public under the FOIA includes: 
•  Banking records 
•  Trust records 
•  Telephone records 
•  Passenger lists 
•  Stock ownership 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.405 
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
One of the primary statutes limiting access to  information is the federal Fair Credit 
Reporting Act (FCRA). This statute regulates the dissemination of consumer information to 
third parties by consumer reporting agencies. Historically, the FCRA only applied to 
consumer credit reports, but due to amendments in 1997, the FCRA now applies to the 
gathering of many other types of information about an individual through third parties. 
 
The FCRA applies in the employment context when an employer contracts with a consumer 
reporting agency (CRA) to collect consumer reports on employees or potential employees. A 
CRA is defined as anyone who sells information about people (e.g., a private investigator or 
an online public records service). A consumer report  is defined as any written, oral, or other 
communication by a consumer reporting agency bearing on a customer’s credit worthiness, 
credit standing, character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living. 
 
The FCRA, however, does not apply if the person or organization seeking the information 
gathers it directly from the source.  
 
If the FCRA does apply, it generally means that an examiner cannot use a third party to 
obtain certain information about a person unless that person has received certain notices and 
signed a consent form. The failure to do so can mean civil penalties. 
 
Complying with the FCRA 
Before an employer can obtain consumer information about a current or prospective 
employee from a third party, it must comply with all of the following requirements: 
• Provide the individual with a “clear and conspicuous” separate written disclosure that 
the employer might obtain a report 
• Obtain the individual’s written authorization 
• Inform the third party that the employer has complied with the FCRA’s notice 
requirements 
• Inform the third party that the employer will not use the information to violate any equal 
employment law 
 
The disclosure and the authorization can be contained in the same document, as long as the 
document contains nothing else. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.406   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
If the employer relies on a consumer report for an “adverse action” (e.g., denying a job 
application, reassigning or terminating an employee, or denying a promotion), then it must 
provide the individual with a pre-adverse action disclosure before taking the adverse action. 
This disclosure must include a copy of the individual’s consumer report and a copy of “A 
Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,” which is available from  
the FTC. 
 
After adverse action is taken, the employer must notify the individual via an adverse action 
notice that the action has been taken. That notice must include the following: 
• Name, address, and phone number of the consumer reporting agency (CRA) that 
supplied the report; 
• A statement that the CRA did not make the adverse action decision and cannot explain 
why the adverse action was taken; and 
• A notice of the individual’s right to di spute the accuracy or completeness of the 
information furnished, and his right to an additional free consumer report from the 
agency upon request within 60 days. 
 
If, however, the employer is gathering the consumer information in connection with a 
workplace investigation of misconduct, however, it may be excluded from the FCRA (see 
the section “Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct” below). 
 
Workplace Investigations of Fraud and Misconduct 
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 amended the Fair Credit Reporting 
Act (FCRA) to exempt certain reports involving employee misconduct investigations. 
 
As a result of these amendments, an employer who uses a third party to conduct a workplace 
investigation no longer has to obtain the prior consent of an employee if the investigation 
involves suspected misconduct, violation of laws or regulations, or violation of any 
preexisting policy of the employer. 
 
To qualify for this exception, the report from the third party must not be communicated to 
anyone other than the employer, an agent of the employer, or the government. 
 
But if “adverse action” is taken against the employee based on the results of the 
investigation, the FCRA still requires the employer to provide the employee with a summary 
of the report. “Adverse action” is broadly defined as any employment decision that adversely 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.407 
affects the employee. The summary must “contain the nature and substance of the 
communication upon which the adverse action is based.” It does not, however, have to 
identify the individuals interviewed or the sources of the information. 
 
Investigative Consumer Report 
Under the FCRA, an investigative consumer report is a report containing information about 
an individual’s character, general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living, that 
is obtained through personal interviews with neighbors, friends, or associates. If such a 
report is made, then other notices and consents may need to be obtained from the 
individual. For example, a separate disclosure must be used to inform the employee that an 
investigative consumer report is being obtained. The form must also state what sort of 
information will be collected. 
 
Also, the company must disclose to the individual the nature and scope of the investigation 
(if he requests). If any adverse action is to be taken against the person, he can ask to receive 
a copy of the report before such action is taken. Further, the report given to the individual 
must not be redacted, meaning that if the report contains names of the people providing the 
information and what they reported, such information cannot be deleted from the report. 
The person must also be given an opportunity to dispute the findings in the report. 
 
Contact Your Attorney 
Unfortunately for fraud examiners, the FCRA has created several more hoops that 
examiners must jump through before they can obtain certain types of information. The 
FCRA is not clearly written, but the Federal Trade Commission has published several letters 
giving its interpretation of the statute. These letters and the text of the FCRA can be 
obtained through its website at www.ftc.gov.  
 
The most important thing for the fraud examiner to remember is to consult his in-house or 
outside counsel. Your attorney will help you determine what procedures you need to 
institute to comply with the FCRA. 
 
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLB) was passed in 1999, and rules implementing the Act 
became final in 2001. GLB was originally enac ted to allow banks and other companies to 
offer previously forbidden services, such as insurance and securities brokerage services. 
Congress was worried that these “super banks” would share customers’ financial data with 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.408   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
affiliates and other companies to hawk their products. Therefore, Congress added a 
provision requiring “financial intuitions” to te ll customers about their privacy policies, to 
notify customers of private information they intend to share, and to give customers the 
chance to block such information sharing. 
 
To implement the law, Congress ordered regulators to define “financial institution” in the 
broadest possible terms. Thus, “financial institutions” include not just banks, but also 
insurance companies, accountants, tax preparation and real estate settlement services, and 
investment advisors. The text of the rule can be found at 16 C.F.R. Part 313. Additional 
information about the rule can be found at the Federal Trade Commission’s website: 
www.ftc.gov. 
 
GLB is important for fraud examiners because the privacy rules implemented as part of the 
Act have been interpreted to prevent the selling of credit header information, and under the 
FTC’s interpretation of the rule, credit header information cannot be sold except for the 
very limited purposes allowed under the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The agency reached this 
decision by concluding that such basic personal information, such as names and addresses, is 
financial information, and, therefore, must be protected under the GLB Act. Therefore, the 
GLB prevents credit bureaus from selling credit header information (including names, 
addresses, phone numbers, and Social Security numbers) to private investigators, direct 
marketers, or other information brokers. 
 
As a general rule, financial information can be obtained only by subpoena.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act also made it a criminal offense to engage in “pretexting.” 
Some individuals used pretexting as a means to gather financial information about a subject. 
Pretexters would contact a financial institution and pretend to be the customer or someone 
else authorized to obtain financial information and basically trick the financial institution 
into providing information about the subject. 
 
Section 6821 of Title 15 of the U.S. Code (added by GLB) makes it an offense to: 
• Use false, fictitious, or fraudulent statements or documents to get customer information 
from a financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution;  
• Use forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen documents to get customer information from a 
financial institution or directly from a customer of a financial institution; or 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.409 
• Ask another person to get someone else’s custom er information using false, fictitious, or 
fraudulent statements or documents or using forged, counterfeit, lost, or stolen 
documents.  
 
Violators can, under certain circumstances, be fined and/or imprisoned up to 10 years. 
 
Pretexting is not always illegal, but it should be used with extreme caution. For example, if a 
fraud examiner is trying to locate a witness or a suspect, he might call the person’s relative 
and pretend to be an old high school friend who is looking for a phone number. This type of 
pretexting generally is not illegal. However, it is illegal to obtain certain types of information, 
such as financial records and phone records. 
 
Fraud examiners should never impersonate a member of law enforcement, and should never 
impersonate an actual person (particularly the individual being investigated). To do so may 
lead to charges of identity theft. In 2006, investigators hired by Hewlett-Packard were 
charged with identity theft, conspiracy, and wire fraud for acquiring the phone records of 
several members of their board of directors who were suspected of leaking confidential 
information. As a result, Congress passed the Telephone Records and Privacy Protection 
Act, which is codified at 18, U.S. Code, section 1039. This law makes it a federal crime to 
obtain confidential phone records without authorization, including posing as another 
individual.  
 
Before engaging in any type of pretexting activity, investigators should consult with an 
attorney to determine whether the information sought is protected by state or federal law as 
well as whether the planned impersonation method is legally acceptable. 
 
Privacy Act of 1974 
The Privacy Act of 1974 restricts information about individuals, including employees and 
non-employees, that might be gathered by governmental agencies. Under the Act, an agency 
may maintain records about a person containing information that is relevant and necessary 
to accomplish a purpose of the agency. This information may include a person’s education, 
finances, medical history, criminal history, employment history, and identifying information 
(fingerprint, voice print, or photograph). The person may have access to his information 
unless it is investigatory material compiled for law enforcement purposes, statistical records, 
or material compiled solely for determining suitability, eligibility, or qualification for federal 
service or promotion.  
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.410   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Right to Financial Privacy Act 
The Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions from disclosing financial 
information about individual customers to governmental agencies without the customer’s 
consent, a court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or other formal demand. There are, 
however, limited exceptions to this rule. 
 
Although the statute applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and 
other financial institutions also will not release such information to private parties absent 
legal process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
Driver’s Privacy Protection Act  
In 1999, Congress made significant changes to the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
(18, U.S.C., § 2721). The law bars states from  releasing drivers’ Social Security numbers, 
photographs, or certain other information unless they obtain “the express consent” of each 
person in advance. Before the 1999 amendments, drivers could “opt out” and ask that their 
information not be released. Under the law, however, drivers are under an “opt in” system 
that requires their express authorization of the release of information. Although the law was 
challenged, the U.S. Supreme Court, in January 2000, upheld the constitutionality of the 
amendments. 
 
These amendments make it extremely difficult to obtain up-to-date information from state 
motor vehicle departments. Such information can only be obtained if the driver has 
expressly consented to its release. Therefore, companies may wish to consider having 
employees sign a consent form as early as the employment application stage. For example, 
the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act does not prohibit the use of motor vehicle records 
(MVR) for pre-employment screening, but the state can only release the records with the 
driver’s consent.  
 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) instituted several 
additional privacy rules concerning personal health information. While most of the rules do 
not directly affect fraud investigations, fraud examiners should be aware of the rules because 
they may have an impact on the type of information that can be legally gathered on 
employees. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.411 
The HIPAA privacy rules place restrictions on the availability and use of “protected health 
information.” The definition of this term is extremely broad and covers any information 
relating to an individual’s past, present, or  future physical or mental health, payment for 
services, or health care operations. 
 
If information about the health of an individual or payments for services becomes an issue 
during an investigation, fraud examiners should immediately contact the human resources 
(HR) department. The HR department should have information about whether the entity is 
subject to HIPAA rules and can assist you in compliance with those rules.  
 
The most important thing to note is that if HIPAA rules do apply, you are restricted as to 
the type of health information you can access without specific written authorization. You 
should never contact the health care provider, the health-plan administrator, or a medical-
 billing service for copies of employee’s records without first consulting the employer’s legal 
counsel or the HR department. 
 
 
City Government Records 
The following items are basic types of public records that can be accessed at the city level of 
government: 
• Building inspector records 
• Health and fire department records 
• City personnel department records 
• Public school records 
• Regulatory agency records 
• City tax assessor/collector records 
• Utility company records 
 
Building Inspector Records 
The following information generally is available through a city’s building inspector’s office: 
• Building permits, showing the name of applicant, address of construction, estimated 
cost, and the name of builder or contractor 
• Blueprints and plans showing construction details that often are submitted with 
applications for building permits 
• Building inspectors’ reports, containing information regarding compliance with 
construction specifications 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.412   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Health and Fire Department Records 
Most local health or fire departments conduct routine inspections of businesses for health 
and safety code or fire code violations. These inspectors might have valuable information 
about the business, its operations, the employees, and the owners. 
 
Death certificates usually can be found at city, county, or state health departments. A death 
certificate provides the name of the deceased, address, sex, age, race, birthplace, birth date, 
death place, date and time of death, Social Security number, medical certificate, and 
coroner’s certificate. Additionally, a death certi ficate generally provides information about 
the deceased’s parents and their occupations. 
 
City Personnel Department Records 
The city personnel department maintains personal-history statements from city employees 
and political leaders, as well as employment records, efficiency reports, and records of salary 
liens on city employees. 
 
Public School Records 
City school systems maintain teachers’ bi ographies, showing personal background, 
education, and former employment; and stud ent records, showing biographies (in some 
school districts), grades, and disciplinary actions. 
 
Regulatory Agency Records 
Applications for business licenses, contained in the files of city regulatory agencies, often 
have valuable information on certain types of enterprises. In many cities, the following 
businesses would have to apply for licenses to operate: 
• Businesses seeking liquor licenses 
• Professionals, including certified public accountants, dentists, doctors, plumbers, 
electricians, and optometrists 
• Restaurants, bars, and night clubs (which are frequently inspected by health and fire 
departments) 
• Businesses operating under names other than the owners’ names (such businesses must 
register under assumed names and are included in the city’s DBA [doing business as] 
files) 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.413 
City Tax Assessor/Collector Records 
A city’s tax assessor’s office maintains maps of real property in the city, including a 
property’s dimensions, address, owner, taxable value, and improvements. A tax collector’s 
office maintains the following information: 
• Names and addresses of payers of property taxes, even if the taxes were paid by 
individuals other than the apparent owners 
• Legal descriptions of property 
• Amounts of taxes paid on real and personal property 
• Delinquency status of taxes 
• Names of former property owners 
 
Utility Company Records 
Many utility companies are nonprofit corporations or municipalities. Although the recent 
trend has been to restrict access to utility company records, check with the utility companies 
in the subject’s area to see what, if any, information is available. Utility records might contain 
the phone number of the customer, even if that number is unlisted. In addition, be sure to 
check the names of friends or relatives. 
 
 
County Government Records 
The following items are basic types of public records that can be accessed at the county level 
of government: 
• County court records 
• County coroner’s register 
• County personnel department records 
• Building permit records 
• Public school records 
• Voter registration records 
• County recorder’s office records 
• Sheriff/county prosecutor records 
• County fire marshal records 
• Regulatory agency records 
• Welfare commission records 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.414   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
County Court Records 
The great majority of an individual’s civil records can be found at the county courthouse in 
the jurisdiction where the subject does business or resides. 
 
Courts are generally divided into jurisdictions that encompass a single county in a single 
state. In each single court, there are usually three levels: trial courts, appellate courts, and 
supreme courts.  
 
Most of the papers filed in civil suits are acce ssible as public records; however, criminal and 
juvenile actions may not be as open to review. In addition, criminal conviction records are 
generally available to the public.  
 
A great deal of litigation occurs each year and many people might be subject to judicial 
action, voluntarily or not. Researching civil and criminal suits can provide invaluable 
information assisting in: 
• The location of individuals 
• Identifying pending actions 
• Uncovering closed cases 
• Insight into marital status (family) 
• Tracing sources of funds (probate) 
• Identifying financial conditions (bankruptcy) 
• Litigation history 
• Outstanding judgments 
 
Although a wealth of information is available in court files, civil or criminal actions might 
not be readily known and the researcher must be able to identify the jurisdiction, county, or 
court involved.  
 
A researcher typically will have access to microfiche listings of cases or parties within the 
individual court system through the clerk’s office. Some courts are set up to provide 
computerized access to this information. Normally, one must be able to provide a case 
number in order to access the actual court file. The Party Name Index will provide the  
case number. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.415 
Court clerks maintain files on all active and closed lawsuits in their jurisdictions. Information 
regarding these suits is public record and can be searched by scanning the indexes for 
subject’s name as a plaintiff or defendant. 
 
For example, the subject data fields of court records will contain: 
• The complaint for or against the subject (direct and reverse indexes) 
• The subject’s last known address (either through the lawsuit’s pleadings or the court 
officer’s citation and subpoena returns) 
• Other personal information on the subject, depending on the type of suit 
 
Court levels vary by jurisdiction, as do the names of the levels. Different case types are filed 
at different levels and in different courts.  
 
Different levels of courts are assigned jurisdiction over any given case, based on court issues 
and the nature of the claim. To determine the full extent of the litigation history against a 
company or individual, the examiner must search each of the various types of local court 
records. 
 
Civil Court Records 
The key to locating civil court records is knowing the correct spelling of your subject’s name, 
where the person currently lives, and where he lived in the past.  
 
Depending on the type of suit, civil court records will provide potentially valuable 
information. 
 
PERSONAL INJURY SUIT RECORDS 
Records for a personal injury suit, for example, will often contain an accident report, injury 
history, statements of the involved parties, and the financial settlement of the case.  
 
FINANCIAL SUIT RECORDS 
Financial suit records will disclose an individual’s debtors and creditors, and they will present 
an outside view of a business’s history or ability to perform. 
 
DIVORCE RECORDS 
Divorce record searches will return marriage partner names, addresses, location of marriage, 
divorce filing date, and file number. In addition, divorce records frequently contain the 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.416   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
subject’s financial inventory, which is submitted at  the time of the divorce or separation, and 
should also include the partition of assets to each party in the settlement. 
 
Criminal Court Records 
When conducting a criminal records search, certain types of information are critical. Like 
civil courts, criminal courts across the country are divided into jurisdictions that generally 
encompass a single county in a single state. 
 
Although most states have their criminal courts divided by county, some states offer indexes 
with criminal convictions for the entire state.  
 
Criminal convictions should not be confused with criminal filings. When you search for 
criminal records at the county level, you will find all cases filed by the district attorney, even 
if the person was not found guilty of a crime. When searching a statewide convictions 
database, you will find only cases that resulted in conviction.  
The county criminal court clerk maintains criminal court files that might contain a wealth of 
information. These files might provide information describing the offenses and the counts. 
These files also might contain the complainant’s signature (exemplar); a transcript of the 
preliminary hearing; the names of the prosecuting and defense attorneys; the probation 
officer’s report, with a background investigation of the defendant; and the subpoenas issued 
in the case. 
 
Probate Court Records 
Probate court records are documents filed to show the dispersal of assets after a subject’s 
death. The probate court conducts an investigation to verify any debts owed by an individual 
estate and sees to the dispersal of assets according to the deceased’s will (or if there is no 
will, by state law) after all debts are paid. 
 
The debts left in an individual’s estate will give the investigator information on the following: 
• Names of individuals with an interest in the deceased’s estate 
• The subject’s financial position at the time of death 
 
The dispersal of assets will reveal: 
• The names and addresses of heirs to the deceased 
• Some indication of the value of the property willed to them 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.417 
County Coroner’s Register 
A county coroner’s register generally contains the name or a description of the deceased; 
date of inquest, if any; property found on the de ceased and its disposition; and the cause  
of death. 
 
County Personnel Department Records 
A county personnel department maintains information similar to that maintained by a city 
personnel department. 
 
Building Permit Records 
If a business or individual constructs a new building or makes improvements to an existing 
building, there should be a building permit on file with the local building authority. In 
addition, before most businesses can open their doors, the city or county may require that 
they possess certain permits. The local fire department may require permits ensuring that the 
business complies with the fire code. The city health department will require permits for 
restaurants or other businesses that serve food. Planning and zoning departments enforce 
regulations regarding the types of businesses and their locations.  
 
Public Schools 
County public school systems maintain information similar to that found in city public 
school systems. 
 
Voter Registration Records 
To be eligible to vote, U.S. citizens must be registered in their respective precincts. To 
register, citizens must fill out a registration application. The information required to process 
the application includes: name, address, date of birth, signature, and Social Security number. 
 
Voter registration records routinely are verified  by the county and old addresses are deleted 
as new ones appear. 
 
County Recorder’s Office Records 
A county recorder is a government office responsible for maintaining public records and 
documents, especially records relating to real estate ownership. A county recorder’s office 
maintains the following information: 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.418   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Documents pertaining to real estate transactions — including deeds, grants, transfers and 
mortgages of real estate, releases of mortgages, powers of attorney, and leases that have 
been acknowledged or approved 
• Mortgages on personal property 
• Marriage license records and applications, including information on previous marriages, 
maiden names, addresses, and dates of birth 
• Wills admitted to probate 
• Official bonds 
• Notices of mechanic’s liens 
• Transcripts of judgments that are made liens on real estate 
• Notices of attachment on real estate 
• Papers in connection with bankruptcy 
• Certified copies of decrees and judgments of courts of record 
• Other documents permitted by law to be recorded, such as the Department of Defense’s 
DOD 214 Forms, recorded by some veterans as  evidence of veteran status, particularly 
in those states where veterans are granted reduced property tax rates 
 
Real estate transaction records are extremely important. They are relatively easy to access and 
contain a vast amount of information. Real estate records usually are found in the county in 
which the land is located. When an individual purchases real estate, he becomes a taxpayer 
and a registrant in the following county records:  real property records, property tax records, 
and tax assessor records. 
 
Real Property Records 
Each real estate transaction will list a deed verifying the transfer of the property. If an 
individual either buys or sells a house or piece of property, or his real property becomes 
subject to a state or federal lien, the transaction will be reflected in the county real property 
indexes. If improvements are made to the property, such as the addition of a new room or 
the installation of a pool, then a mechanic’s lien or other notice may be on file in the county 
property records. 
 
COMMERCIAL SEARCHES  
Many companies provide access to real property records. A search for a business or 
individual in these databases can return real property ownership information, recent property 
sales and transfers, refinance, construction loans, and seller carry-back transactions.  
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.419 
In addition, you can conduct a single search of all available online states in the same amount 
of time and for the same price as an individual county or state search. Typical responses will 
include the property owner’s name, property address, mailing address, parcel number, lot 
size, land, property value, tax amount, purchase amount, property description, and more. On 
refinance, construction loans, and seller carry-back and sale transactions, the date and 
amount of each transaction usually appear. This is especially useful for determining an 
individual’s equity in a specific property or for identifying individuals that may be receiving 
monthly income as a result of providing financing. 
 
NON-COMMERCIAL SEARCHES 
Although examiners can use commercial services to obtain real property information (e.g., 
identify the ownership of a piece of real property), some jurisdictions are not available, 
depending on how local jurisdictions and states compile property information. Searches may 
be conducted by business or person name(s), address, or name of the putative owner. 
Searches of the real property records may reveal: 
• Residences and addresses of buyer and seller (referred to respectively as grantor and 
grantee) 
• Price of the property (see tax stamps if listed) 
• Mortgage company and amount originally financed 
• Real estate ownership 
• Who financed the transaction, if applicable 
• Title companies involved 
• Improvements to the property, along with the names and addresses of the contractors 
used 
 
Property Tax Records 
In addition to the property records themselves, counties charge new landowners property 
taxes for upkeep of their schools, courthouses, police, and other public buildings. These 
records can provide: 
• An idea of the estimated value, for tax purposes, of the property listed 
• The identity of the owner of a vacant piece of land or a piece of property, if ownership is 
unknown 
• The name of the last person to pay taxes on the property 
 
When searching real property and tax records, the fraud examiner should always look for any 
additional names listed on the documents. Frequently, the name of the attorney or notary 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.420   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
public who verified the documents is listed, providing another potential source of further 
information. 
 
Tax Assessor/Collector Records 
County tax assessor’s and collector’s offices maintain information similar to that held by city 
tax assessor’s offices. 
 
Sheriff/County Prosecutor Records 
The county sheriff or the county prosecutor may maintain general incident files related to 
the businesses within the county. Incident files can provide leads on managers or owners of 
the business or third parties who have made complaints against the business. 
 
County Fire Marshal Records 
The county fire marshal should have a record of any fires that have occurred at specific 
properties. These records may contain information about a property’s insurer, as well as 
information about any previously conducted investigations. 
 
Regulatory Agency Records 
County regulatory agencies maintain information similar to that held by city regulatory 
agencies.  
 
Welfare Commission Records 
Files of a county welfare commission are based on information gathered by social workers, 
psychologists, and physicians. Frequently, the recipient of benefits provides the information, 
which is generally not verified. Files contain such information as the recipient’s address, 
previous employment, how much the recipient earned, property the recipient or the 
recipient’s relatives might own, the state of the family’s health, and criminal records. 
 
 
State Government Records 
The following items are basic types of public records that can be accessed at the state level 
of government: 
• Business flings 
• State court records 
• Uniform Commercial Code filings 
• Employee/labor department records 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.421 
• State tax filings 
• Professional associations and licensing boards 
• State attorneys general records 
• Workers’ compensation records 
• Department of motor vehicles records 
• Bureau of vital statistics 
• Other state regulatory agencies 
 
Business Filings 
If an individual wants to conduct business in a name other than his own, the law requires 
that he file documents to claim ownership of that name. These documents can include: 
• Articles of incorporation 
• Foreign corporation registration 
• DBA/fictitious name registration 
• Tax related filings 
 
Articles of Incorporation 
Corporations are formed by filing articles of incorporation with the secretary of state (or 
state corporation bureau or corporate registry office) in the state of which the company does 
business. These corporate records are public record and will include: 
• Corporate name 
• Ownership information 
• Stock value 
• Initial shareholders 
• Names of the directors and officers 
• Registered agent 
• Location of the principal office 
• Date of incorporation 
• Standing/status 
 
This information will permit the investigator to review a corporate structure, identify the 
registered agent, and trace incorporation dates. The records will often include limited 
partnership information as well. The examiner can also use these records to verify the 
state(s) in which a company is registered as a corporation. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.422   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Foreign Corporation Registration Records 
Some states, but not all, require foreign corporations (i.e., corporations that were 
incorporated in another state) to register with the state corporation office if the foreign 
corporation transacts business in that state. For example, if a corporation chartered in 
Delaware wishes to transact business in Texas, it must file an Application for Certificate of 
Authority. The application is filed with the secretary of state and must include the date of 
incorporation, the principal office, the address of the registered agent, and the names of the 
officers and directors. 
 
Fictitious Business Names/Doing Business As Information 
Doing business as (DBA) information is typically filed at the county level, though many 
states require filing with at the state level as well. Most states also require limited 
partnerships, trusts, and joint ventures to file DBA information at the state or county level. 
This information will provide insight into the true business venture behind the name. DBA 
information is very similar to corporate filings with the secretary of state, and they allow 
examiners to trace the corporation’s roots or  prove ownership in sole proprietorships, 
partnerships, limited partnerships, joint ventures, and trusts. 
 
Tax Related Filings 
Some state revenue departments require certain businesses to obtain licenses or permits, 
such as a sales tax permit. The licenses and the applications are generally public record. If the 
business is delinquent in the payment of its taxes, the local or state tax investigator or 
collector might be able to provide inside information concerning the business. 
 
Law enforcement officials might be able to gain access to corporate, business, and personal 
state tax information. These records might unwittingly reveal hidden assets or investments. 
Loans to or from officers, stockholders, or related entities should be examined closely. Also, 
mortgages, notes, and bonds shown as liabilities on a corporate return should be 
investigated. Tax returns might also disclose the identity of the accountant or attorney 
preparing the return.  
 
State Court Records 
State Civil Court Records 
State civil court records searches are conducted by court, by county, and are divided between 
upper and lower courts (generally a monetary division) where applicable. Searches of state 
civil court records may return the identities of the plaintiff and defendant, case number, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.423 
filing date, cause of action, and disposition or current status. Depending on the court, 
divorces, domestic, family law, child support, name changes, or probate matters may also be 
included.  
 
State Criminal Court Records 
State criminal court records searches are conducted by court or by county for felonies, 
misdemeanors, or a combination of both. Searches of state civil court records may return the 
identity of the defendant, a physical description of the conduct, the arrest date, arresting 
agency, case number, filing date, charges, and disposition or current status. An index search 
is available for some states and counties, and most states have some type of release 
requirement for obtaining this information.  
 
Uniform Commercial Code Filings 
A search of Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) filings can help you identify personal 
property that an individual or business has financed. This is because a lender must file UCC 
statements with the secretary of state or with the county level unit to perfect its security 
interest in personal property. 
 
Banks, finance companies, and other lenders will generate records or recorded filings of 
financial transactions conducted with individuals and businesses, such as purchases of 
household furniture, appliances, boats and yachts, automobiles, aircraft, and business 
equipment. 
 
These filings produced as the result of the transactions will identify: 
• Name of the debtor or joint debtors 
• Current address of the debtors 
• Name of the financial lender 
• Type of collateral pledged as security 
• Date of filing and continuations 
 
UCC filings can also disclose when and where a person obtains personal loans, the type of 
property pledged to the lender to secure the loan, and the current address of the debtor. 
These documents provide itemized lists of personal property held by the debtor. 
 
Additionally, UCC filings and supporting documents can help examiners uncover hidden 
ownership or relationships between parties by viewing the names of all listed debtors and 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.424   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
their addresses. The examiner may find information linking individuals to the companies 
they own, or discover information about a company’s subsidiaries, branch offices, or parent 
company.  
 
These documents can be readily retrieved from the secretary of state’s office, through service 
companies, or through online public records services. One company that provides access to 
this information is Experian. Experian’s UCC online database provides information from 
state-level UCC-1 financing statements, as well as information on amendments, assignments, 
terminations, and so on. Most online responses will include debtor and secured party 
name(s) and address(es), file date and file number for each original filing, amendment dates, 
and assignment information (when applicable). 
 
Employee/Labor Department Records 
Some states, under their labor departments, require the filing of periodic lists of employees, 
revealing their names, Social Security numbers, and salaries. In addition, by examining 
previous filings, an investigator can locate former employees.  
 
Professional Associations and Licensing Boards 
Many state and local agencies or bodies main tain records identifying individuals holding 
special licenses or memberships. These can include: 
• Medical practitioners, such as doctors, dentists, and nurses 
• Social workers 
• Attorneys 
• Certified Public Accountants 
• Real estate licensees 
• Notaries 
• Law enforcement personnel 
• Firefighters 
• Security guards 
• Stockbrokers 
• Teachers 
• Insurance agents 
• Private investigators 
• Bail bond agents 
• Travel agents 
• Barbers and cosmetologists 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.425 
• Contractors, engineers, electricians, and architects 
 
The licenses and applications granted by the state might be public record. Although some 
applications contain no more than a name and address, other applications contain lengthy 
personal information, such as previous residential addresses, previous employers, education 
and training, and financial statements. Some agencies are required to conduct a background 
investigation before issuance of a license. 
 
Also, the state regulatory or licensing agency might have the authority to suspend or revoke 
the licenses necessary for the business to operate. 
 
Many professional organizations maintain their own listings of members or licensees. They 
might be reluctant to provide information beyond the person’s name and current standing in 
the association. 
 
State Attorneys General Records  
State attorneys general are good sources of information on whether a particular entity or 
individual was the subject of an enforcement action by a particular state. For links to the 
attorney general’s website for any of the 50 states, consult the National Association of 
Attorneys General at http://www.naag.org. 
 
Workers’ Compensation Records 
Records of workers’ compensation claims are av ailable in most states; however, the breadth 
of coverage will vary from state to state. Some states require some type of authorization 
from the target of the search. Workers’ comp ensation searches may return the subject’s 
name, Social Security number, date of birth, employer’s name, date and type of accident, and 
nature and extent of inquiry.  
 
The Americans with Disability Act, however, purports to prevent prospective employers 
from using workers’ compensation records to deny employment to otherwise qualified job 
applicants. 
 
Department of Motor Vehicles Records 
The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) maintains information on drivers’ licenses, 
vehicle registrations, titling, car dealers, car salespeople, wrecking yards, tow companies, 
smog inspection facilities, and (in some states) auto repair businesses.  
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.426   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
DMV records were once thought to  be good locator tools, but recent restrictions on the use 
of such data has reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Moreover, the update quality of 
individual state records supplied by state authorities may not be adequate to locating people 
in a transient, fast-paced society. Still, searches such as Driver Identification can be useful on 
a spot basis. 
 
Vehicle ownership information will identify ve hicles registered to a specific person or 
business. These records include trailers, motor homes, or motor vessels. Information on 
disability placards may also be available. Current ownership of a particular vehicle can be 
obtained through the use of a plate number or a vehicle identification number (VIN). 
Information returned will include plate number, VIN, expiration date, make, model, model 
year, registered owner’s name/address, and legal owner’s name/address.  
 
In 1999, Congress made significant changes to the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act of 1994 
(18, U.S.C., § 2721). The amended law bars sta tes from releasing drivers’ Social Security 
numbers, photographs, or certain other information unless they obtain “the express 
consent” of each person in advance. Before the 1999 amendments, drivers could “opt out” 
and ask that their information not be released. Under the new law, however, drivers are 
under an “opt in” system that requires their express authorization of the release of 
information. Although the law was challenged, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the 
constitutionality of the new amendments in January 2000. 
 
These amendments make it extremely difficult to obtain almost any up-to-date information 
from state motor vehicle departments. Such information can only be obtained if the driver 
has expressly consented to its release. Therefore, companies may wish to consider having 
employees sign a consent form as early as the employment application stage because even 
though the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act does not prohibit the use of motor vehicle 
records for pre-employment screening, the state can only release the records with the 
driver’s consent.  
 
Bureau of Vital Statistics 
A state’s bureau of vital statistics, where birth certificates are generally filed, is an excellent 
source of information. Birth certificates can provide a child’s name, sex, date of birth, and 
place of birth; the names of the attending phy sician, midwife, and/or other assistants; the 
parents’ names, ages, addresses, races, places of birth, and occupations; the mother’s maiden 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.427 
name; and the number of siblings. (In some states, birth certificates might be found at the 
city or county level.)  
 
Other State Regulatory Agencies 
At the state level, the following additional records can be found: 
• Auto licenses, auto transfers, and sales of vehicles 
• Civil service applications 
• Drivers’ licenses 
• Health department records 
• Inheritance and gift tax returns 
• Name changes 
• Occupancy and business licenses 
• Parole officers’ and probation departments’ files 
• Personal property tax returns 
• School and voter registrations 
• State income tax returns 
• Welfare agency records 
 
The following state departments and agencies might also maintain information valuable to 
fraud examiners: 
• Bureau of Professional and Vocational Standards or Department of Licensing (especially 
professional associations, partnerships, and corporations) 
• Controller/treasurer 
• Department of Agriculture 
• Department of Industrial Relations 
• Department of Natural Resources 
• Horse-Racing Board/Gambling Commission 
• Secretary of State (corporations division) 
• State Board of Equalization 
• State Police or Highway Patrol 
• State Securities Commission 
• State Utility Commission 
 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.428   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Federal Government Records 
A huge amount of information is available to the public through the various federal agencies. 
A list of a number of federal agencies and their website addresses will be provided later in 
this workbook, and information about various federal agencies can be obtained through the 
following reference guides: 
• Congressional Staff Directory and Federal Staff Directory, prepared annually by CQ 
Press 
• Congressional Directory, prepared by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
• The United States Government Manual, prepared by the U.S. Government Printing Office 
 
However, the following records are of particular note. 
 
Federal Court Records 
Civil and Criminal Court Records 
Federal civil and criminal court records can provide valuable information, including the 
plaintiff and defendant’s name, the case number, the filing date, the cause of action, and the 
case disposition of current status.  
 
Bankruptcy Court Records 
Bankruptcy proceedings are conducted in federal bankruptcy courts. In these courts, all 
documents filed with the court are public record and can be examined by anyone without 
charge. These on-site federal court records may include the case number, debtor’s name(s), 
Social Security number, address, filing date, chapter designation, and closure date. The 
search is available for all federal jurisdictions, usually covering a seven-year span that starts 
from the present and moves backward. 
 
Bankruptcy documents are usually located in the federal bankruptcy court for the district 
where the debtor resided or had his principal place of business. When checking bankruptcy 
court records, the examiner should remember to check not only the individual or business 
filing for bankruptcy, but also any related businesses, principals, employees, or relatives. 
 
A bankruptcy is initiated by the filing of a bankruptcy petition. The petition can be either 
voluntary or involuntary. Three or more creditors who have outstanding claims that have not 
been paid can file an involuntary petition. 
 
Specifically, a bankruptcy file typically contains the following documents: 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.429 
• Bankruptcy petition : The bankruptcy petition contains type of bankruptcy 
(voluntary/involuntary, Chapter 7, Chapter 11, etc.); Social Security number or tax ID 
number; street address and primary place of business; location of principal assets of 
business; type of business; name of attorney; estimated amount of assets; estimated 
number of creditors, liabilities, and employees; financial data; and a list of shareholders 
• Proof of claim forms : Proof of claim forms are filed by creditors listing the amounts they are 
owed by the debtor.  
• Trustee’s final report : The final report is filed by a trustee when a case is concluded; it 
shows which claims were paid.  
• Trustee’s final account : Trustee’s must also file a final a ccount of the administration of the 
estate. This account will also show which claims were paid.  
• Schedule A : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s real 
property. 
• Schedule B : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s personal 
property, including tangible property (e.g., jewelry and vehicles) and intangible property 
(e.g., investments and accounts receivable). 
• Schedule C : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes the property that the debtor 
is claiming as exempt from being used to satisfy claims. 
• Schedule D : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the secured debts the 
debtor owes (e.g., mortgages).  
• Schedule E : This form is filed by the debtor, and it describes all of the debtor’s priority 
debts (the Bankruptcy Code gives certain unsecured creditors priority, such as those 
owed wages, contributions to pension plans, taxes owed to governmental entities, etc.) 
• Schedule F : Filed by the debtor, this form describes unsecured, non-priority claims owed 
by the debtor.  
• Schedule G : Filed by the debtor, this form describes any leases and executory contracts 
(i.e., contracts that have not been fully performed) to which the debtor is a party.  
• Schedule H : This form is filed by the debtor, and it  describes all co-debtors that might be 
affected by the debtor’s bankruptcy.  
• Schedule I : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current income. 
• Schedule J : Filed by the debtor, this form describes the debtor’s current monthly 
expenditures. 
• Statement of financial affairs : This form is filed by the debt or, and it describes the debtor’s 
legal, economic, and business transactions prior to filing. It is a listing of all recent 
sources of income; payments to creditors;  lawsuits; repossessions or foreclosures; 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.430   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
assignments; gifts; losses; financial accounts; safe deposit box es; prior addresses; financial 
statements; inventories; and current and former officers, directors, and shareholders 
• Bankruptcy plan : The bankruptcy plan is a detailed account of how the creditor’s claims 
will be resolved. 
 
The bankruptcy file may also contain transcripts of depositions or interviews. If fraud was 
suspected, the trustee may have conducted a fraud investigation. Check with the trustee to 
find out if any investigations were conducted. 
 
Inspectors General 
Inspectors general can provide valuable information, especially to official law enforcement 
personnel, about businesses they have investigated or audited, and they are good guides to 
other information sources in their departments or agencies. Most offices of inspectors 
general maintain centralized index and case file systems. Congress established inspectors 
general to combat governmental fraud, waste, and abuse in federal departments, agencies, 
and designated the entities listed below. 
 
Federal Entity Website Address 
Agency for International Development www.usaid.gov 
Agriculture, Department of www.usda.gov 
Amtrak www.amtrakoig.com 
Appalachian Regional Commission www.arc.gov 
Central Intelligence Agency www.cia.gov 
Commerce, Department of www.commerce.gov 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission www.cftc.gov 
Consumer Product Safety Commission www.cpsc.gov 
Corporation for National and Community Service www.nationalservice.org 
Corporation for Public Broadcasting www.cpb.org 
Council of the Inspectors General www.ignet.gov 
Defense, Department of  www.defense.gov 
Education, Department of  www.ed.gov 
Energy, Department of www.doe.gov 
Environmental Protection Agency www.epa.gov 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission www.eeoc.gov 
Farm Credit Administration www.fca.gov 
Federal Communications Commission www.fcc.gov 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.431 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation www.fdicoig.gov 
Federal Election Commission www.fec.gov 
Federal Emergency Management Agency www.fema.gov 
Federal Housing Finance Board www.fhfa.gov 
Federal Labor Relations Authority www.flra.gov 
Federal Maritime Commission www.fmc.gov 
Federal Reserve Board www.federalreserve.gov 
Federal Trade Commission www.ftc.gov 
General Services Administration oig.gsa.gov 
Government Printing Office www.gpo.gov 
Health and Human Services, Department of www.hhs.gov 
Homeland Security, Department of www.dhs.gov 
Housing and Urban Development, Department of www.hud.gov 
Interior, Department of the www.doi.gov 
International Trade Commission, U.S. www.usitc.gov 
Justice, Department of www.usdoj.gov 
Labor, Department of www.dol.gov 
Legal Services Corporation www.lsc.gov 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration www.nasa.gov 
National Archives and Records Administration www.archives.gov 
National Credit Union Administration www.ncua.gov 
National Endowment for the Arts www.nea.gov 
National Endowment for the Humanities www.neh.gov 
National Labor Relations Board www.nlrb.gov 
National Science Foundation www.nsf.gov 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission www.nrc.gov 
Office of Personnel Management www.opm.gov 
Peace Corps. www.peacecorps.gov 
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation www.pbgc.gov 
Postal Service, U.S. www.usps.com 
Railroad Retirement Board www.rrb.gov 
Securities and Exchange Commission www.sec.gov 
Small Business Administration www.sba.gov 
Social Security Administration www.ssa.gov 
State, Department of www.state.gov 
Tennessee Valley Authority www.tva.gov 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.432   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Transportation, Department of www.dot.gov 
Treasury, Department of the www.ustreas.gov 
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration www.ustreas.gov/tigta 
Veterans Affairs, Department of www.va.gov 
 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
The Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974 created the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission (CFTC), and it empowered the CFTC to regulate all futures trading in 
the United States. The CFTC imposes speculative position limits on futures contracts as 
needed to eliminate, decrease, or deter the burdens on interstate commerce that may result 
from excessive speculation. Moreover, the CFTC, through its affiliation with the National 
Futures Association (NFA), provides a dispute-resolution program for customers and 
members.  
 
This CFTC maintains the following information: 
• Registration information concerning firms and individuals 
• Administrative and injunctive actions filed by the CFTC against firms and individuals 
• Financial reports filed by CFTC registrants 
• Customer complaints filed against CFTC registrants 
 
National Futures Association 
The National Futures Association is an industry-wide, self-regulatory organization 
authorized by the Commodity Exchange Act; it  operates under the supervision of the CFTC. 
The NFA is a one-stop information source for all types of registration and disciplinary 
information regarding firms and individuals in the futures industry. This information 
includes registration status and employment history; disciplinary actions filed by the NFA, 
the CFTC, and the commodity exchanges; and c ustomer complaints filed under the CFTC’s 
Reparations Program.  
 
The NFA’s Information Center can be contacted at (800) 621-3570 or within Illinois at (312) 
781-1410, or accessed on their website at www.cftc.gov. 
 
Department of Agriculture 
Some U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) agencies maintain or have access to financial 
records concerning contracts with the agency; recipients of various benefits, such as food 
stamps and free or reduced-price school lunches; farmland improvements; and federal crop 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.433 
insurance coverage. Various USDA agencies maintain information about gaining access to 
records concerning the following: 
• Meat or poultry companies 
• Feedlot owners or operators, livestock brokers, meat packers, or canneries 
• Ownership, management, or the operations of—or certain financial data concerning—
 farms or ranches participating in USDA programs 
• Retail grocery stores authorized to accept food stamps 
• Rural electric or telephone cooperatives 
• Applications for and receipt of loans, loan guarantees, grants, or contracts with or from 
USDA agencies 
• Applications for and indemnities paid by federal crop insurance 
• Logging (tree harvesting) companies that remove timber from national forests 
• Certain improvements to farm land 
• The import or export of agricultural commodities, animals, or plants 
• Personnel data on current or former USDA employees 
 
The USDA headquarters are at 1400 Independence Avenue SW, Washington, D.C. 20250 
and can be called at (202) 720-6858. The USDA’s website is www.usda.gov. 
 
Department of Commerce 
The Department of Commerce is focused on promoting economic growth, and it maintains 
information on international trade, social and economic conditions, trends, patents, 
trademarks, ocean studies, domestic economic development, and minority businesses. It has 
foreign country experts who can direct examiners to sources of business information on any 
country in the world 
 
The Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), a division of the Department of Commerce, 
maintains lists of persons and entities who have been denied the right to export or import 
goods. The BIS’s website is www.bis.doc.gov. 
 
The Department of Commerce is located at 1401 Constitution Avenue NW, Washington, 
D.C. 20230 and can be called at (202) 482-2000. Their website is www.commerce.gov. 
 
Social Security Administration Records 
The Social Security Administration retains original applications for Social Security numbers. 
Applications list an applicant’s name (maiden and married names for women), date of birth, 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.434   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
place of birth, sex, race, parents’ names, and address at time of application. If a Social 
Security number is known, it might lead to helpful information regarding the location where 
the card was issued. Because many people apply for a Social Security number at a young age, 
these records can help to locate an individual’s place of birth.  
 
There are nine digits in the Social Security number. With the exception of the 700 series, the 
first three digits reflect the state of issue. Some states and Puerto Rico have more than one 
series of numbers. The last six digits are individual identifiers. Here is a listing of the states 
of issue of the first three digits: 
 
Social Security Number Chart 
Initial Numbers  State of Issuance  
001–003 New Hampshire 
004–007 Maine 
008–009 Vermont 
010–034 Massachusetts 
035–039 Rhode Island 
040–049 Connecticut 
050–134 New York 
135–158 New Jersey 
159–211 Pennsylvania 
212–220 Maryland 
221–222 Delaware 
223–231, 691–699* Virginia 
232–236 West Virginia 
237–246, 232, 681–690* North Carolina 
247–251, 654–658* South Carolina 
252–260, 667–675* Georgia 
261–267, 589–595, 766–772 Florida 
268–302 Ohio 
303–317 Indiana 
318–361 Illinois 
362–386 Michigan 
387–399 Wisconsin 
400–407 Kentucky 
408–415, 756–763* Tennessee 
416–424 Alabama 
425–428, 587, 588*, 752–755*   Mississippi 
429–432, 676–679* Arkansas 
433–439, 659–665* Louisiana 
440–448 Oklahoma 
449–467, 627–645 Texas 
468–477 Minnesota 
478–485 Iowa 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.435 
486–500 Missouri 
501–502 North Dakota 
503–504 South Dakota 
505–508 Nebraska 
509–515 Kansas 
516–517 Montana 
518–519 Idaho 
520 Wyoming 
521–524, 650–653* Colorado 
525, 585, 648, 649* New Mexico 
526–527, 600–601 Arizona 
525–529, 646–647 Utah 
530, 680* Nevada 
531–539 Washington 
540–544 Oregon 
545–573, 602–626 California 
574 Alaska 
575–576, 750–751* Hawaii 
577–579 District of Columbia 
580 groups 01–18 (groups 20 above PR) Virgin Islands 
580–584, 596–599 Puerto Rico 
586 Guam, American Samoa, Northern  
  Mariana Islands, Philippine Islands 
700–728 Railroad employees under the   
  special retirement act** 
729–733 Enumeration at Entry 
 
*    New areas allocated but not yet issued 
**  Issuance of these numbers to railroad em ployees was discontinued July 1, 1963. 
 
Department of Defense  
The Department of Defense (DOD) maintains information concerning military pay, 
dependents, allotments, deposits, and other financial information is maintained by the 
entities listed below. 
 
Army 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Indianapolis Center 
Indianapolis, IN 46249-0001 
(888) 332-7366 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/ArmyContacts.html 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.436   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Air Force 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Denver Center, Lowry Air Force Base 
Denver, CO 80279-5000 
(888) 332-7411 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/airforcecontacts.htm 
 
Navy 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Cleveland Center 
1240 East Ninth Street 
Cleveland, OH 44199-2055 
(888) 332-7411 or (216) 522-5096 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/navycontacts.html 
 
Marine Corps 
Defense Finance and Accounting Service 
Kansas City Center 
Kansas City, MO 64197-0001 
(800) 756-4571 or (614) 693-8507 
www.dfas.mil/about/Contacts/marinecorps.html 
 
Department of Education 
The Department of Education’s Inspector Ge neral maintains financial and earnings 
statements from parents of students applying for Pell Grants (formerly called Basic 
Educational Opportunity Grants). 
 
Department of Housing and Urban Development 
The Department of Housing and Urban Development’s (HUD) Compliance Division 
conducts investigations of alleged HUD violations. This division handles investigations of 
false statements on credit applications for Federal Housing Administration (FHA) loans, 
mortgagers’ certification of no outstanding obligations, cost certificates, and other areas of 
fraud. HUD maintains central index files in Washington, D.C., containing information 
regarding HUD programs and participants, including such individuals and businesses as 
mortgage companies, developers, and borrowers. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.437 
Department of Justice 
The Department of Justice’s U.S. National Central Bureau of the International Criminal 
Police Organization (USNCB-INTERPOL) has direct contact with law enforcement 
authorities in more than 185 INTERPOL memb er countries. The USNCB, therefore, can 
request information regarding ownership, previous investigations, and any other material  
legally releasable. The information available is determined by the laws of the countries from 
which the material is requested. 
 
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) is a principal law 
enforcement agency within the United States Department of Justice that is dedicated to 
preventing terrorism, reducing violent crime, and protecting the United States. The  
ATF retains: 
• Data on distilleries; wineries; breweries; ma nufacturers of tobacco products; wholesale 
and retail dealers of alcoholic beverages; and certain other manufacturers, dealers, and 
users of alcohol 
• Investigative reports of alleged violations under its jurisdiction 
• A list of federally licensed firearms manufacturers, importers, and dealers 
• A complete list of all federally licensed explosive manufacturers, importers, and dealers 
• Data on firearms licenses given; also conducts firearms licensee qualification and 
compliance inspections 
 
Department of Labor 
The Department of Labor (DOL) has information about the Federal Employees 
Compensation Act, the Job Partnership Training  Act, the Occupational Safety Health Act, 
and the Mine Safety Health Act. The Department  retains substantial data on businesses that 
have special work programs affiliated with it. 
 
Under the Employment Standards Administration of the DOL, the Office of Labor-Management 
Standards (OLMS) administers and enforces most of the provisions of the 
Labor-Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA). The LMRDA has 
reporting requirements for certain labor organizations, union officers and employees, 
employers, labor relations consultants, and surety companies. The LMRDA requires covered 
labor organizations to annually file reports with the OLMS. The information required 
includes names and titles of officers; rates  of dues and fees; loans receivable; other 
investments; other assets; other liabilities; fixed assets; loans payable; sales of investments 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.438   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
and fixed assets; disbursement to officers;  disbursement to employees; purchase of 
investments and fixed assets; benefits; and contributions, gifts, and grants.  
 
In addition, surety companies that issue bonds required by LMRDA or the Employee 
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA) are required to report premiums received 
and claims paid. 
 
Department of State 
The Department of State maintains data on import and export licenses. The State 
Department’s Bureau of Diplomatic Security has information relating to previous 
investigations conducted by that office. The Bureau of Diplomatic Security is a world leader 
in international investigations; threat analysis; cyber security; counterterrorism; security 
technology; and protection of people, property, and information. 
 
Department of the Treasury 
The Department of the Treasury includes several statutory inspector general law 
enforcement agencies.  
 
Within the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), the Criminal Investigation (CI) Division 
conducts investigations of tax fraud relating to income tax, excise tax, occupational tax, and 
violations of currency-transaction reports. Enforcement efforts include tax violation, money 
laundering, currency crimes, and asset forfeiture. The release of taxpayer information to 
other than IRS personnel requires special procedures. The IRS Inspection Service maintains 
information on subjects of investigation and their relationships to IRS employees (e.g., 
threats made against, collusion with, and bribery of IRS employees). 
 
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) safeguards the financial system from 
the abuses of financial crime, including terrorist financing, money laundering, and other illicit 
activities. FinCEN works to maximize information sharing among law enforcement agencies 
and its other partners in the regulatory and financial communities. Through cooperation and 
partnerships, FinCEN’s network approach encourages cost-effective and efficient measures 
to combat money laundering domestically and internationally. The USA PATRIOT Act 
section 314(b) permits financial institutions, upon providing notice to the United States 
Department of the Treasury, to share information with one another in order to identify and 
report to the federal governmental activities that may involve money laundering or terrorist 
activity. However, access to these records by outside parties is extremely limited. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.439 
Department of Homeland Security 
Under the Border and Transportation Directorate of the Department of Homeland Security, 
the U.S. Customs and Border Protection Service retains data on businesses that are involved 
in imports and exports, including lists and records of importers, exporters, custom house 
brokers, and truckers. The Office of Investigations looks into alleged violations of import 
and export practices. The Customs and Border Protection Service is also involved in the 
National Narcotics Border Interdiction System, and special agents from the Office of 
Investigations have been participating in the Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task 
Force. Customs might provide information relative to businesses that violate the statutes  
it enforces. 
 
The U.S. Secret Service maintains records on forgers, counterfeiters, and businesses that 
have contacted the Service concerning forged or counterfeit obligations of the United States, 
such as Treasury notes. In addition, the Treasurer of the United States can provide copies of 
canceled checks paid by the U.S. Treasury. The Secret Service also investigates counterfeiting 
and other financial crimes, including financial institution fraud; identity theft; computer 
fraud; and computer-based attacks on our nation’s financial, banking, and 
telecommunications infrastructure.  
 
Department of Veterans Affairs 
Records of loans, tuition payments, insurance payments, and nonrestrictive medical data 
related to disability pensions are maintained at VA regional offices  located in several 
metropolitan areas throughout the country.  
 
Drug Enforcement Administration 
The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) maintains information on licensed handlers 
of narcotics and the criminal records of users, pushers, and suppliers of narcotics. 
 
Federal Aviation Administration 
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) maintains records reflecting the chain of 
ownership of all civil aircraft in the United States. These records include documents about 
the manufacture, sale, transfer, inspection, and modification of an aircraft, including the bill 
of sale, sales contract, mortgage, and liens. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.440   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The FAA also maintains records on pilots, aircraft mechanics, flight engineers, and other 
individuals whom it certifies for flight safety positions. These records include information on 
certificates held, medicals, and law enforcement history. 
 
Federal Bureau of Investigation 
An agency within the Department of Justice,  the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) 
provides information on criminal records and fingerprints, as well as nonrestricted 
information pertaining to criminal offenses and subversive activities. It also provides 
information about wanted, missing, and unidentified people and foreign fugitives. The FBI 
currently investigates cases involving counterterrorism, counterintelligence, cyber crime, 
public corruption, civil rights, white-collar crime, organized crime, major thefts, and  
violent crimes.  
 
The Integrated Automated Fingerprint Identification System, more commonly known as 
IAFIS, is a national fingerprint and criminal-history system maintained by the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services (CJIS) Division. The IAFIS 
provides automated fingerprint search capabilities, latent searching capability, electronic 
image storage, and electronic exchange of fingerprints and responses 24 hours a day, 365 
days a year. As a result of submitting fingerprints electronically, agencies receive electronic 
responses to criminal 10-print fingerprint submissions within two hours, and within 24 
hours for civil fingerprint submissions.  
 
The IAFIS maintains the largest biometric database in the world, containing the fingerprints 
and corresponding criminal history information for more than 55 million subjects in the 
Criminal Master File. The fingerprints and corresponding criminal history information are 
submitted voluntarily by state, local, and federal law enforcement agencies. 
 
Federal Communications Commission 
The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) licenses all radio operators in the United 
States. Individuals or corporate bodies applying for authority to construct new broadcast 
stations or to change existing stations also must file with the FCC. Information contained in 
the filings includes details on programming, technical aspects of the proposed facilities, 
ownership, and financial status. 
 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission 
Electric utility and natural gas companies are required to file annual reports with the Federal 
Energy Regulatory Commission. The reports provide excellent financial pictures of the 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.441 
companies and provide information about officers, directors, and stockholders who own 
more than 10 percent of the company. 
 
Federal Highway Administration 
The Federal Highway Administration licenses, regulates, inspects, and registers all motor 
carriers operating in interstate commerce. It keeps records of its inspections of motor 
carriers and a history of violations of each carrier. 
 
Federal Maritime Commission 
The Federal Maritime Commission investigates applicants for licenses to engage in 
oceangoing freight-forwarding activities. Applicants provide information to the Commission 
covering most aspects of their history, including name, residence, date and place of birth, 
and citizenship of all corporate officers and directors; names of partnership members of 
individual proprietors; and names of direct holders of 5 percent or more of company stock. 
 
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority  
In 2007, the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) was created through the 
consolidation of NASD and the member regulation, enforcement, and arbitration functions 
of the New York Stock Exchange. FINRA is dedicated to investor protection and market 
integrity through effective and efficient regulation and complementary compliance and 
technology-based services.  
 
FINRA touches virtually every aspect of the securities business—from registering and 
educating industry participants to examining securities firms; writing rules; enforcing those 
rules and the federal securities laws; informing and educating the investing public; providing 
trade reporting and other industry utilities; and administering the largest dispute resolution 
forum for investors and registered firms. It also performs market regulation under contract 
for the NASDAQ Stock Market, the American Stock Exchange, the International Securities 
Exchange, and the Chicago Climate Exchange.  
 
Securities broker-dealers must register with the SEC and in those states where they plan to 
do business. If they plan to do business with the public they must also become FINRA 
members. Typical registration requirements for the SEC, states, and NASD include business, 
financial, disciplinary information, and disclosure of criminal convictions. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.442   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
General Services Administration 
The General Services Administration (GSA) has considerable information on architects, 
engineers, personal property auctioneers, real estate appraisers, construction contractors, 
sales brokers, and businesses that contract with the GSA. The agency also maintains the 
“GSA Consolidated List,” a computerized roster of suspended and debarred bidders. 
 
The GSA is also responsible for the Excluded Parties List System (EPLS), which is an 
electronic, Web-based system that identifies parties that excluded from receiving federal 
contracts, certain subcontracts, and certain types of federal financial and nonfinancial 
assistance and benefits. The EPLS keeps its user community aware of suspected terrorists, 
individuals barred from entering the United States, and those subject to administrative and 
statutory exclusions. The user is able to search, view, and download both current and 
archived exclusions. 
 
National Aeronautics and Space Administration 
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is responsible for the nation’s 
public space program and long-term aerospace research. More than 90 percent of NASA’s 
multibillion-dollar budget goes to NASA contractors. Files maintained by its Office of 
Procurement contain information about a contractor and its employees. NASA requires that 
contracting firms submit the following data with their proposals: name and qualifications of 
the contractor and resumes of the personnel who will be directly assigned to the project. The 
resumes should include educational background, work experience, length of service with the 
firm, and projects on which these individuals have worked. 
 
National Archives and Records Administration 
The National Archives and Records Administration operates federal records centers 
throughout the country, including the National Personnel Records Center in St. Louis, MO, 
and the Federal Register and the National Archives Building in Washington, D.C. It also is 
responsible for regional archives and the presidential libraries. The National Personnel 
Records Center in St. Louis stores the personnel records of former members of the armed 
forces and former federal civilian employees. Procedures for investigative inquiries into these 
records are available from the Center. For information, call +1 (314) 801-0800. 
 
The Federal Register is the medium for notifying the public of official agency actions; all 
federal regulations must be published in it. The Office of the Federal Register provides a 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.443 
periodic workshop on the use of the Federal Register as an information source. A handbook 
on the uses of the Federal Register  is also available. For information, call +1 (202) 741-6000. 
 
National Railroad Passenger Corporation 
The National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) maintains information on 
passengers, including reservation histories, methods of payment, and dates of travel; the 
railroad industry; railroad contractors; subcontractors; vendors; and train routes and 
schedules. 
 
Nuclear Regulatory Commission 
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) maintains applications and licenses of people 
and companies that export nuclear material and equipment from the United States. The 
NRC determines whether proposed exports would be inimical to our defense and security 
and, for certain exports, whether they come under the terms of an agreement that establishes 
the ground rules for nuclear cooperation and trade between the United States and the 
country of destination. 
 
Office of Foreign Assets Control 
The Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) is an office within the Department of the 
Treasury charged with administering and enforcing U.S. sanction policies against targeted 
foreign organizations and individuals who sponsor terrorism and international narcotics 
traffickers. OFAC maintains a list of individu als, governmental entities, companies, and 
merchant vessels around the world that are known or suspected to engage in illegal activities. 
Persons or entities on the list, known as Specially Designated Nationals and Blocked Persons 
(SDNs), include foreign agents, front organizations, terrorists and terrorist organizations, 
and drug traffickers. The list contains thousands of variations on names of individuals, 
governmental entities, companies, and merchant vessels and is updated on a regular basis. 
Current information on licenses issued with regard to SDNs and other blocked persons may 
be obtained or verified by calling OFAC Licensing at (202) 622-2480. 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission Records 
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) maintains public records of corporations 
with stocks and securities sold to the public. These records include the following 
information: 
• Financial statements 
• Identification of officers and directors 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.444   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Identification of owners of more than 10 percent of a business’s stock 
• A description of the registrant’s properties and businesses 
• A description of the significant provisions of the security to be offered for sale and its 
relationship to the registrant’s other capital securities 
• Identification of events of interest to investors 
• Identification of accountants and attorneys 
• A history of the business 
 
The SEC also maintains files on individuals and firms reported to it for violating federal or 
state securities laws. The information in these files pertains to official actions taken against 
such people and firms, including denials, refusals, suspensions, and revocations of 
registrations; injunctions, fraud orders, stop orders, and cease-and-desist orders; and arrests, 
indictments, convictions, sentences, and other official actions. 
 
Moreover, changes in beneficial ownership by officers, directors, and principal stockholders 
of securities listed and registered on a national securities exchange or of securities of public 
utility companies and certain closed-end investment companies can be accessed through the 
SEC’s EDGAR system, on the SEC’s website. Also, as of September 2008, this information 
can also be accessed on the SEC’s new IDEA (Interactive Data Electronic Applications) 
system. IDEA will at first supplement and then eventually replace the EDGAR system, 
which will become an archive of SEC filings made prior to the introduction of the IDEA 
system. 
 
Most of a company’s information filed with EDGAR and IDEA can be obtained in 
electronic form by using the online SEC search feature at www.sec.gov. To obtain paper 
copies of SEC records and documents, historic SEC filings, special reports and studies, 
speeches, and testimony, contact the Office of Investor Education and Advocacy at (202) 
551-8090 or through e-mail at PublicInfo@sec.gov. 
 
Some important corporate filings with the SEC are discussed below.  
 
Annual Report of Publicly Traded Company (Form 10-K) 
Form 10-K is an annual reports required by the SEC; it contains the company’s income 
statement and balance sheet, information on its debt structure, foreign ownership, properties 
owned, subsidiaries, industry descriptions, depreciation, dilution, and other key business 
information. If the filing company has filed for bankruptcy, been the target of a shareholder 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.445 
lawsuit, or been sued for patent infringement, such information may also show up in the 10-
 K. Excerpts or complete reports are available via LexisNexis or Dialog databases. 
 
Quarterly Report of Publicly Traded Company (Form 10-Q) 
Form 10-Q is same as the Form 10-K, but it  must filed quarterly instead of annually 
 
Special Events in Publicly Traded Company (Form 8-K) 
Form 8-k, which is one of the most common types of forms filed with the SEC, is filed to 
notify investors of any unscheduled material corporate event.  
 
Registration of Security (Form 8-A) 
Form 8-A is one of the forms used to register securities for offering to the public; it contains 
information regarding the type of security, details of the issuance, and information about the 
issuer.  
 
Registration of Security by Successor (Form 8-B) 
Form 8-B is a filing with the SEC that concerns the registration of securities of certain 
successor issuers; it contains the name of issuer and the relationship to the primary 
registrant/issuer. 
 
Special Events in Foreign Security (Form 6-K) 
Foreign private issuers must submit a Form 6-K. The information contained in a Form 6-K 
is similar to that contained in a Form 10-K and a Form 8-K. 
 
Report of Acquisition of Beneficial Ownership of 5 percent or More of Capital Stock of Public Company (Form 13-D) 
Form 13-D must be filed when an investor acquires five percent of any public company. 
This form contains a description of the security, any agreements or other undertakings by 
the reporting entity, the sources of funds for the acquisition, the purpose of the acquisition, 
and the relationship of the parties. Also, if acquisition results in change of control, it 
contains background information on each person reporting. 
 
Federal Trade Commission Filings 
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which is the federal agency responsible for 
enforcement of the Fair Credit Reporting Act, archives information on actions taken against 
companies and individuals, as well as consent decrees  (i.e., judicial recognition of an agreement 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.446   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
between parties to a suit) and judgments against companies and individuals. Detailed 
information on particular companies or actions is available through a request under the 
Freedom of Information Act. 
 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration Records 
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) is charged with the 
enforcement of legislation designed to protect employees who raise complaints about the 
health and safety of their workplace. OSHA information includes the name, address, 
county/country, number of employees, and SIC code of any business subject to a health and 
safety inspection; purpose and scope of the in spection; office and officer conducting the 
inspection; hours spent; and total number of vi olations and penalties assessed as a result of 
the inspection. A search of OSHA information also encompasses all parallel state agencies. 
 
Interstate Commerce Commission 
The Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) identifies liability and car insurance carriers for 
all surface transportation companies engaged in interstate and foreign commerce. 
Information kept by the ICC includes the identification and address of the insurance carrier, 
the limits of the insurance policy, the policy number, and the status.  
 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) is a federal agency that provides support to 
small businesses. The SBA guarantees loans made by private lenders and makes direct loans 
for business construction, expansion, or conversion; for purchase of machinery, equipment, 
facilities, supplies, or materials; and for work ing capital. A loan applicant (sole owner, 
partnership, corporation, or other) must complete SBA forms, providing information about 
the business and its principals (owners, officers, and directors). 
 
Additionally, the SBA arranges contracts and guarantees loans for qualified, small, minority-
 owned businesses. For some of these businesses, the SBA might be the only source for 
financial and other information about the businesses, their principals, their assets, and other 
data. Because their stock is not publicly held, these businesses are not subject to public 
disclosure laws.  
 
The SBA also connects small firms owned by socially and economically disadvantaged 
Americans with contracts set aside by other federal agencies for the purposes of increasing 
opportunities for small businesses generally.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.447 
United States State Department 
The United States State Department (known as the State Department) is responsible for the 
country’s international relations. It maintains the International Traffic in Arms Regulations 
(ITAR) Debarred List, which contains a list of  parties barred from participating in the 
exportation of defense articles (e.g., technical data, or in the furnishing of defense services 
for which a license or approval is required) under the International Traffic in Arms 
Regulation (22 CFR Sec. 127.7).  
 
Treasury Direct 
Treasury Direct is a financial services website that allows individuals to buy and redeem 
securities from the Department of the Treasury in electronic form. It maintains information 
on purchased and redeemed U.S. saving bonds (registered bonds), marketable securities, and 
special securities. Specifically, the information includes the series of bonds involved and the 
surname, given name, middle name or initial, and address of each person in whose name 
bonds were purchased.  
 
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services 
Formerly the Immigration and Naturalization Service, the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration 
Services (USCIS) is a bureau of the Department of Homeland Security. The USCIS is 
charged with overseeing lawful immigration in the United States, and it retains a number of 
records, including alien registration records issued after August 27, 1940 (from July 1, 1920, 
to August 27, 1940, each immigrant was given an Immigrant’s Identification Card); lists of 
passengers and crews on vessels from foreign ports; passenger manifests and declarations 
(ship, date, and point of entry); naturalization records (names of witnesses to naturalization 
proceedings and acquaintances of the individual); deportation proceedings; and financial 
statements of aliens and people sponsoring an immigrant entry. 
 
U.S. Coast Guard 
The Coast Guard is a branch of the armed forces that carries out three basic roles: maritime 
safety, maritime security, and maritime stewardship. It maintains names of merchant 
mariners on U.S. vessels and investigative records pertaining to them, records relating to 
maritime drug smuggling, records on criminal investigations, and records on documented 
U.S. vessels.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.448   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
U.S. Government Accountability Office 
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is  the audit, evaluation, and investigative 
agency of the United States Congress. GAO’s Internet home page provides access to recent 
GAO audit products and comptroller general decisions, as well as information on how to 
order paper copies of both recent and older GAO products. In addition, GAO audit 
products from fiscal year 1995 forward and recent decisions are available in electronic form 
at the Government Printing Office’s website. GAO products, including those not available 
on the Internet, may also be ordered by calling (202) 512-6000 or TDD (301) 413-0006. 
 
U.S. Postal Service 
The Postal Service, which is responsible for providing postal service in the United States, 
maintains valuable information, including the names and addresses of post office box 
holders. Check with the local post office to learn the identity of the inspector who can 
furnish the information. Photocopies of postal money orders and requests for copies of 
postal money orders are made through the local U.S. Postal Inspection Service office, usually 
by subpoena. 
 
Federal Procurement Data System 
The Federal Procurement Data System (FPDS) collects, develops, and disseminates federal 
contracting information. Many federal agencies report their contracts and purchases to the 
FPDS, which catalogs the information for government and public use. Contracts agreed 
upon as long ago as 1978 are searchable. The FPDS is best source for federal procurement 
information, and its website (www.fpds.gov) is also fairly explanatory and easy to navigate. 
 
FedWorld Information Network  
Established by The National Technical Information Service, FedWorld provides access to a 
comprehensive inventory of information disseminated by the Federal Government. 
Essentially, it is a one-stop shopping spot for federal governmental information, including a 
government locator database, U.S. Customs rulings, Supreme Court decisions, and a foreign 
news alert service. Its website is www.fedworld.gov. 
 
National Motor Vehicle Title Information System 
Established by the Anti-Car Theft Act of 1992, the National Motor Vehicle Title 
Information System (NMVTIS) is an electronic database used to authenticate and exchange 
key vehicle history data, such as titling information and certain theft data. The primary 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.449 
reason for creating the NMVTIS was to address the lack of conformity among state vehicle 
documentation laws, which is one of the key factors contributing to title fraud.  
 
The new database, effected on January 1, 2010, is designed to prevent title washing, which 
occurs when a vehicle’s brand (i.e., a permanent designation indicating that the vehicle has 
incurred damage through collusion, flood, fire, or other incident requiring repair) is removed 
by re-titling the vehicle in a state that doesn’t carry forward any brands on the new title.  
 
 
Non-Public Records 
 
Types of Non-Public Records 
As previously stated, non-public records—information about a person or business that is 
considered to be private and confidential—mig ht be needed in some fraud examinations. 
Some of the most valuable personal records include: 
• Banking records 
• Tax returns and related documents 
• Credit records 
• Telephone records 
• Credit card account records 
 
Banking Records 
Bank records are perhaps the single most important external financial source available to a 
fraud examiner. In addition to their use as evidence for fraud, banking records might provide 
leads on sources of funds, expenditures and personal affairs. These records help the 
examiner construct a paper trail to prove the fraud.  
 
Some of the records that should be reviewed, if available, are: 
• Account opening documentation 
• Monthly account statements 
• Checks written on the account 
• Loan files 
• Safe deposit box records 
• Currency transaction reports 
• Bank collection department records 
• Mortgage loan files 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.450   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Tax Returns and Related Documents 
Personal tax returns, if available, may provide indirect evidence of illicit payments, such as 
profits or losses from previously undisclosed business ventures, or interest and dividends on 
hidden certificates of deposit and bank accounts. The returns may also show deductions and 
expenses, such as real estate taxes, which may lead to previously unknown funds or assets. 
 
Credit Records 
Practically all lines of business have specialized credit-reporting associations that can provide 
credit information on individuals and businesses, including trade information, designation of 
lenders and creditors, types of businesses, date accounts were opened, terms of payment 
agreed upon, highest credit, balance owing, and paying habits. Some credit reports also give 
the name of the bank the subject does business with and the size of the subject’s accounts.  
 
In the United States, most consumer credit information is collected and maintained by the 
three national credit-reporting agencies: Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion. Generally, a 
subscription is required to obtain information from these sources, and their dissemination is 
governed by the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA). The FCRA places restrictions on when a 
consumer credit report can be obtained and used. In many cases, the consumer must be 
notified or must consent to the use of the report for employment purposes. Please consult 
the information on the FCRA presented previously in this chapter for more information 
about the legality of obtaining and using consumer credit reports.  
 
Credit reports are provided by credit reporting agencies, also known as credit bureaus. Credit 
reporting agencies are local or national institutions that collect data from various sources on 
individual consumer creditworthiness and report that data to their members or subscribers.  
 
There are essentially two types of credit reporting agencies. The first is known as a file-based 
credit reporting agency, which develops its information from credit files and public records. The 
other type is known as an investigative credit reporting agency, which gathers most of its 
information through interviews.  
 
Credit reporting agencies typically maintain the following information: 
• Consumer information, such as address, age, family members, employers, income levels, 
length of employment, the extent of other obligations, and the like 
• Account information, such as payment schedules, items purchased, defaults (if any), and 
buying habits 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.451 
• Marketing information, such as customers brok en down by age, sex, income levels, and 
other classifications 
• Information on current and former employers 
 
Information on the creditworthiness of a business organization may also be obtained from 
credit reporting agencies. The responses for such searches may include payment trends from 
creditors, public records (such as UCC filings and tax liens), banking information, and key 
facts as to the type of business and ownership. But unlike consumer credit information, 
business credit information is not restricted by the Fair Credit Reporting Act. 
 
Generally, credit reporting agencies obtain their information from the following sources: 
• Consumers, primarily from filling out application forms for credit. 
• Public records, which provide information on bankruptcies, court judgments, 
foreclosures, divorces, criminal convictions, registered chattel mortgages, and registered 
agreements.  
• The major credit grantors and collection agencies, which, as subscribers, regularly send 
their credit files electronically to the credit bureaus, resulting in files that include the 
account number, outstanding balance, and a nine-point scale indicating whether a 
payment was made on time.  
• Many credit grantors and collection agencies  only report payment information to one of 
the three national credit-reporting agencies, but larger creditors may report to more than 
one bureau. Some creditors, like utility companies, only report delinquent activity. Since 
the big three agencies do not share data among themselves, there will be differences 
between the credit reports from each credit bureau. 
 
In a typical credit information request, the potential creditor calls the credit bureau (or 
makes an online request) for information, and the creditor receives details regarding other 
credit histories of the individual, such as payment schedules and delinquencies.  
 
Information maintained by credit reporting agencies is regularly updated at the request of the 
consumer or by request of the credit grantor.  
 
Telephone Records 
Like other types of non-public information, telephone records can provide valuable insight 
into fraud examinations. For example, telephone records  may provide contacts with real 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.452   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
estate brokers or sellers, identify charge calls from vacation spots or contacts with co-
 conspirators, or provide other leads to assets and expenditures. 
 
Credit Card Account Records 
Credit card account records can be helpful when conducting a fraud examination. Credit 
card receipts will track the travels of the defendant, and, of course, record expenditures. An 
extremely high balance on a credit card may indicate a motive for the crime or provide 
circumstantial evidence of hidden income. Even modest credit card charges may provide 
leads to identifying hidden assets (e.g., charges for boating supplies purchased at a marina 
might indicate a need for further investigation to determine whether the subject owns an 
expensive boat). 
 
Gaining Access to Non-Public Records 
Non-public records are not available to the public and therefore, may be difficult to obtain. 
Despite the limitations on obtaining personal records, fraud examiner may be able to obtain 
non-public records by using one or more of the methods discussed below.  
 
Requesting the Records 
The simplest way to obtain relevant documents is to request them. This usually works for 
examiners representing large organizations that are important customers to the party with 
the information. Vendors and other customers of the company conducting the investigation 
may cooperate voluntarily if they have nothing to hide (or think that incriminating evidence 
cannot be found) and are anxious to maintain good relations with the company. 
 
Subpoenas 
Subpoenas and other legal processes, such as depositions, interrogations, and document 
requests, are available if a civil action is filed. For example, a wronged organization may file a 
civil or administrative action or make a criminal referral so that records can be subpoenaed. 
In a civil case, records such as bank accounts, brokerage accounts, travel, credit card, credit 
agencies, and telephone toll records may be obtained by subpoena. 
 
Conversely, records subpoenaed in a criminal case usually are available only to the 
government during the investigation and perhaps thereafter if not disclosed at trial. In 
addition, law enforcement agencies may also subpoena records, of course, but usually will 
not disclose them to the victim or third parties. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.453 
Demand as a Condition of Continued Business 
Similarly, an organization may demand that a supplier, vendor, or agent turn over relevant 
documents as a condition of continued business. Taking this action is legal, in appropriate 
circumstances. Of course, management and counsel should be consulted before such 
demands are made, particularly if the other party has a contractual relationship with the 
company. 
 
Exercise Audit Clause Rights 
An audit clause allows the parties to access the books of the other party. Thus, absent 
subpoena power, examiners may need to use audit clause rights to access contractor and 
subcontractor records and financial accounts.  
 
Unfortunately, most audit clauses are too narrow to provide useful information. However, if 
properly constructed, an audit clause can be a powerful method by which on-book 
information can be obtained. 
 
Negotiating 
Another method to obtain relevant documents is to negotiate with a party to the 
investigation as part of a deal to cooperate in exchange for leniency. In some cases, third-
 party facilitators, or others marginally involved in the wrongdoing, may agree to produce 
records and cooperate in exchange for a release of liability, indemnity, or commitment to 
continue the business relationship. Counsel and management must, of course, be involved in 
such decisions, as well as the fidelity bond carrier, if a claim is to be made under the bond. 
 
Consent  
Although unlikely, a target executive may voluntarily produce certain records (if he is 
blameless, thinks he is blameless, or thinks the investigators will not find the “smoking 
gun”), or execute a consent to obtain such records from banks, credit agencies, or the IRS. 
 
 
Commercial Sources of Information 
 
Associations and Lobby Groups 
Associations and lobby groups have information about their member firms. Two of the best 
sources are the Better Business Bureau and a city’s Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.454   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Better Business Bureau 
A number of Better Business Bureaus are located throughout the country. They are 
sponsored by local businesses and offer a variety of services, including background 
information on local businesses and organizations. The bureaus generally keep information 
about criminal rackets and cons and their operators and can provide information about the 
business reputations of local groups. 
 
Chamber of Commerce 
Chambers of Commerce generally have city directories and often keep back issues of the 
directories. They also have information regarding reputations of businesses and operators in 
the area. 
 
Abstract and Title Companies 
In addition to records of individual transactions, abstract and title companies often publish 
and distribute papers to attorneys, real estate brokers, insurance companies, and financial 
institutions. These papers contain information about transfers of property, locations, 
mortgage amounts, and release of mortgages. 
 
Bonding Companies 
Bonding companies provide bonding services, including surety bonds, license bonds, permit 
bonds, bid bonds, and so on. To get bonded, an entity will have to submit an application for 
a bond at a bonding company. The application for a bond contains the applicant’s (person or 
firm) financial statement and data. The information contained in a bond application is 
essentially the same information that is required in loan applications (though in greater 
detail). 
 
Credit Card Records 
Credit card records often contain valuable information concerning the individual debtor, but 
laws and regulations must be checked before obtaining these records. Information on 
expenditures can be obtained from firms such as MasterCard, American Express, Diners 
Club, Discover, and Visa. This information usually requires a subpoena. 
 
Stockbrokers 
Stockbrokers maintain information, which is similar to that which is maintained by financial 
institutions, on many of their clients, especially those who have margin accounts. And they 
maintain records of transactions for all clients. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.455 
Western Union 
Western Union is a non-bank money transfer provider, and it stores records for paid money 
orders. These records contain the original telegram, by purchaser or sender, and bank drafts 
by Western Union. Western Union retains orders for less than $1,000 for two years and 
orders of $1,000 or more for six years. 
 
Carfax 
Carfax is a private service that provides vehicle history information. It determines whether 
there is an odometer discrepancy or evidence of prior salvage or title washing. Carfax’s 
unique database contains more than five billion records. They receive information from 
thousands of sources, including all Departments of Motor Vehicles (DMVs) in the United 
States and Canada, as well as many vehicle inspection stations, auto auctions, fleet 
management and rental agencies, automobile manufacturers, and fire and  
police departments.  
 
International Air Transport Association 
The International Air Transport Association is an international industry trade group of the 
leading airlines, and it has information on all international matters dealing with aviation 
security, including counterterrorism efforts worldwide. It also monitors and attempts to 
prevent fraud against airlines, such as ticket fraud. 
 
International Foundation for Art Research 
The International Foundation for Art Research (IFAR) is a nonprofit organization 
established in 1969 to help prevent the circulation of forged and misattributed works of art. 
IFAR offers an Authentication Service to help resolve controversies concerning the 
authenticity of works of art. IFAR also publishes quarterly journals on authentication 
research, art law, theft and recovery, and an extensive listing of recently reported stolen and 
missing art and antiques. The IFAR’s website is www.ifar.org. 
 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners 
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners’ (NAIC) is an organization of 
insurance regulators from the 50 states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. territories. It 
provides a forum for the development of policy when uniformity is appropriate. A state 
regulator’s primary responsibility is to protect the interests of insurance consumers and the 
association helps regulators fulfill that obligation. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.456   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The NAIC’s website is a particularly effecti ve resource for consumer protection because 
potential investors can visit their site to verify if an insurance promoter is licensed to sell the 
investment. The NAIC’s website can be accessed at www.naic.org. 
 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
 
Types of Public Record Database Vendors 
Although there are many categories of public record professionals, this section focuses on 
three: commercial database vendors, search firms, and document retrievers.  
 
Commercial Database Vendors 
Commercial database vendors provide users access to very powerful archives of data that 
compile various public records in one searchable database. Unlike public databases, 
commercial databases generally contain a broad range of information and allow the user to 
search millions of records simultaneously. Because these databases contain diverse types of 
information, fraud examiners can use them for many different types of jobs. 
 
Although generally, commercial database vendors do not provide any more information than 
can be accessed from other sources, they have two distinct advantages—search speed and 
constant access. 
 
Generally, commercial database vendors are available online and allow users to retrieve 
requested information through a computer that is connected to the Internet. For such 
databases, there may be an initial access fee, monthly membership fees, or a one-time access 
fee. 
 
Search Firms 
Search firms specialize in locating assets and retrieving public documents. They use a variety 
of resources, including online services, databases, public records, private information 
sources, and private investigators.  
 
Document Retrievers 
Document retrievers are researches for hire; they obtain information by visiting government 
agencies in person. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.457 
Types of Information Available 
The types of information available from public record services include: 
• Credit reports 
• Driving records 
• County and state criminal convictions 
• Workers’ compensation records 
• Education records 
• Professional license records 
• Social Security records 
• Addresses 
• Telephone numbers 
• County and state real property records 
• Federal criminal and civil records 
• Consumer public filings 
• Military records 
• Names and addresses of neighbors 
• State and county civil records 
• Business public filings 
• Business credit reports 
• Corporate records (by state) 
• FAA registrations 
• Pleasure craft registrations 
• Vehicle registrations (by license number or name of person or company) 
• Federal bankruptcy court records 
• Grantor and grantee records 
• Abstracts of judgments 
• Tax liens 
 
Uses for Public Record Professionals 
Fraud examiners can use public record professionals to: 
• Obtain useful background information on subjects and witnesses, contractors and 
vendors, such as criminal and civil litigation, bankruptcies, management or sales 
information 
• Assist in the compilation of “financial profile s” and “net worth” analyses, to show that 
the subject is living beyond his or her means, or has financial problems, through real 
property, motor vehicle, UCC and other records of assets and expenditures 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.458   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Identify undisclosed outside businesses or income by subject employees 
• Show that shell companies or phantom vendors do not exist 
• Identify assets that might be seized or recovered 
• Help locate witnesses 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
There are a number of companies that offer wide access to public records, credit reports, 
and newspapers and periodicals. Some of the more commonly used sources are: 
• Asset Locator and Business Background Check by KnowX 
• US Datalink 
• infoUSA 
• CSC Diligenz 
• Dialog 
• LexisNexis 
• DCS Information Systems 
• G.A. Public Records Services 
 
A complete description of these services and other information available through the 
computer is discussed in the next chapter, “Accessing Information Online.” 
 
 
Directories 
Directories provide data on national, trade, business, and commercial associations. Some of 
the more frequently used directories are discussed below. 
 
D&B Directories 
D&B is a business and financial information services company, and it is the leader in 
business credit reports. D&B provides access to  a variety of resources and is renowned for 
products like America’s Corporate Families and the Million Dollar Database. 
 
America’s Corporate Families  
This three-volume print directory, published by D&B, provides complete detailed 
information on U.S. family members of foreign parent companies and foreign subsidiaries of 
U.S. corporations. It includes data on more than 13,000 U.S. subsidiaries, 1,900 U.S. 
ultimates, and 31,000 foreign subsidiaries.   
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.459 
D&B’s Million Dollar Database 
D&B’s Million Dollar Database provides access to information on approximately 23 million 
businesses in over 200 countries worldwide. Information available includes annual sales, 
corporate officers, locations, phone numbers, type of business, and number of employees. 
 
American Medical Association Directory of Physicians 
Available in four hardbound volumes, this directory, which is published by the American 
Medical Association, lists physicians alphabetica lly and geographically. Each physician listing 
contains information on state and city of practice, year of birth, medical school and year of 
graduation, year of license, residence and office address, specialty, and membership in 
associated medical organizations. The Directory also contains a name index of all doctors in 
the United States. 
 
Best’s Insurance Reports 
Best’s Insurance Reports presents comprehensive statistical reports of the financial position, 
history, and operating results of thousands of property/casualty or life/health insurance 
companies operating in the United States and Canada. The individual report on each 
institution includes a review of its history, management and operations, investments, 
operating results, and other statistical compilations. The Reports are available online, in print, 
or in CD.  
 
City Directories 
City directories usually contain the name, residence, occupation, and sometimes the place of 
employment of a city’s influential people. Such  directories can usually be found at public 
libraries, chambers of commerce, and secondhand bookstores. 
 
Congressional Directory 
The Congressional Directory is the official directory of the U.S. Congress. It presents short 
biographies on each member of the Senate and House, listed by state or district, and 
additional data, such as committee memberships, terms of service, administrative assistants 
and/or secretaries, and room and telephone numbers. It also lists officials of the courts, 
military establishments, and other federal departments and agencies, including Washington, 
D.C., governmental officials, governors of states and territories, foreign diplomats, and 
members of the press, radio, and television galleries. The directory is compiled by the Joint 
Committee on Printing, Washington, D.C., and is available through the Government 
Printing Office. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.460   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Gale 
Gale, part of Cengage Learning, is an educational publishing company. It is known for its 
online databases and multi-volume reference works. Some of its resources include: Gale Gale 
Directory Library, Gale Directory of Databases, Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and 
Broadcast Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, and Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
Gale Directory Library 
The Gale Directory Library provides online access to some of Gale’s most popular 
directories on companies, publishers, associations, and so on. It includes online access to  
Gale Directory of Databases, Gale Directories in Print, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast 
Media, Encyclopedia of Associations, Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources.  
 
With Gale Directory Library, users can use state-of-the-art functionality to perform a range 
of data sorting, filtering, and exporting. Users can use the library to find contacts, 
companies, individuals, or publications by searching with a name or keyword; generate lists 
and analyze trends by exporting data to Word or Excel; and search across a growing number 
of directory titles. Each directory can be searched individually by its own unique data fields, 
or the entire directory collection can be searched. 
 
Gale Directory of Databases 
This two-volume directory provides detailed descriptions of nearly 20,000 publicly available 
databases, database products, online services, and database vendors and distributors 
worldwide in a variety of formats. Entries include producer name and contact information, 
description, cost, and more.  
 
Detailed listings provide complete information on databases, producers, and vendors. 
Database listings include content and subject coverage, type, language, time span, update 
frequency, geographic coverage, producer contact information, and vendor availability. 
Producer and vendor entries feature full contact information, including address, phone, fax, 
website addresses, e-mail addresses, former names, branch office locations, and a list of 
available databases and products. For online vendors (or hosts), entries cover conditions of 
access, networks used, and gateway access. For portable vendors, entries include a list of 
distributors. The Directory of Databases is also available on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.461 
Directories in Print 
This publication, published by Gale, thoroughly describes and indexes about 16,000 
directories of all kinds, including business and industrial directories, professional and 
scientific rosters, foreign directories, and other lists and guides. Directories in Print  covers a 
wide range of subjects, including general business; manufacturing industries and commercial 
services; banking, insurance, and financial services; advertising, marketing, and public 
relations; health care services; law, military,  and government; and associations, philanthropy, 
ethnic groups, and religion. Directories in Print is available online on Gale Directory Library.  
 
Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  
This three-volume directory contains information on 57,000 radio and television stations, 
cable companies, and print-media publishers. Entries provide addresses, phone and fax 
numbers, e-mail addresses, website addresses, key personnel, owner information, hours of 
operation, and much more. Providing access to information on U.S., Canadian, and 
international media outlets, Gale Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  also includes ad 
rates, circulation statistics, local programming information, and other essential data. The 
Directory of Publications and Broadcast Media  is available online on the Gale Directory Library. 
 
Encyclopedia of Associations 
Gale publishes a series of Encyclopedia of Associations in regional, national, and 
international editions. It publishes the Encyclopedia of Associations: National Organizations of the 
U.S., which lists each chartered public and private association in the United States and 
provides valuable information about each association’s officers and purpose. In addition, 
publishes the Encyclopedia of Associations:  International Organizations  and the Ency clopedia of 
Associations: Regional, State, and Local. These Encyclopedias can be found online on Gale 
Directory Library. 
 
Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources 
Published by Gale, this comprehensive directory is a bibliographic guide to more than 
35,000 live, print, and electronic sources of information covering more than 1,100 subjects 
of particular interest to business professionals. Citations cover abstracts and indexes, 
almanacs and yearbooks, bibliographies, CD-ROM and online databases, directories, 
encyclopedias and dictionaries, periodicals and newspapers, research centers and institutes, 
statistic sources, trade and professional societies, and many other sources of business 
information. The Encyclopedia of Business Information Sources  is available online on Gale 
Directory Library. 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.462   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SEC Filings 
EDGAR 
EDGAR (Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval) is a system that collects 
documents submitted by companies and others who are required by law to file with the 
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). EDGAR performs automated collection, 
validation, indexing, acceptance, and forwarding of SEC filings. Its primary purpose is to 
increase the efficiency and fairness of the securities market to benefit investors, 
corporations, and the economy by accelerating the receipt, acceptance, dissemination, and 
analysis of time-sensitive corporate information filed with the SEC.  
 
Not all documents that public companies file with the SEC, however, will be available on 
EDGAR. Even so, several important documents, such as Form 10-K or 10-KSB, are 
required to be filed on the EDGAR system. For more information, visit 
www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml. 
 
Interactive Data Electronic Applications  
In August 2008, the SEC unveiled the successor to the agency’s EDGAR database, which 
will give investors far faster and easier access to key financial information about public 
companies and mutual funds. The new system is called IDEA, short for Interactive Data 
Electronic Applications. Based on a completely new architecture being built from the 
ground up, it will at first supplement and then eventually replace the EDGAR system.  
 
Currently, most SEC filings are available only in government-prescribed forms through 
EDGAR. Investors looking for information must sift through one form at a time, and then 
re-keyboard the information — a painstaking task. With IDEA, investors will be able to 
instantly collate information from thousands of companies and forms, and create reports 
and analysis on the fly, in any way they choose.  
 
In 2009, however, CaseWare International, the developer of IDEA — Data Analysis 
Software, filed suit against the SEC over the use of the IDEA name. That same year, the 
SEC agreed to discontinue its use of the mark IDEA. At this point, it is not clear what the 
SEC will call its new system.  
 
e-Government and Web Directory: U.S. Federal Government Online 
The e-Government and Web Directory is a guidebook for anyone looking for official U.S. 
governmental resources on the Internet. The directory contains more than 2,000 website 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.463 
records that provide descriptions and URLs for each site. U.S. government organization 
charts are supplemented with URLs for the 16  cabinet-level departments and agencies, the 
House of Representatives and the Senate, and the federal judicial branch. It also provides 
great detail on the House and Senate in two appendices. Appendix A provides a roster of 
congressional members with their websites, and Appendix B provides a listing of House and 
Senate committees with committee URLs and the names of chairpersons and ranking 
minority members. This print publication can be purchased at www.bernan.com. 
 
Factiva 
Factiva, from Dow Jones, is a business information and research tool. It is tailored for 
business and financial news searches, maintaining a catalog of more than 28,000 of the 
world’s leading news and business sources from  157 countries, 350 geographic regions, and 
in 23 languages. Factiva allows users to pay for only the articles downloaded and does not 
require an annual subscription. 
 
Carroll Publishing  
Carroll Publishing is a government information resource. It provides access to government 
information for all levels of government, and it offers a line of information products, 
including the Federal Directory and the Federal Organization Charts.  
 
Federal Directory 
Carroll Publishing’s Federal Directory combines all three branches of the government into 
one volume. It contains nearly 38,000 names, titles, telephone numbers, and e-mail addresses 
of senior- and mid-level governmental officials in the executive office of the president, all 15 
cabinet-level federal departments, independent agencies, U.S. Congress, and the federal court 
system. This directory features a keyword index to help users quickly find program and 
regulatory offices, and it is updated four times a year. 
 
Federal Organization Charts 
This loose-leaf chart produced by Carroll Publishing provides names, addresses, and 
telephone numbers of staff members in the White House, executive departments, 
independent agencies, quasi-governmental organizations, and congressional support offices. 
It has name and key word indexes and is updated monthly. Due to the high cost of 
maintaining this directory, it generally available at selected federal governmental libraries. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.464   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Foreign Representatives in the U.S. Yellow Book 
This directory has names and titles of more than 19,000 international business and 
governmental leaders and sections on corporations, financial institutions, foreign nations, 
intergovernmental organizations, foreign press, and law firms. It includes officials’ titles, 
addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. This yellow book is broken down into  
six sections: 
• Corporations: Lists more than 1,000 leading foreign-based corporations with more than 
2,000 U.S. offices and subsidiaries. 
• Financial institutions: Lists more than 230 leading foreign-based financial institutions 
and more than 600 U.S. representative offices. 
• Foreign nations: Lists embassies and consulates in 191 countries with permanent 
missions to the United Nations. 
• Intergovernmental organizations: Lists the U.S. offices in entities such as the United 
Nations, European Union, and the World Bank Group. 
• Foreign press: Lists more than 210 international media outlets with bureaus in the U.S. 
• Law firms: Lists foreign law firms with a U.S. presence. 
 
Index to Legal Periodicals 
Published by H. W. Wilson, the Index to Legal Periodicals offers international coverage and 
access to scholarly articles, symposia, jurisdictional surveys, court decisions, legislation, 
books, book reviews, and more. This source indexes more than 1,025 legal journals, law 
reviews, yearbooks, institutes, statutes, bar association publications, university publications, 
and governmental publications, with the full text of nearly 325 select periodicals available. 
 
Inmate Locator 
Inmate Locator is a Federal Bureau of Prisons on line database. It contains information on all 
federal prisoners incarcerated since 1982. The information includes physical description, 
inmate profile, inmate location or release location, numerical identifiers, personal history, 
security designation, past and present institution assignments, custody classification, and 
sentencing information. To locate an inmate, visit the Federal Bureau of Prison’s inmate 
locator at www.bop.gov. 
 
IHS Fairplay  
IHS Fairplay, formerly Lloyd’s Register—Fairplay, supplies a range of comprehensive 
shipping databases, registers, online information, and a tailored research and system-development 
service for customers’ specific needs.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.465 
Magazines for Libraries 
Published by Bowker, Magazines for Libraries lists almost every magazine (general, technical, 
and scholarly) that a library might wish to stock and describes the formats in which the 
magazines are available. 
 
Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory 
The Martindale-Hubbell Law Directory contains biographical information on most lawyers 
and law firms practicing in the United States and Canada. 
 
Mergent  
Mergent’s publications are similar to D&B’s. Mergent’s reports can provide information 
about firms listed on the New York and American stock exchanges as well as companies 
listed on regional American exchanges. Mergent also provides Mergent Online, which 
provides online access to Mergent’s comprehensive global company database. 
 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual and News Reports 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual and News Reports is a business and financial information 
resource containing information on nearly 2,000 corporations. It covers the field of finance 
represented by banks, insurance companies, investment companies, unit investment trusts, 
and miscellaneous financial enterprises. It also includes information on real estate companies 
and real estate investment trust. Additionally, it provides other relevant facts and figures, 
including information on corporations’ auditors, general counsel, exchange and symbol, 
number of employees, number of shareholders, address, telephone and fax numbers, 
shareholder-relations contact, stock-price ranges, dividends, report of independent auditors, 
transfer agents, stock splits, and annual meeting date.  
 
Mergent’s Bank and Finance News Reports  are published each month in print and each week 
online and contain material that updates Mergent’s Bank and Finance Manual. The reports 
include news items, interim financial statements, personnel changes, new company 
descriptions, merger proposals, details about new debts and stock issues, security offerings, 
announcements of new financing, and call notices.  
 
National Insurance Crime Bureau 
The National Insurance Crime Bureau (NICB) is a leading not-for-profit organization 
dedicated to preventing, detecting, and defeating insurance fraud and vehicle theft through 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.466   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information analysis, investigations, training, and public awareness. The NICB combats auto 
theft by investigating cases referred to it by insurers and through its online databases.  
 
The NICB publishes the Passenger Vehicle Identification Manual  annually. This manual contains 
the structure and decoding of vehicle identification numbers (VINs) from the last three 
model years for most U.S. and Canadian passenger vehicles, including light-duty trucks  
and motorcycles.  
 
The NICB publishes the Commercial Vehicle and Off-Road Equipment Identification Manual  every 
five years. This manual contains the structure of vehicle identification numbers for 
commercial vehicles and the structure of product identification numbers (PIN) for off-road 
equipment from the last five model years.  
 
These manuals also include: 
• Summary of the Federal Motor Vehicle Theft Prevention Standard, which requires VIN 
markings on major parts of passenger vehicles that are part of high-theft lines 
• General information on VIN structure and decoding of trucks, tractors, and trailers 
along with PIN structure and decoding for off-road equipment 
• Glossary of vehicle-related terminology 
 
VINCheck is another service available from  the National Insurance Crime Bureau. NICB’s 
VINCheck is a service provided to the public to  assist in determining if a vehicle has been 
reported as stolen. NICB’s VINCheck database contains vehicles that have been reported 
stolen by cooperating NICB members, but not recovered. A Vehicle Identification Number 
(VIN) is required to perform a search. This information is made available, free of charge, as 
a public service to help consumers determine whether a specific vehicle has been reported as 
stolen and to assist NICB and law enforcement in locating stolen vehicles. A maximum of 
five VINCheck searches can be conducted within a 24-hour period. 
 
In the 1980s, states and regions experiencing high levels of auto thefts began to form Anti-
 Car Theft (ACT) groups, funded by voluntary grants from coalitions of law enforcement 
groups, state funds, insurers, and consumers, to promote public awareness of vehicle theft 
and lobby for the passage of state legislation aimed at combating thefts. A few states have 
enacted Automobile Theft Prevention Authorities (ATPAs), which are nonprofit 
organizations dedicated to preventing motor vehicle thefts. States that have active ATPAs 
include Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Louisian a, Maryland, Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.467 
Texas, and Washington. State ATPAs are mostly funded by a small surcharge on drivers’ 
licenses or registration fees, or on auto insurance policies sold in the state. 
 
National Motor Vehicle Title Information System 
Established by the Anti-Car Theft Act of 1992, the National Motor Vehicle Title 
Information System (NMVTIS) is an electronic database used to authenticate and exchange 
key vehicle history data, such as titling information and certain theft data. The primary 
reason for creating the NMVTIS was to address the lack of conformity among state vehicle 
documentation laws, which is one of the key factors contributing to title fraud.  
 
The new database, which went into full effect on January 1, 2010, is designed in part to 
prevent title washing, which occurs when a vehicle’s brand (i.e., a permanent designation 
indicating that the vehicle has incurred damage through collusion, flood, fire, or other 
incident that requires repair) is removed by re-titling the vehicle in another state that does 
not carry forward any brands on the new title. 
 
The National Directory of Law Enforcement Administrators 
This annually updated database contains information on more than 40,000 listings, which 
include the names, addresses, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of highway patrol 
offices; prosecuting attorneys; municipal, county,  campus, state correctional, federal, military, 
airport, and harbor law enforcement agencies. 
 
National Trade and Professional Associations Directory 
The National Trade and Professional Associations lists more than 7,800 active national trade 
associations, professional associations, technical organizations, and labor unions, and the 
20,363 executives who run them. Each listing in this directory contains an address, telephone 
and fax number, e-mail address, name/title of top executives, purpose of the organization, 
history, membership size and composition, annual budget, staff size, publications, and 
annual meetings. It also provides a listing of firms that provide administration and 
management services to associations on a contract basis, including a list of their full-time 
client associations. Other features include cont act information, serial publications, upcoming 
convention schedule, membership and staff size, budget figures, and background 
information. The 2010 edition of the National Trade and Professional Associations directory 
can be purchased online through Columbia Books and Information Services, and it is 
available online at www.AssociationExecs.com. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.468   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The New York Times Article Archive 
The New York Times Article Archive contains the complete back file of the New York Times. 
It contains more than 13-million articles in all, and it can be searched at 
www.NYTimes.com. The archive is divided in to two sections: 1851 to 1980 and 1981 to 
present.  
 
PubMed 
PubMed is a database service that provides free access to more than 20 million citations 
from MEDLINE and other life science journals for biomedical articles dating back to the 
1950s. PubMed includes links to full-te xt articles and other related resources. 
 
Reader’s Guide to Periodical Literature 
The Reader’s Guide  is a reference guide to articles published in periodicals and scholarly 
journals. The guide contains a full dictionary catalog of all articles by author, subject, and 
title, where possible. The entries refer to the volume, number of the periodical, starting and 
inclusive pages of the article, date of publication, and graphic material in the article, such as 
portraits. There is an electronic retrospective version of the guide available for 1890 to 1982.  
 
Standard & Poor’s NetAdvantage  
NetAdvantage is a subscription-based service provided by Standard & Poor’s. It is a 
comprehensive source of business and investment information, offering online access to 
Standard & Poor’s independent research, da ta, and commentary on stocks, bonds, funds, 
and industries. This service also includes export tools to enable researches to download data 
into spreadsheet programs for further analysis. Some of NetAdvantage’s premium 
publications are discussed below. 
 
Corporation Records  
This directory has information on more than 10,000 public companies. Each description 
includes company background, stock and bond descriptions, balance sheet and earnings 
information, officers and directors, capital expenditures, subsidiaries, and more. 
 
Company Profile 
NetAdvantage also publishes a comprehensive company profile for more than 10,500 
publicly traded companies. Each profile includes  a business description, an interactive 
charting tool, statistics, analyst ratings, valuation and financial information, as well as the 
latest stock price quote, company news, and information on competitors.  
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.469 
Register of Corporations, Directors, and Executives 
The Register of Corporations, Directors, and Executives gives short summaries about 
corporate executives and directors, including their titles, the name of the company they work 
for, their academic credentials, membership in fraternal organizations, and available business 
and residential contact information. 
 
Register of Public Companies 
This Register provides brief descriptions of publicly traded companies, including stock 
symbol, total annual sales, number of employees, officer names, and North American 
Industry Classification System (NAICS) assignments. 
 
Register of Private Companies 
The Register of Private Companies provides hard to find information on approximately 
85,000 private companies, including (when available) their address, telephone number, 
officers and directors, total annual sales, number of employees, line of business, primary and 
secondary NAICS classifications, principal bank, law firm, accounting firm, and more. 
 
Security Dealers of North America 
The Security Dealers of North America is a listing of North American securities dealers, 
providing a brief description of each dealer’s business; a listing of the states in which it is 
registered to do business; the location of its ma in office; the names of its officers, clearing 
firm, associations, and memberships; and the number of employees and registered 
representatives it employs. 
 
The Global Banking Resource 
The Global Banking Resource (TGBR) is a comprehensive database of financial institutions, 
and it provides data on financial institutions’ contacts, correspondents, subsidiaries, affiliates, 
financial information, payment information, and much more. 
 
Yellow Book Series 
Associations Yellow Book 
The Associations Yellow Book, which is published by Leadership Directories, provides access to 
information on major trade and professional associations. Semiannual editions provide 
current information on chief staff executive turnovers, changes in staff and governing 
boards, mergers, and name changes. It features (1) more than 32,000 officers, executives, and 
staff, with the titles, affiliations, education, and telephone and fax numbers of more than 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.470   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
1,000 associations with budgets exceeding $2 million; (2) the addresses, e-mail addresses, 
Internet address, telephone numbers, and fax numbers of the associations’ headquarters and 
branches; (3) the associations’ board members and outside affiliations; (4) the associations’ 
committees and chairpeople, Washington representatives, political action committees, and 
foundations; (5) the associations’ publications, including editors; and (6) the associations’ 
annual budget, tax status, number of employees, and number of members. 
 
Corporate Yellow Book 
The Corporate Yellow Book is a directory of the people who manage, direct, and shape the 
largest public and privately held companies in the United States. Published quarterly, it 
enables subscribers to access corporate leaders, including board members who are taking 
increased responsibility for corporate decision-making and administrative-services 
professionals. The directory features (1) the names and titles of more than 26,000 executives, 
including more than 7,000 corporate board members and their outside affiliations; (2) the 
direct-dial telephone numbers of executives and more than 10,000 e-mail addresses for 
officers, management, and administrative-services professionals; (3) the addresses, telephone 
and fax numbers, and Internet addresses of each entity’s corporate headquarters, foreign 
subsidiaries, and divisions; (5) the contacts for each entity’s administrative services, such as 
benefits, corporate contributions, foundations, governmental affairs, information systems, 
libraries and information centers, purchasing, real estate and facilities, recruitment, and 
shareholder relations; and (6) four indexes:  organization, industry, geographical, and 
individual’s name. 
 
Judicial Yellow Book 
The Judicial Yellow Book provides detailed biographical information for state and federal 
judges and gives information on each judge’s staff, including law clerks. It features 
information on more than 2,200 federal judges and more than 1,300 state judges, providing 
depth and detail on each judge’s chambers. 
 
Law Firms Yellow Book 
The Law Firms Yellow Book has information on more than 700 of the largest law firms in the 
United States. It provides up-to-date information on changes in firm management and 
structure. It is also the only personnel directory that clearly identifies the partners who make 
a firm’s business decisions and supervise its practice areas, and the administration that 
manage its operations. It focuses on the administrators and attorneys in these firms, and it is 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.471 
indexed by practice area, law schools, geography, name, and organization (including affiliates 
and subsidiaries). It is published semi-annually. 
 
Municipal Yellow Book 
The Municipal Yellow Book  provides information on city and county governments and local 
authorities in the United States. It contains data on more than 38,000 elected and 
administrative officials, including their names, addresses, and telephone and fax numbers. It 
also contains sections on cities and counties, which feature complex hierarchies of municipal 
officials. This directory also has listings for local departments, agencies, subdivisions, and 
branches. 
 
News Media Yellow Book 
The News Media Yellow Book is a directory containing information on the leading news media 
organizations in the United States. It contains listings of more than 38,000 reporters, writers, 
editors, and producers. It features 10 sections — on newspapers, news services, networks, 
television stations, radio stations, programs, periodicals, non-U.S. media, publishers, and 
biographical index. This directory is fully updated on a quarterly basis. 
 
State Yellow Book 
The State Yellow Book provides information on members of the executive and legislative 
branches of the 50 state governments, as well as American Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, and 
the Virgin Islands. It has a subject and a personnel index, and it includes information on 
government officials, departments, agencies, and legislative committees. Informational 
profiles of all states and territories are also provided. This directory is fully updated on a 
quarterly basis. 
 
Federal Regional Yellow Book 
The Federal Regional Yellow Book is released semi-annually, and it describes federal regional 
offices located outside Washington, D.C. It contains information on more than 40,000 
regional directors and administrative staff members at federal departments and agencies. It 
also has information on administrators and professional staff at federal laboratories, research 
centers, military installations, and service academies. 
 
Financial Yellow Book 
The Financial Yellow Book is a semi-annual directory that lists the names and titles of more 
than 26,000 executives, including more than 4,000 board members, at more than 560 leading 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.472   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
financial institutions. The directory also has complete contact information, including address, 
telephone and fax numbers, and e-mail for executives and outside board members. The 
directory has four indexes — on organization, geographical location, individual name, and 
industry.  
 
Government Affairs Yellow Book 
The Government Affairs Yellow Book contains information on corporations; financial 
institutions; trade and professional associations; labor unions; interest groups including 
coalitions, public interest groups, governmental agencies; and governmental affairs 
organizations. It contains a section on federal, state, and municipal government that includes 
the governmental-affairs staff for federal agencies; state governments; and leading cities, 
counties, and authorities. Its “Government Affairs Representatives” section lists more than 
1,200 lobbying firms, law firms, and public relations firms. It details the issues that lobbyists 
contest, as well as the coalitions they form to advance their legislative agenda. Four indexes 
are included—on subject, geographical location, personnel, and master. 
 
 
Banks and Financial Institutions 
The relationship between banks and their customers is confidential, and there are numerous 
laws and regulations that protect consumers’ personal financial information held by financial 
institutions. 
 
Laws Limiting Access to Banking Records 
The primary law protecting the privacy of consumer information held by financial 
institutions is the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, which was signed into law in 1999. The Act 
required the federal government to adopt regulations requiring financial institutions to 
ensure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act also made it a crime for certain institutions—banks, stock 
brokerage firms, insurance companies, loan companies, credit card issuers, and credit 
bureaus—to obtain, disclose, or provide documents under false pretenses pertaining to a 
customer’s financial information.  
 
The Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act applies not only to people who use false pretenses, but also to 
any third party requesting the information when it is known or should be known that false 
pretenses will be used. But certain parties are exempted from this rule. Exempted parties 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.473 
include law enforcement agencies and insurance companies conducting related claims 
investigations. It also exempts state-licensed private investigators who are attempting to 
collect delinquent child support. 
 
Under the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, fraud examiners should be extremely careful about 
obtaining financial information from financial institutions.  
 
In addition to the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, the Right to Financial Privacy Act (12, U.S.C., 
§§ 3401-3422) also limit access to consumer in formation held by financial institutions. In 
general, the Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions from releasing a 
customer’s financial information to governmental agencies without the customer’s consent, a 
court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or other formal demand. Thus, if the government 
is requesting information, it must also comply with the Right to Financial Privacy Act. And 
even though the law applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and 
other financial institutions will not release such information to private parties absent legal 
process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
Types of Financial Records 
As a general rule of thumb, financial information can be obtained only by subpoena. If you 
are able to obtain a subpoena, the following financial information should be requested. 
 
Master Files of Customers  
The master files of customers (e.g., depositors, debtors, and safe deposit box holders) that 
are maintained by the bank should detail where all of its important records are stored.  
 
Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Valuable information can be obtained from a safe-deposit box record. These records usually 
provide the name(s) of the person(s) renting the box, how often a person visited it, the dates 
he visited it, and the times he visited it. The times and frequency of visits can be valuable if 
they correspond to times and dates of deposits or withdrawals from other accounts.  
 
The contents of a safe-deposit box, however, are not known by bank officials, and they are 
never recorded on the box holder’s file. More over, banks usually require the customer’s 
consent, a search warrant, or a court order before an authorized bank official can open a safe 
deposit box. 
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.474   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Account Opening Records 
Records required to open accounts at financial institutions can also be valuable. Savings 
account applications can provide handwriting samples and certain personal information 
about customers, varying from one bank to another. Likewise, applications for checking 
accounts should provide handwriting samples and certain personal information, varying 
from one bank to another. 
 
Records of Deposits 
Records of account deposits reflect the date of deposit, amounts of currency and checks, 
and the drawee banks of checks. Also, checking account deposit slips might identify the 
account holder’s financial associates. 
 
Records of Withdrawals 
Withdrawal records should reflect the date of withdrawal, the amounts of currency and 
checks, and the drawee banks of checks.  
 
Additionally, for large withdrawals, some banks will request that the customer give a reason 
for withdrawing the money. The customer is not required to give such information, and the 
bank cannot refuse to honor the withdrawal. Similarly, some savings and loan associations 
might demand notice on large withdrawals. 
 
Federal Regulatory Agencies 
Export-Import Bank of the United States 
The Export-Import Bank is the official export credit agency of the United States federal 
government. It loans funds to foreign countries and businesses to buy goods from U.S. 
companies. Borrowers can obtain up to 50 percent of the purchase price of the goods being 
acquired. Selling companies must submit a supplier certificate to the bank. This certificate 
must include a statement regarding commissions paid, especially in a foreign country, to 
foreign sales “represent atives” or “agents.” 
 
Farm Credit Administration 
The Farm Credit Administration oversees and regulates entities within the farm credit 
system, which is a network of borrower-owned lending institutions and related service 
organizations serving all 50 states and Puerto Rico. Some of the entities regulated are the 
Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation (which markets the securities the banks sell 
to raise loan funds), the Farm Credit System Financial Assistance Corporation (which 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.475 
provides capital through the purchase of preferred stock issued by institutions that received 
financial assistance from the Farm Credit System Assistance Board), and the Federal 
Agricultural Mortgage Corporation (which provides a secondary market for agricultural real 
estate and rural housing mortgages).  
 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) is an independent agency of the federal 
government that insures deposits in banks and savings associations.  
 
Federal or state banks or savings associations that apply to be insured by the FDIC must 
submit an application that covers financial history, financial condition, capital structure, 
management, future earnings prospects, convenience to and needs of the community, and 
consistency of corporate powers.  
 
FDIC insured banks are examined annually by FDIC insured examiners; FDIC savings 
associations are examined periodically by FDIC examiners. Each examination includes an 
appraisal of management, directors, officers, and staff.  
 
The examination reports contain white and pink sheets. The white sheets provide 
examination findings; a copy is given to the bank’s board of directors. The examiner, 
however, retains the pink sheets, which contain confidential information, including an 
alphabetical list of all directors, officers, and principal employees; their titles; and comments 
on every individual to the fullest extent possible. The examiner also comments on the 
capabilities of each individual, gives his approximate age, and cites other business affiliations. 
Additionally, the examiner completes a form for each individual, setting forth his estimated 
net worth, par value of stock owned, and salary. 
 
Inquiries regarding types of FDIC records available to the public (including records available 
under the Freedom of Information Act) should be directed to the appropriate FDIC 
regional office or to the Office of the Executive Secretary. 
 
Federal Housing Finance Board 
The Federal Housing Finance Board (Finance Board) is an independent regulatory agency in 
the executive branch. It succeeded the Federal Home Loan Bank Board and is responsible 
for administering and enforcing the Federal Home Loan Bank Act.  
 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.476   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Finance Board supervises the 12 federal home loan banks (FHLBs), which were created 
by the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, and issues regulations and orders for carrying out the 
Act’s purposes. Savings associations that make  long-term home mortgage loans are eligible 
to become members of an FHLB.  
 
In addition, the Finance Board implements community-oriented mortgage lending and 
affordable housing programs; prescribes rules and conditions under which banks are 
authorized to borrow; issues consolidated FH LB bonds, notes, or debentures that are the 
obligation of all FHLBs; and ensures that the FHLBs remain adequately capitalized and 
operate in a sound manner. 
 
The FHLB system provides a flexible credit re serve for member savings institutions engaged 
in home mortgage lending and includes 12 regional FHLBs that are federally chartered, 
privately capitalized, and independently managed. The 12 FHLBs help their member 
financial institutions meet their communities’ diverse housing-finance and economic-
 development needs. 
 
Each FHLB is capitalized by the capital-stock investments of its member financial 
institutions and its retained earnings. The proceeds of these stock investments are used to 
issue and sell consolidated obligations, which are sold to investors (e.g., commercial banks, 
foreign central banks, mutual funds, corporations, government agencies, and individuals).  
 
In addition, the FHLBs provide loans to their member financial institutions.  
 
Federal Reserve System 
The Federal Reserve System, which serves as the nation’s central bank, is a valuable source 
of information on banks that it has chartered.  
 
The Federal Reserve System’s Board of Gover nors regulates state-chartered banks that are 
members of the Federal Reserve System, their subsidiaries, and holding companies, as well as 
the activities of foreign banks that operate within the United States 
 
On an annual basis, reserve system examin ers visit and report on chartered banks. Their 
examination reports contain two parts: the open part, a copy of which is given to the bank, 
and the confidential part, which is kept by the reserve system and contains qualifications of 
management, lists of officers and directors, and background data on the officers. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.477 
A bank must file a registration statement for its securities. The registration statement must 
be followed by an annual report that provides considerable data on the securities issued as 
well as employment information on all directors and those who own more than 10 percent 
of any class of the bank’s securities. The Federal Reserve System maintains these statements. 
 
National Credit Union Administration 
The National Credit Union Administration regulates, insures, and supervises all federal credit 
unions as well as state-chartered credit unions that apply for its insurance. 
 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency 
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which is within the U.S. Department 
of the Treasury, regulates national banks and maintains information concerning them. The 
OCC conducts examinations of the national banks to determine their financial positions and 
to evaluate their assets. The bank examiners’ reports contain information about bank 
records, loans, and operations. In view of their purpose and the basis on which they are 
obtained, reports of national bank examinations, as well as related correspondence and 
papers, are considered confidential. Requests for these documents should include the 
subject’s name and address, the information desired, the reason it is needed, and the 
intended use. 
 
 
Investigative and Law Enforcement Information Centers and Databases 
 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System 
The National Law Enforcement Telecommunications System (NLETS) is the International 
Justice and Public Safety Information Sharing Network, which is a sophisticated 
communication network that links all law enforcement and criminal justice agencies in the 
United States, Puerto Rico, and, through a computerized link to INTERPOL, Canada.  
 
NLETS provides two basic capabilities to its users. First, it is an international, computer-based 
message-switching system that links together state, local, and federal law enforcement 
and justice agencies for the purpose of information exchange. Second, it provides 
information-services support for a growing number of justice-related applications. To 
accomplish this, NLETS supports data-communi cations links to state networks using a 
commercial frame-relay service. All agencies within each state are serviced through this state 
interface. Federal and international systems operate in much the same manner. The primary 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.478   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
NLETS operational site is located in the Arizona Department of Public Safety’s facility, and 
a disaster-recovery site that enables full resumption of operations in fewer than 30 minutes 
was developed with the Idaho State Police. 
 
The user population is composed of federal agencies with a justice component, selected 
international agencies, and all states and territories, all of which are cooperatively exchanging 
data. Agencies include state and local law enforcement groups, motor vehicle and licensing 
departments, and a variety of federal enforcement offices, such as the U.S. Customs Service, 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, Department of Justice, U.S. Secret Service, U.S. Marshals 
Service, Naval Investigative Service, Air Force Office of Special Investigations, Department 
of State, Department of the Army, and Department of the Interior. The National Auto 
Theft Bureau also is linked to NLETS. NLETS users can send free-form messages to other 
users either individually or via a broadcast message. 
 
A great deal of information is available to law enforcement through the network, including: 
• Vehicle registrations by license plate or vehicle identification number 
• Driver’s license and history by name and date of birth, or driver’s license number (some 
states support driver’s license queries by name only) 
• Criminal records by name and date of birth, state identification number, or FBI number 
• Boat registrations by hull number, registration number, or name 
• Snowmobile registrations by registration number, vehicle identification number, or 
owner’s name and date of birth 
• Hazardous material file by UN number, which is an internationally recognized code for 
hazardous material 
• Private aircraft tracking data by registration number or date range 
• Aircraft registrations by registration number, serial number, or name of registrant 
• Directory of participating agencies by originating agency identifier 
• Registration information on diplomatic license plates 
• Index to parole/probation and corrections information 
• Sex offenders registration information 
 
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police’s Canadian  Police Information Centre provides many 
additional files, including: 
• Wanted people by name and date of birth 
• Criminal history by name or FPS (Canadian national identification number) 
• Stolen vehicles by license number or vehicle identification number 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.479 
• Stolen articles by serial number 
• Stolen guns by serial number 
• Stolen securities by serial number, corporation name, issuer, or name of owner 
• Stolen boats and motors by license number, hull number, registration number, or name 
of owner 
 
Defense Clearance and Investigation Index 
The Defense Clearance and Investigations Index (DCII) is part of the Defense Security 
Service (DSS) that is overseen by the Department of Defense (DOD). 
 
The DCII is an automated index of DOD investigations and security decisions regarding 
personnel that have been made by DOD adju dicators. Normally, the DSS limits the DCII’s 
access to the Department of Defense and other federal agencies. 
 
El Paso Intelligence Center 
The El Paso Intelligence Center’s (EPIC) mission is to provide timely and expeditious 
support to federal, state, local, tribal, and international law enforcement agencies. Prior to 
2001, EPIC provided entities a complete and accurate intelligence picture of worldwide 
movements of transportable drugs, weapons, and illegal aliens into the United States. It 
analyzed raw data and provided tactical and operational intelligence to agencies involved in 
the antidrug effort. EPIC also provided strategic assessments of drug movement and 
concealment techniques. After September 11th, 2001, EPIC was called upon to support 
investigations to find those responsible for the terrorist attacks, and its mission expanded to 
include counterterrorism efforts. 
 
EPIC member agencies include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; 
Coast Guard; Department of Defense; Department of Homeland Security’s Customs and 
Border Protection; Department of Homeland Security’s Immigration and Customs 
Enforcement; Department of the Interior; Drug Enforcement Administration; Federal 
Bureau of Investigation; Internal Revenue Service; Marshals Service; National Drug 
Intelligence Center; Secret Service; and Tr ansportation Security Administration.  
 
Initially EPIC focused on the United States-Mexico border with an emphasis on Mexico’s 
heroin traffickers and illegal alien smugglers, but with the increased use of aircraft, seagoing 
vessels, and global networks to facilitate drug trafficking, EPIC’s focus broadened and 
became international in scope. EPIC serves federal agencies, all 50 states, the District of 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.480   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Columbia, Canada, Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virg in Islands, and Guam, and it supports law 
enforcement efforts conducted by its foreign counterparts throughout the world. It currently 
has Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with  Canada, Australia, and the Netherlands. 
 
Member agencies have direct access to all EPIC  information, with appropriate safeguards to 
provide for the protection and the secure communication of highly sensitive or classified 
information. State and local law enforcement entities have access to EPIC data through a 
designated group within the respective organization or through a member agency. 
 
Financial Crimes Enforcement Network 
The Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN)—an organization established by the 
U.S. Department of the Treasury—collects, analyzes, and disseminates intelligence on 
financial crimes. Its mission is to provide a government-wide, multisource intelligence and 
analytical network to support law enforcement agencies in the detection, investigation, and 
prosecution of financial crimes. The participating agencies are the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; U.S. Customs Service and Border Protection; Drug 
Enforcement Administration; Federal Bureau of  Investigation; Internal Revenue Service; 
U.S. Marshals Service; Postal Inspecti on Service; and U.S. Secret Service.  
 
FinCEN’s financial database c ontains information from reports required under the Bank 
Secrecy Act, including the Currency Transaction Report; Report of International 
Transportation of Currency or Monetary In struments; Currency Transaction Report by 
Casinos and Card Clubs and by Depository Institutions; Reports of Foreign Bank and 
Financial Accounts; Registrations of Money Services Businesses; Designation of Exempt 
Person; and Suspicious Activity Reports by Depository Institutions, Securities and Futures 
Industries, Insurance Industries, Casinos and Card Clubs, and Money Services Businesses. 
Furthermore, FinCEN has access to data from IRS Form 8300 (Reports of Cash Payments 
Over $10,000 Received in a Trade or Business). 
 
FinCEN produces two types of products: tactical support documents and strategic analyses. 
The tactical support products either provide information and leads on criminal organizations 
and activities that are under investigation by law enforcement or proactively identify 
previously undetected criminal organizations and activities so that investigations can be 
initiated. The FinCEN’s work product can also assist in identifying assets for seizure and 
forfeiture purposes and supporting ongoing investigations. Its strategic analyses look at 
financial crimes and money laundering with an emphasis on the future. FinCEN collects, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.481 
processes, analyzes, and develops intelligence on emerging trends, patterns, and issues 
related to the proceeds of illicit activities. 
 
FinCEN uses the majority of its resources to assist agencies in investigations of the financial 
aspects of the illegal narcotics trade. FinCEN then prioritizes investigations of such non-
 narcotic crimes as money laundering, Bank Secrecy Act violations, corruption, treason, 
bankruptcy fraud, financial institution fraud, and government contract fraud. In both the 
narcotic and non-narcotic areas, FinCEN concentrates on investigations of national or 
international criminal organizations. 
 
Interagency Border Inspection System 
The Interagency Border Inspection System (IBIS) was initiated in 1989 by U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection to improve border enforcement and to facilitate inspection of individuals 
applying for admission to the United States at ports of entry and pre-inspection facilities. 
IBIS is considered a presidential priority and receives White House guidance regarding 
policy, coordination, and control. U.S. Customs and Border Protection, law enforcement, 
and regulatory personnel from 20 other federal agencies or bureaus use IBIS. Some of these 
agencies are the Federal Bureau of Investigation; Interpol; the Drug Enforcement 
Administration; the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; the Internal 
Revenue Service; the Coast Guard; the Federal Aviation Administration; and the Secret 
Service. Information from IBIS is also shared with the Department of State for use by 
consular offices at U.S. embassies and consulates. IBIS strives to provide travelers with 
expeditious clearance at ports of entry while allowing border enforcement agencies to focus 
their limited resources on potentially non-compliant travelers. IBIS provides the law 
enforcement community with access to computer-based enforcement files on suspect 
individuals, businesses, vehicles, aircraft, and vessels. It also provides access to National 
Crime Information Center (NCIC) records on wanted persons; stolen vehicles, vessels, or 
firearms; license information; criminal histories; and previous federal inspections. IBIS  
users can also interface with all 50 states via the National Law Enforcement 
Telecommunications Systems.  
 
International Chamber of Commerce Commercial Crime Bureau 
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) established the Commercial Crime Bureau 
(CCB) in January 1992 to act as a focal point for fraud prevention and to encourage 
cooperation between commerce and law enforcement agencies. The CCB maintains an 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.482   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
extensive database on all aspects of commercial fraud. The CCS also operates Fraudnet, a 
unique global network of law firms that specialize in tackling business crime.  
 
International Criminal Police Organization 
The International Criminal Police Organizati on, better known by its radio designation 
INTERPOL, is a network of National Central Bureaus in more than 186 member countries 
that share information with each other to assist law enforcement agencies in the detection 
and deterrence of international crime. Each Bureau is an agency of the member country’s 
government and serves as the liaison between that country’s law enforcement agencies and 
the INTERPOL network. In the United Sta tes, the National Central Bureau (USNCB) is 
under the direction and control of the Department of Justice and co-managed by the 
Department of Homeland Security. 
 
To support ongoing investigations that require international assistance, INTERPOL 
provides information regarding: 
• Location of suspects/fugitives/witnesses 
• International wanted circulars 
• Criminal history check 
• Terrorism prevention 
• Stolen art 
• Tracing of weapons and motor vehicles abroad 
• License plate, driver license check, and vehicle registration data 
 
International Criminal Police Organization Case Tracking System 
The International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) Case Tracking Systems 
(ICTS), located at the U.S. National Central Bureau (USNCB) in Washington, D.C., contains 
information about people, property, and organizations involved in international criminal 
activity. The USNCB can determine the history of an international connection in an 
investigation or the existence of any previous international criminal activity. The USNCB 
operates to provide international support for U.S. law enforcement. 
 
Sixteen federal and state law enforcement agencies are represented at the USNCB, and all 50 
states have established INTERPOL liaison offices. Agencies represented at the USNCB 
include the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives; Environmental 
Protection Agency; Drug Enforcement Administ ration; Federal Bureau of Investigation; 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement; Transportation Security Administration; U.S. 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.483 
Coast Guard; Bureau of Customs and Border Protection; U.S. Marshals Service; U.S. 
Department of Defense; U.S. Department of State; U.S. F ood and Drug Administration; 
U.S. Postal Inspection Service;  and U.S. Secret Service. 
 
Interstate Identification Index 
The Interstate Identification Index (III) is an “index-pointer” system for the interstate 
exchange of criminal records. Under the III, the FBI maintains an index of people arrested 
for felonies or serious misdemeanors under state or federal law. The index includes 
identification data (name, birth date, race, sex, etc.) and the FBI and state identification 
numbers (SIDs) from all states that have information about an individual. 
 
Search queries from justice agencies nationwide are transmitted via state telecommunications 
networks and the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) lines. Searches are made 
by name and other identifiers. The III held the criminal histories of more than 64.9 million 
individuals as of September 2008. Forty-eight states participated in the III as of that date. 
Ten also participated in the National Fingerprint File (NFF). The NFF states have assumed 
responsibility for criminal and non-criminal requests.  
 
Joint Maritime Information Element 
The Joint Maritime Information Element (JMIE) — a consortium of 15 U.S. government 
agencies in the law enforcement and intelligence communities — provides access to 
repositories of formatted data at the secret level on worldwide merchant vessel locations, 
characteristics, registries/ownership, commercial cargo imports and exports through U.S. 
ports, and commercial cargo imports and exports in selected foreign countries and 
worldwide ports. Consortium members are the Office of Naval Intelligence, Military Sealift 
Command, Drug Enforcement Administration, Department of State, Executive Office of 
the President’s Office of National Drug Control Policy, U.S. Customs Service, Central 
Intelligence Agency, U.S. Coast Guard, Maritime Administration, Department of Energy, 
Defense Intelligence Agency, U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services, INTERPOL, 
Bureau of Census, and National Security Agency. 
 
The system provides information on maritime-related law enforcement and national foreign 
intelligence data to aid members’ operational targeting, such as narcotics interdiction, 
smuggling, sea and defense-zone surveillance, border control, petroleum-traffic monitoring, 
and emergency sealift management. Thirty-five sites are operational, allowing access to data 
sources that provide at-sea and in-port location information and characteristics on 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.484   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
commercial and private vessels and vessel registration files for Florida, California, Delaware, 
Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. 
 
Law Enforcement Support Center 
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement’s Law Enforcement Su pport Center (LESC) 
serves as a national operations center by providing timely immigration status and identity 
information to local, state, and federal law enforcement agencies on aliens suspected, 
arrested, or convicted of criminal activities. The LESC operates 24 hours a day, seven days a 
week, responding to requests from federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies with 
information gathered from eight DHS databases, the National Crime Information Center 
(NCIC), the Interstate Identification Index (III), and other state criminal history indices.  
 
In addition to providing real-time assistance to law enforcement agencies that are 
investigating, or have arrested, foreign-born individuals involved in criminal activity, the 
LESC also performs the following investigative functions: administers and controls 
immigration-related cases for Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE); provides 
support to a host of ongoing multiagency investigative initiatives; acts as the central point of 
contact for the FBI’s National Instant Criminal  Background Check System (NICS) program; 
handles queries and field responses relating to national security employment issues; provides 
the law enforcement community with NCIC hit confirmation information; and offers ICE 
special agents and deportation officers after-hours support via digitally recorded duty lines 
confirmed with personal identification numbers. 
 
Excluded Parties Listing System 
The Excluded Parties Listing System (EPLS) is a Web-based database maintained by the 
General Services Administration that identifies those parties excluded throughout the U.S. 
government (unless otherwise noted) from receiving federal contracts or certain 
subcontracts and from certain types of federal financial and nonfinancial assistance and 
benefits. 
 
National Tracing Center 
The National Tracing Center (NTC), a branch of the Firearms Enforcement Division of the 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF), is the country’s only crime 
gun tracing facility. It provides 24-hour assistance to duly authorized law enforcement 
agencies in the United States and those in many foreign countries. Using the ATF’s Firearms 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.485 
Tracing System, the NTC systematically tracks firearms used to commit crimes from their 
place of manufacture to the place of sale. 
 
National White-Collar Crime Center 
The National White-Collar Crime Center (NW3C) seeks to provide a nationwide support 
system for agencies involved in the prevention, investigation, and prosecution of economic 
and high-tech crimes and to support and partner with other appropriate entities in 
addressing homeland security initiatives as they relate to economic and high-tech crimes. The 
NW3C has a database system that contains information on individuals and businesses 
suspected of economic criminal activity, including advance-fee loan schemes, credit card 
fraud, computer fraud, and securities and investment fraud.  
 
Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System 
The Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs Information System (NADDIS) is a centralized 
automated file of summaries of reports on subjects of interest to the Drug Enforcement 
Administration (DEA), consisting of more than 5.9 million records on individuals, 
businesses, vessels, aircraft, and selected airfields identified through the DEA investigative 
reporting system and related investigative records. Inquiries should be limited to narcotics-
 related cases or files and/or smugglers of funds, other contraband, and aliens. NADDIS is 
accessible through the El Paso Intelligence Center (EPIC) and the DEA. 
 
National Automated Immigration Lookout System 
The National Automated Immigration Lookout System (NAILS) is a Bureau of Immigration 
and Custom Enforcement system. The system provides an index of the names of all 
individuals who might be denied entry into the United States. Names in NAILS are passed 
to the Treasury Enforcement Communications System (TECS); therefore, a search of 
NAILS is not necessary if TECS has been searched. 
 
National Crime Information Center 
The National Crime Information Center (NCIC), located at the FBI headquarters in 
Washington, is a widely used law enforcement computer system. Most major law 
enforcement agencies have NCIC connections. 
 
An NCIC file often contains information about: 
• Stolen, missing, or recovered guns 
• Stolen articles (that have a serial number) 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.486   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Wanted people (for questioning or arrest) 
• Stolen/wanted vehicles (autos, aircraft, motorcycles) 
• Stolen license plates 
• Stolen, embezzled, or missing securities, stocks, bonds, and currency 
• Stolen/wanted boats 
• Missing people 
• Index to state and federal criminal history records 
• Unidentified people 
• Foreign fugitives 
• ATF violent felon file 
• U.S. Secret Service protection file 
• Gang and terrorist organizations file 
• Deported felon file 
• Originating agency identifier file 
• Protective order file 
 
NCIC is a computerized index of criminal justice information (e.g., criminal record history 
information, fugitives, stolen properties, and missing persons). It is available to federal, state, 
and local law enforcement and other criminal justice agencies and is operational 24 hours a 
day, 365 days a year.  
 
The purpose of maintaining the NCIC system is to provide a computerized database for 
ready access by a criminal justice agency making an inquiry and for prompt disclosure of 
information in the system from other criminal justice agencies. This information assists 
authorized agencies in criminal justice and related law enforcement objectives, such as 
apprehending fugitives, locating missing persons, locating and returning stolen property, as 
well as in the protection of the law enforcement officers encountering the individuals 
described in the system. 
 
Regional Information Sharing System 
The Regional Information Sharing System (RISS) program consists of six multistate projects 
that facilitate regional criminal information exchange and provide other related support 
service to federal, state, and local law enforcement agencies throughout all 50 states, Canada, 
the District of Columbia, Australia, U.S. Territories, and England. 
• Middle Atlantic-Great Lakes Organized Crime Law Enforcement Network (MAGLOCLEN). 
MAGLOCLEN includes law enforcement agencies in Indiana, Michigan, Ohio, 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.487 
Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, Delawa re, Maryland, and Washington, D.C. The 
center also has member agencies in Canada, England, and Australia. MAGLOCLEN is 
located at 140 Terry Drive, Suite 100, Newtown, Pennsylvania 18940, or can be reached 
at (215) 504-4910 or (800) 345-1322. 
• Mid-States Organized Crime In formation Center (MOCIC). MOCIC includes law enforcement 
agencies in North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, 
Wisconsin, and Illinois. The center also has member agencies in Canada. MOCIC is 
located 1610 East Sunshine Street, #110, Springfield, Missouri 65804, or can be reached 
at (800) 846-6242 or (417) 883-4383. 
• New England State Police In formation Network (NESPIN).  NESPIN incorporates law 
enforcement agencies in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut, 
and Rhode Island. The center also has member agencies in Canada. NESPIN is located 
at 124 Grove Street, Suite 105, Franklin, MA 02038, or can be reached at (800) 343-5682 
or (508) 528-8200. 
• Regional Organized Crime Information Center (ROCIC).  ROCIC serves 800 law enforcement 
agencies in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana,  Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Tennessee, 
Kentucky, West Virginia, Virginia, North Caro lina, South Carolina, Georgia and Florida, 
as well as Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin  Islands. ROCIC is located at 545 Marriott 
Drive, Suite 850, Nashville, Tennessee 37214, or can be reached at (800) 238-7985. 
• Rocky Mountain Information Network (RMIN). The RMIN has 13,000 members in more 
than 1,000 agencies in Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, Utah, Nevada, Idaho, Wyoming, 
and Montana. The center also has member agencies in Canada. The RMIN is located at 
2828 North Central Avenue, Suite 1000, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, or can be reached at 
(602) 351-2320. 
• Western States Information Network (WSIN).  The WSIN provides narcotics intelligence and 
related services to its member law enforcement agencies in California, Oregon, 
Washington, Alaska, and Hawaii. The center also has members in Canada, Australia, and 
Guam. The WSIN’s address is P.O. Box 90 3198, Sacramento, California 94203-1980, 
and it can be called at (800) 824-7902 (outside of California) and (800) 952- 5258  
(in California). 
 
Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems 
The Treasury Enforcement Communications Systems (TECS) is a Department of the 
Treasury system managed by the Internal Revenue Service. TECS is a computerized 
information system designed to identify individuals and businesses suspected of, or involved 
in, a violation of federal law. TECS is also a communication system that transmits messages 
Sources of Information  Investigation 
3.488   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
among Treasury law enforcement offices and other federal, national, state, and local law 
enforcement agencies. 
 
TECS provides access to the FBI’s National Crime Information Center (NCIC) and the 
National Law Enforcement Telecommunication Systems (NLETS) with the capability of 
communicating directly with state and local enforcement agencies. The NLETS provides 
direct access to state motor vehicle departments.  
 
Participants include the U.S. Customs Service; Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and 
Explosives; Drug Enforcement Administration; U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services; 
Department of State; U.S. Coast Guard; Fe deral Bureau of Investigation (NCIC Section); 
U.S. Marshals Service; Internal Revenue Service; EPIC; INTERPOL (National Central 
Bureau); and Department of Agriculture. 
 
TECS works on a soundex-type system. If an inquiry is made regarding a certain name, then 
all similar sounding names on record are provided to the inquirer. Inquiries on TECS might 
be made by name alone, even if no identifying number—such as date of birth, FBI number, 
or Social Security number—is available. 
 
When TECS provides a list of similar sounding names, the subjects’ sex, race, and date of 
birth also are included. The inquirer then can determine which subject, if any, is of interest. 
If a name is selected, TECS can provide additional information, including special 
instructions (such as “armed and dangerous”), full  name, race, sex, height, weight, hair color, 
eye color, date of birth, fugitive (which agency), background information, miscellaneous 
number (such as FBI), where and by whom a warrant is held, date of offense, alias, case 
number, and NCIC number. 
 
United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network 
The United Nations Crime and Justice Information Network (UNCJIN) is funded in part by 
the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. The goal of the UNCJIN is to establish a worldwide 
network to enhance the dissemination and exchange of information concerning criminal 
justice and crime prevention issues. 
 
World Criminal Justice Library Network 
The World Criminal Justice Library Network (WCJLN) is a network that is used to share 
services and information concerning criminal justice. The group has developed an 
Investigation  Sources of Information 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.489 
international network to disseminate national and international crime statistics and criminal 
justice profiles. 
  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.501 
ACCESSING INFORMATION ONLINE 
 
Fraud examiners now have a number of online investigative resources available through their 
personal computers. But not so long ago, examiners had to travel to the county courthouse 
or state capital to search for public records. Fraud examiners today, however, have enough 
information available through different online sources to conduct entire inquiries without 
leaving their seat.  
 
 
Investigating with the Internet 
A great deal of information can be accessed through the Internet for little or no cost. This 
section explains some Internet basics, as well as how to use its services to obtain information 
about people, businesses, and fraud in general. 
 
The Internet is a decentralized global network of millions of diverse computers and 
computer networks. These networks can all “talk” to each other because they have agreed to 
use a common communications protocol called TCP/IP, which is named after its two most 
important protocols: Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP). 
 
Essentially, the Internet is a tool for communications between people and businesses. In 
general, the Internet is a giant network linking together millions of computers worldwide. 
 
The Internet is not organized by any uniform system, such as libraries’ Dewey Decimal 
System. Instead, it remains a free-floating, loosely-strung gold mine of information, available 
to those who understand how to use it. Unless you know the exact addresses of the Internet 
sites you are looking for, it is necessary to learn how to find the information.  
 
An Internet site, or page, is a single Web address, generally introduced by a person or a 
company to post information on a topic or to generate or promote business. There are a 
number of websites that will be of use to a fraud examiner, and some are listed and 
discussed at the end of this chapter. 
 
Traditional Methods for Finding Information on the Internet 
The most basic way to find information on the Internet is to execute searches using search 
engines or meta-search engines, or to locate information using website directories.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.502   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Search Engines 
Search engines are website tools that allow you to type in keywords describing the subject in 
which you are interested. The search engine will then scour the pages of the Internet and 
attempt to locate pages that may have pertinent information. For instance, in a search for the 
keyword fraud, the search engine will likely bring back a number of pages that have some 
relevant link to fraud (such as the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners’ website, located 
at www.ACFE.com). There are several prominent search engines on the Internet, and each 
functions in a different way. An extensive list of search engines is provided at the end of the 
chapter; however, a few of the more popular engines are described below. 
 
GOOGLE  
Google is the most-used search engine in the United States and has advanced search 
capabilities. Individual Web pages are ranked by the engine’s software according to how 
often the page is linked to by others, determining the page’s “importance” by the number of 
links and the identity of the linking page. Google is a good source for finding targeted 
information on a particular topic. Additionally, learning Google-specific search operators will 
provide the investigator with an extremely powerful tool for online investigations. 
 
For example, Google Groups is a searchable Usenet archive. It scans thousands of postings 
of Usenet groups, which are electronic bulletin boards classified by subject (see 
“Newsgroups” below). A search using Google Groups will reveal instances in which the 
terms you specify appear in a posting on the Internet. You can search by the name or e-mail 
address of users who have posted to newsgroups, or by subject, keywords, attachments, and 
so on. 
 
BING 
Bing (formerly Live Search, Windows Live Search, and MSN Search) is the current Web 
search engine from Microsoft. Bing automatically groups search results in different 
categories, depending on the type of searches users are conducting. Bing also provides the 
ability to save and share search histories via Windows Live SkyDrive, Facebook, and e-mail. 
 
In addition to providing many of the same search resources found in other popular engines 
(e.g., it provides searches specific to travel, video, pictures, and maps), Bing has several 
useful features. For example, Bing maintains an ongoing history of searches, giving 
researchers a way to identify what they looked up and in what order. And Bing’s image 
search is easier to manage than others because it displays more images on the results screen.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.503 
ALTAVISTA 
Altavista is a detail-oriented search engine. Because it reads the individual text of every page 
listed on the Internet, Altavista is very useful for finding random information. If you are 
simply “casting your line” to see what information might be available on a topic, this is a 
good engine to use. However, Altavista’s searches are so thorough you will encounter every 
page that contains your keyword(s), ending with as many as 200,000 hits. Successful Altavista 
searching requires you to construct your search carefully.  
 
YAHOO!  
Yahoo! is a multifaceted website containing a first-rate directory (see below for more 
information about directories), but it is also equipped with a search engine. In 2009, 
however, Yahoo! announced that its search engine would be powered by Bing. And, as of 
July 2010, up to 25 percent of the search results provided by Yahoo! Search are powered by 
Bing. 
 
EXCITE  
Excite’s search engine is good for broad general topics because it a simultaneous search of 
the Web, news headlines, sports scores, and company information. Results are grouped on a 
single page. Weeding through the results can sometimes be a chore. 
 
LYCOS  
Lycos provides advanced search capabilities, including the ability to search for specific 
media. Its Lycos Pro feature allows users to fine-tune searches. Lycos’s index of Web pages 
is smaller than those of some other services.’ 
 
ASK.COM  
Formerly AskJeeves, Ask.com is a good site for beginners and for general queries. The 
engine leads users through questions to help narrow the search, and also searches six other 
search sites. (For similar services, see metasearch engines, below.) Ask.com’s ability to 
interpret natural language makes it easy to use, though constructing precise queries can be 
difficult for the same reason. 
 
Meta-search Engines 
Meta-search engines send user requests to several other search engines and display the 
results. Some of the more common meta-search engines are described below. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.504   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
METACRAWLER  
Metacrawler uses meta-search technology to search the Internet’s top search engines, 
including Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com, and more. It searches the best results from 
the combined pool of the world’s leading search engines instead of results from only one 
search engine.  
 
DOGPILE  
Owned by Infospace, this engine sends a query to a customizable list of search engines, 
directories, and specialty search sites (e.g., Google, Yahoo! Search, Bing, Ask.com) and then 
displays the results from each search engine individually. Once the results are retrieved, the 
innovative meta-search technology used by Dogpile goes to work removing duplicates and 
analyzing the results to help ensure that the best results top the list. The Comparison View 
feature lets users compare results from the leading engines with the click of a button. 
 
MAMMA  
Mamma is a “smart” meta-search engine; every time users type in a query, Mamma 
simultaneously searches a variety of engines, directories, and content sites; properly formats 
the words and syntax for each; compiles their results in a virtual database; eliminates 
duplicates; and displays them in a uniform manner according to relevance.  
 
SURFWAX  
SurfWax claims to provide the best use of relevant search results from the open Internet. It 
uses a cohesive matrix to search, sort, extract, and relate information from both the Internet 
and enterprise intranets. Surfwax offers multiple search tools, including FocusWords, 
SearchSets, SiteSnaps, and ContextZooming. 
 
Directories 
The road to mining information on the Internet does not always go through search engines. 
Some of the best investigative tools an examiner has online are directories. As the name 
suggests, directories  are specialized websites that collect the names of numerous other related 
websites, allowing the user to browse through a complete listing of possible sites to visit. 
Directories contain links to pages that have a commonality. Some all-inclusive directories 
cover a plethora of different topics, and others are more focused on particular subjects or 
disciplines. These include several accounting and auditing directories that fraud examiners 
may find very useful. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.505 
The upside to using directories is that you can logically navigate a search, easing through the 
different categories until you find what you are looking for. However, directories contain 
only a portion of the sites and pages available on the Internet; therefore, the fraud examiner 
should use directories in concert with a search engine and not instead of one. 
 
YAHOO!  
In addition to its search engine, Yahoo! has an intricate directory, possibly the most 
comprehensive and all-inclusive on the Internet. The directory is built and maintained by 
Yahoo! employees, with input from users. Yahoo! functions much like a pyramid: it begins 
with several large pools of categories, such as entertainment and government, and then 
allows the user to select more specific options from each broad category. For instance, an 
examiner could select “education,” then “universities,” then “university libraries,” until 
finally encountering a direct link to the main library catalog for the University of Texas. By 
paring down your selections to increasingly narrow topics, you can generally find several 
useful websites.  
 
VIRTUAL LIBRARY  
The Virtual Library (VL) is the oldest catalog of the Web, started by Tim Berners-Lee, the 
creator of the HTML that makes the Internet possible. Unlike commercial catalogs, it is run 
by a loose confederation of volunteers who compile pages of key links for particular areas in 
which they have expertise. While not the biggest index of the Web, the VL pages are widely 
praised as guides to particular sections of the Internet. 
 
INTERNET PUBLIC LIBRARY  
Run by librarians, this service indexes Web pages by topic. The Internet Public Library also 
contains an array of guides, such as online magazines and newspapers, associations, and tips 
for conducting research. 
 
OPEN DIRECTORY PROJECT 
Founded in 1998, Open Directory Project (dmoz.org) is the largest human-edited directory 
on the Internet. Dmoz.org provides non-commercial moderation of registered sites and is 
maintained by a community of volunteer editors. It provides site listings grouped into 
categories and subcategories.   
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.506   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BEST OF THE WEB DIRECTORY 
The Best of the Web Directory is a commercial directory that provides site listings 
categorized by topic and region.  
 
BUSINESS.COM 
Business.com is an Internet search engine and Web directory that provides site listings in 
more than 65,000 business categories.  
 
Nontraditional Methods for Finding Information on the Internet 
Moving beyond the use of Google and other tr aditional methods of searching the Internet is 
important for individuals conducting fraud examinations. This section will examine how to 
use the following websites to obtain information on the Internet: 
• eBay 
• Whois 
• Craigslist 
• Archive 
• Zoominfo  
• GuideStar 
•  NOZA  
 
In addition to the above sites, this section will also discuss how an examiner can find 
valuable information using social networking sites.  
 
The websites addressed in this discussion are tried and true resources that fraud examiners 
should be comfortable with using. But before using these sites, establish an undercover e-mail 
account to use when searching. The e-mail account should be set up through a web-based
service like Hotmail, Yahoo!, or Gmail. Examiners should not use any of the following 
information when creating the e-mail account: 
• Personal names 
• Geographical region 
• Favorite sports teams 
• Hobbies 
 
In addition, a discreet e-mail account should have certain characteristics, such as a gender-neutral 
name. The handle should be comprised of numbers and letters that appear to be for 
a purpose, giving it added credibility and authenticity. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.507 
EXAMPLE  
LS-194-2183@yahoo.com  
 
eBay 
The online auction website eBay.com can be a valuable resource for fraud examiners. It 
maintains lengthy, detailed logs for each transaction, but this high-level information should 
be obtained with a subpoena. To conduct a more general search using a person’s name or e-mail 
address on eBay: 
• Go to “Advanced Search” in the upper-right corner of eBay’s home page. 
• Choose “Find a Member” from the left column. 
• Type in the first half of the person’s personal e-mail address (e.g., for 
crazybird@gmail.com, type “crazybird”). 
 
After finding a match, the examiner should visit the user’s eBay profile and read everything 
available on the page. An examiner can gain insight into a fraud examination by examining 
any items the subject bought or sold and by reviewing any comments the subject has made.  
 
Once the examiner has read the user’s comments, he should click the user’s “Feedback 
Profile.” Along the right side of the page will be a few selectable items under “Member 
Quick Links”; the investigator should select “View ID History” to see if the member has 
changed his ID over the past ten years. In addition, the examiner can make the suspect one 
of his “Favorite Sellers,” to receive alerts when the subject places new items for sale on 
eBay. 
 
The Whois Protocol 
Whois is a query response protocol that is used to search databases that store domain 
registration records, including domain name, server addresses, technical contacts, and 
addresses. These databases can be queried at the following sites: 
• Networksolutions.com will provide the ownership and registration information for a 
website.  
• Arin.net is a whois server that searches for the registrant and IP address range of a 
particular IP address.  
• Allwhois.com will find the whois database for a particular domain name.  
• Whatismyipaddress.com provides a collection of tools for locating information about an 
IP address.   
• Traceroute.org—like whatismyipaddress.com— can be used to trace IP addresses.  
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.508   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Craigslist 
Craigslist.org is a network of online communities, featuring free classified advertisements 
with sections dedicated to jobs, housing, personals, items for sale, services, résumés, and so 
on.  
 
The key to searching Craigslist is getting past the geographic restriction. For example, if the 
examiner is looking for items in the Silicon Valley, he cannot search other areas at the same 
time. To expand the search, the examiner must specify another area or use 
SearchTempest.com, a tool that allows users to search multiple Craigslist sites at once.  
 
Archive 
Archive.org offers researchers and historians a view of other websites captured by the 
Wayback Machine on a specific date. To access archived sites, enter a web address in the 
search box, and the engine will return a list of archived dates available. For example, a search 
of www.data2know.com returns a list of archived pages, starting on August 18, 2000.  
 
Zoominfo 
Another great resource on the Internet is Zoominfo.com. Zoominfo collates information 
from websites and then software bots — also known as intelligent agents — capture and match to 
particular individuals or companies.  
 
Zoominfo searches are conducted by company, person, or industry. Although Zoominfo 
searches can return a large amount of information, examiners must understand that this 
information is generated from other websites and should be verified. 
 
Zoominfo search results look résumés and include information like business experience, 
association connections, education credentials, and so on.  
 
GuideStar 
GuideStar is a great starting point to find data about nonprofits. GuideStar gathers and 
publicizes information about more than 850,000 nonprofit organizations. It obtains 
information from a variety of sources, including the IRS’s Form 990 data—this provides 
information on the filing organization’s mission, programs, and finances—and from 
individual organizations.  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.509 
Noza 
Nozasearch.com is a Web-based database of charitable giving designed as a research tool for 
nonprofit organizations. It gathers data about private foundations’ activities that might be of 
interest to grant-seekers, philanthropic organizations, and individual donors.  
 
Social-Networking Websites 
Social-networking sites can be searched like traditional websites. Although a lot of the 
information available on social-networking sites can be found using traditional search 
engines, there is an ever-growing number of resources that an examiner can use to search 
these sites. For example, each social network has a search engine for locating members by 
name, phone number, or e-mail address. In general, users can search for members without 
logging in (e.g., MySpace’s default settings allow non-members to view members’ 
information) and searches can be done anonymously.  
 
If, however, a member’s profile is private, the researcher will only see a snapshot of the 
member’s information. For example, to view a member’s profile in Facebook or LinkedIn, 
the researcher must connect with the other member. If an examiner wants to view a private 
profile, he should create a compelling, attractive, and simple profile for himself and ask to be 
invited into the subject’s network. It is not necessary to create a false identity, and examiners 
should not use someone else’s identity. But if the examiner is interesting enough, good 
looking enough, or just savvy enough, he will probably be accepted into the network.  
 
An entirely separate category of search engines has been designed specifically to find 
information within social networks. These search engines use social networks to order, 
prioritize, or refine search results. Some popular social-networking search engines include 
Spokeo, Yoname, Technorati, Icerocket, and FriendFeed. This section discusses these search 
engines along with how to search photo-sharing sites. 
 
SPOKEO 
Spokeo is a social-network aggregator site that gathers information about people by 
searching for their e-mail addresses on various social-networking sites. Essentially, it is 
designed to locate and track online profiles within social networks. This site allows users to 
search by a person’s name, e-mail address, or phone number. This can be helpful if an 
examiner knows about the subject’s profile in Facebook and Myspace but is not aware that 
the subject is also a member of Hi5 and Xanga.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.510   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For investigators and researchers, this is an incredible tool that gathers subject information 
in a way that other research tools cannot. One of Spokeo’s best features is its ability to track 
activity on members’ profiles. If the subject posts something on one of the popular social-networking 
sites, such as MySpace or Facebook, the post will appear in Spokeo’s search 
results and that person will be tracked for future updates.  
 
Spokeo allows a user to search and track a limited number of e-mail addresses or names for 
free, but requires a fee after a certain number of searches. 
 
YONAME 
Yoname is similar to Spokeo, but it searches  many social networks that Spokeo does not. 
Yoname is a free service, but the results can be random. Spokeo has a better return rate on 
its searches. It is important to note that if an examiner searches by a user’s e-mail address, 
Yoname will send the user an e-mail saying that someone was looking up “yo name” in 
Yoname. Although the e-mail does not contain the searcher’s information, it could be 
enough to alert a suspicious fraudster.  
 
TECHNORATI 
Technorati is a search engine for websites like YouTube, MySpace, Blog, Xanga, and so 
forth. The engine searches blogs with a variety of filters. A user can search by entering a 
topic into the Technorati search field, or he can use some of the site’s search categories, 
including photos, videos, and blogs. Using Technorati’s Advanced Search option, the 
examiner can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tags to sites that are 
linked to a particular blog. Although getting started with Technorati can be difficult, it can 
be a very useful resource. 
 
ICEROCKET 
Icerocket offers a unique array of tools. Backed by Mark Cuban, owner of the Dallas 
Mavericks, Icerocket was designed to track what people were searching for. It focuses 
primarily on blogs, using meta-tagging to categorize and index the content contained within 
blogs. As a result, a user can search by keyword, which captures any relevant matches found 
on a website and prioritizes matches marked as tagged searches. 
 
Like Technorati, Icerocket also allows users to  narrow down blog searches with an advanced 
search link or by using search operators, such as title, author, and tag. For example, a search 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.511 
for [title:“public records”] would find pages with  “public records” in their title. Similarly, a 
search for [title:“public records” author:“John Doe”] will return blog posts by John Doe that 
have “public records” in their title. 
 
In addition to searching blogs, Icerocket searches through image directories, Twitter, and 
MySpace. Even though an examiner can search MySpace directly, the Icerocket search 
engine tool for MySpace presents a more traditional search environment. 
 
FRIENDFEED 
FriendFeed is a real-time feed aggregator that consolidates the updates from social-networking 
sites, social-bookmarking sites, blogs, and other types of RSS feed. FriendFeed 
facilitates tracking users’ social-media activities (e.g., posting on blogs or Twitter) across a 
broad range of different social networks. According to FriendFeed’s website, its goal is to 
make Internet content more applicable and helpful by using social-network sites as tools for 
discovering intriguing information.  
 
 
A Guide to Successful Internet Searching 
 
Running Searches 
The Internet is not so much a service as a tool. To tap its rich information sources, you have 
to learn how to construct proper queries; that is, you have to learn how to ask for what you 
want. Search engines all have their limitations, but the most serious impediment to locating 
good information is the user’s lack of search skills.  
 
Most searching uses keywords. For instance, when hunting for the latest statistics on check 
fraud, the logical keywords are check  and fraud. However, if you typed in those words, the 
search engine would return numerous sites that have nothing to do with check fraud. By 
placing both words inside quotation marks (i.e., “check fraud”), you will get better results. 
Still, the list of hits will be in the thousands, so you might want to further narrow the search 
using the techniques below. 
 
Boolean Operators 
The best way to utilize a search engine is to use two, or possibly three, keywords that best 
describe the topic. If the words succeed one another, as in the case of check fraud,  then it may 
be beneficial to use Boolean operators to aid one’s search. Boolean operators  are symbols that 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.512   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
help the search engine to better understand exactly what it is searching for. Putting the “+” 
symbol between “check+fraud,” for example, will indicate to the search engine that it is to 
search only for pages that have the word fraud immediately following check.  If you insert the 
word and,  so that the search reads check and fraud, the search engine will understand to search 
for websites and pages that contain both the words check  and fraud,  but not necessarily right 
next to each other.  
 
Some of the more common Boolean operator symbols, or connectors, are shown below. 
 
 
Reserved Words and Noise Words 
The connector words and, or, not, and near are considered reserved words, and are therefore 
ignored when they appear in a search phrase. Similarly, noise words are common words with 
very little meaning (e.g., in, of, and the); such words are also ignored unless the user puts the 
entire phrase in parentheses. (See the Specific Search Operators section, below, for more 
direction on reserved and noise words.)  
 
The following are some of the common noise words ignored by most search engines. And 
and or are marked with an asterisk because they are both noise words and reserved words.  
  
Boolean Operators
 
+  Designates words that must appear right next to each other. 
–  Designates words that should not appear on a Web page. 
“ ” Designates a list of words that must appear together in an exact order, 
such as “holy cow.”  
and Designates two or more words that must both appear on a page, but not 
necessarily next to each other. 
or  Designates two connected words, one of which must appear on a page. 
not Designates words that should not appear on the page, much like the minus 
sign. 
near Designates words that should appear within a certain number of words of 
each other. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.513 
the and *  of 
his my there 
when is are 
so or *  it 
 
Specific Search Operators 
Online researchers rely on search engines to search Web pages for specified keywords and 
return a list of the Web pages containing the keywords. Although these engines return 
results instantly and with little effort, the simplicity of these tools often removes the benefits 
of more complex searching techniques. To determine a search engine or database’s abilities, 
consult the service’s FAQ or search help page. 
 
This section examines the advanced search features of the Google and Bing because they 
provide some of the most robust and useful tools for experts conducting searches. 
 
GOOGLE OPERATORS 
In addition to the basic Boolean operators discussed above, several operators can smarten 
up a Google search and return the right link faster.  
 
Operators Search Results Example  
~ Searches for synonyms of a given 
word 
[ automobiles ~glossary ]   will 
find pages with automobiles  as well 
as words like dictionaries, glossary, 
encyclopedia, etc. 
define: Returns definitions from websites for 
the particular term 
[ define:fraud ] will show 
definitions for fraud.  
site: Returns search results from only one 
website 
[ site:virtuallibrarian.com fraud ] 
will find all fraud-related pages on  
virtuallibrarian.com. 
filetype: Searches for items with a particular 
filetype 
[ filetype:doc ] will restrict the 
results to MS Word files matching 
specified search terms.   
link: Returns pages that  link to a particular 
website 
[ link:virtuallibrarian.com ] will 
return pages with links to 
virtuallibrarian.com.  
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.514   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
allintitle: Restricts results to those containing 
all the search terms specified in the 
title 
[ allintitle: mortgage fraud ] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words mortgage  and 
fraud in the title. 
allintext: Returns documents containing all the 
search terms in their text 
[ allintext: fraud skimming 
materiality ] will return only pages 
in which the words fraud, skimming, 
and materiality  appear in the text of 
the page. 
* Treated as a placeholder for one or 
more words 
[ “fraud * alert” ] tells Google to 
find pages containing a phrase that 
starts with fraud  followed by one or 
more words, followed by alert. 
 
In addition, Google operators can be combined. For example, the query [site:hp.com 
filetype:pdf “5010 LaserJet” printer FAQ] will search for an Adobe Acrobat PDF file of 
frequently asked questions regarding the 5010 LaserJet printer located on the Hewlett 
Packard website. 
 
There are numerous other operators and search techniques that work with each Google 
search service. A good resource for less-known Google operators and search tips is 
www.googleguide.com. 
 
BING OPERATORS 
Although Bing and Google share some of the same search resources, Bing has search 
operators that are unique to its search engine.  
 
Operators Search Results Example  
contains: Searches for pages where there’s a 
hyperlink to a file with the extension  
[swimming dolphin 
contains:wmv] will find wmv 
clips of dolphins swimming.    
inanchor: Returns pages that contain the specified 
terms in the link anchors of Web pages 
[inanchor: useful fraud sites] 
searches for pages that are called 
useful fraud sites by others. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.515 
inbody: Restricts results to those containing all 
the search terms specified in the body 
[inbody: securities fraud] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words securities  and 
fraud in their body.  
intitle: Restricts results to those containing all 
the search terms specified in the title 
[intitle: securities fraud] will 
return only documents that 
contain the words securities  and 
fraud in their title. 
ip: Finds websites hosted by a specific IP 
address 
[ IP:198.46.34.22 ] finds 
websites hosted by the specified 
IP address.  
prefer: Adds emphasis to a search term to help 
focus the search results 
[fraud prefer:Ponzi] specifies the 
type of fraud that the user wants 
to find.  
 
 
Online Public Database Searches 
Online public records databases are another source of information that can be accessed 
online. These databases are numerous and varied; they compile records from the federal, 
state, and county/local levels, and most can be readily accessed from a home computer after 
subscribing to their services. The costs associated with these databases can be equally varied. 
There are several access options available, and an examiner should be prepared to use any 
and all, separately or in combination. Keep in mind, however, that it may be necessary to 
spend time examining the actual documents to get the whole picture. 
 
A public records database will tell the researcher whether a particular record, or some of the 
information contained in that record, exists. However, note that such databases will not 
provide a copy of the actual document. For example, an examiner can conduct a property 
record search to find out that John Doe owns the property at 121 Main Street in Peoria, IL; 
however, if he needs a copy of the actual deed, he will have to retrieve it from the county 
clerk’s office. 
 
Additionally, there is a wealth of information now available on the Internet. As a caveat, 
however, remember that online records companies have to get their information from 
somewhere. Often, it comes directly from the county. But if the information in the county’s 
records was entered into the database incorrectly, then the report you will receive from the 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.516   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
database company will also be incorrect. Therefore, it is important to remember that 
accessing information online is never a full substitute for an examination of the public 
record itself. 
 
Remember, however, that if an examiner accesses certain types of information through an 
online service, he may be subject to the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), as discussed in 
the previous chapter. Again, the FCRA prohibits consumer reporting agencies from releasing 
personal information about an individual (e.g., information about the consumer’s character, 
general reputation, personal characteristics, or mode of living) to third parties without 
authorization, and it limits disclosure of consumer credit information, such as a subject’s 
credit history, to third parties. Thus, before accessing such information, you should always 
contact your attorney. 
 
Limitations of Online Public Database Searches 
There are, however, limitations to online public database searches, including: 
• Online coverage varies widely from state to state. The fraud examiner should determine 
whether specific information is available for each investigation. 
• Searches are limited in the area they cover. Fortunately for the crook, most of his public 
record “evidence” is generally filed at the county level. If he is smart enough to know 
how to conduct transactions outside his normal locality, then he can be tough to track 
without using multijurisdictional online sources. Making sure you are looking in the right 
county is important. You can be off by one county and miss pertinent land holdings, 
divorce records, liens, and so forth. 
• All online public records are brief abstracts of the original public record. 
• The source of the information compiled in a vendor’s database must be reliable. 
• Information must be checked to determine if it is accurate and current.  
• The records or publications that have been compiled in an electronic format may not go 
back very far. 
• Also, Internet search engines are notoriously erratic in their retrieval. 
 
Online Searches Through Database Vendors 
Any public records search should begin with a commercial database vendor. There are 
several companies that provide varying levels of public record information to subscribers. A 
description of some of these companies and the records they can provide are discussed later. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.517 
These companies provide access to a wide range of information that is stored in a central 
database, allowing a subscriber to access it from his computer. Some information is actually 
retrieved in hard copy and mailed or faxed to the subscriber, even though the request was 
made through the online service. 
 
Some companies require a yearly or monthly subscription fee in addition to the fee for each 
search. Others operate on a “pay as you go” principle that allows you to pay only for the 
searches you conduct. Therefore, it is important to shop around to get the best deal for your 
level of usage. 
 
For some practitioners, it may be more economical to enlist the aid of service companies, 
information brokers, and professional online investigators. These companies will conduct 
research for examiners, typically using online services and manual document retrieval from 
local sources. Although the cost of these services is higher than doing it yourself, it may be 
the best choice for occasional records searches.  
 
Using an Online Database to Find Information 
In the past, investigators hot on the heels of an asset-hider or suspect were hamstrung by the 
available investigative resources. In attempting to uncover unreported income, the 
investigator was forced to travel to the courthouse for the county in which the suspect 
conducted business, request the county files available, and take a number. These treks to  
the middle-of-nowhere were rarely cost-effective and were often fruitless in the search for 
pertinent information. 
 
This has all changed, however, and now maybe the flatfoot’s feet won’t be so flat. Thanks to 
the advent of online investigative services, such as LexisNexis, inquiries to the far-flung 
reaches of the United States can be conducted from a personal computer. These services 
have packaged a variety of invaluable investigative sources at very reasonable prices. 
 
Access to these services is accomplished in either one of two ways. Some services allow 
users to log in through an Internet site. Others provide access to their database through a 
software program and a modem. Each user has a user ID and password to gain access. 
 
The following is a description of how online searches can be used to conduct background 
checks and locate people, assets, and legal records. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.518   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Locating People Using Online Records 
The first step to maximize search results is to discover a past address of the suspect; search 
activities should begin from that point. Second, the user should know the most powerful and 
useful types of searches, which are identified below. Third, it is important to keep in mind 
the cost effectiveness of the search activity and avoid ordering online searches that yield 
unnecessary or impractical information. 
 
The search methodology used by most online services is known as “text-string matching,” 
which means that all information entered in the data inquiry field will seek an exact match in 
the database. Typically, you may use truncation techniques (partial or abbreviated entries 
such as the first initial of the first name) only with first names and business names.  
 
Some common types of searches used to locate people using online records are discussed 
below. 
 
CREDIT HEADER SEARCHES 
Credit header searches are among the most powerful locator tools. These searches return 
information from credit reports on individuals. They are a valuable source because almost all 
people have been involved in some credit activity either under their true names or an 
assumed (or known as) name. It is appropriate to keep in mind that for common names, it 
may be necessary to use the Social Security number or date of birth to differentiate the 
subject from other people with the same name. The credit bureau headers offer two search 
mechanisms. First, the examiner can discover a current address, an address history, and 
Social Security number(s) associated with the target by using a past address up to seven years 
old. Second, once the Social Security number is in hand, the headers can be searched for 
matches, because the Social Security number is a national identity number. Although Social 
Security numbers are protected from disclosure by the Privacy Act, it has become practically 
impossible for individuals to avoid disclosing them on public records. 
 
CURRENT OCCUPANT/NEW ADDRESS SEARCHES 
A current occupant/new address search may be used to identify the occupant of an address, 
to confirm occupancy, to uncover a forwarding address, or to develop a list of neighbors 
who may know the suspect’s current whereabouts. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.519 
LAST NAME SEARCHES 
Last name searches can be used if the past address is unknown. This search produces better 
results if the name is not common; however, if  the last name is common, differentiating 
information should be included in the search. It should also be noted that some searches will 
return the identities of neighbors, who can be contacted for additional information about the 
suspect. 
 
BANKRUPTCY FILINGS, TAX LIENS, AND COURT JUDGMENTS 
Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and court judgments have emerged in recent years as locator 
tools because such records contain valid Social Security numbers. The dramatic increase in 
individual bankruptcy claims has also particularly prompted their emergence as locator tools.  
 
DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES RECORDS SEARCHES 
Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) records used to be good locator tools, but recent 
restrictions on them have reduced the effectiveness of such searches. Before Congress 
amended the Driver’s Privacy Protection Act in 1999, drivers could “opt out” and ask that 
their personal information (e.g., Social Security numbers, photographs, etc.) not be released. 
Under the amended law, however, drivers are no longer required to opt out; instead, the 
amended law imposes an “opt in” system requiring that drivers provide express 
authorization for the release of information. Moreover, individual states may not update 
their records frequently enough to provide the examiner with useful information. Searches 
such as Driver Identification can be useful on a spot basis, however. 
 
VOTER REGISTRATION RECORD SEARCHES 
In a few states, voter registration records are available, but as with DMV records, they may 
not be updated frequently. However, to the extent that date of birth information is available, 
such records can augment other searches. Also note any legal restrictions attached to the use 
of voter information. 
 
BUSINESS FILINGS SEARCHES  
Fictitious business name/doing business as filings include owner name(s), business name(s), 
file date, and file number. As noted in the previous chapter, in most states, individuals and 
corporations are required to file a doing business as (or an assumed or fictitious business 
name) statement with the county where they conduct their business. The records of sole 
proprietorship businesses, however, may not be available in the corporate/limited 
partnership records that are found at the state level. Nevertheless, the fraud examiner may be 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.520   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
able to locate these records by conducting an online search. By searching an individual or 
business name, the examiner can gather information from fictitious business name filings, 
including owner name, business name, file date, and file number. Some counties provide 
business address information, and in these counties, the examiner can also conduct searches 
using the business address.  
 
FEDERAL TAX ID SEARCHES 
Businesses can use the IRS website (www.irs.gov) to enter both the name and Federal Tax 
ID of a vendor or other business to confirm that the two match. 
 
Obtaining Financial Information and Locating Assets 
Discovering whether assets exist, where they exist, and whether they are recoverable can be 
accomplished with a search of federal, state, local, and proprietary records. These records 
can be further divided into those identifying “hard” assets and those regarding the potential 
for assets, credit capacity, or credit worthiness. 
 
SEARCHES FOR HARD ASSETS 
• The ownership of real property may be discoverable through the use of property 
searches, to the extent that they are available at the local or county level within individual 
states. 
• The ownership of vehicles can be inferred through the use of the DMV Vehicle Name 
Index, to the extent that the records within the controlling state agency reflect vehicles 
registered to a specific person or organization at a particular address. Conversely, the 
ownership of a particular vehicle may be inferred from the DMV vehicle registration 
searches. 
• An assumed business name search may be helpful in identifying a sole proprietorship 
business in which attachable assets are available.  
• The Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) is extraordinary in that it can be useful in a wide 
variety of business situations. A search of UCC filings can help identify personal 
property that an individual or business has financed. UCC filings can also disclose when 
and where a debtor obtained personal loans, the type of property that he pledged to the 
lender to secure the loan, and the debtor’s current address 
• The ownership of an aircraft can be determined by searching the Aircraft Ownership 
Database by business name, person name, or wing number. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.521 
SEARCHES FOR ASSET POTENTIAL 
• The question of whether it is realistically possible to recover known assets may be 
partially answered by searching bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and tax judgments. 
• Again, the versatility of a UCC filings search is seen through the identification of assets 
that may have been pledged, in whole or in part, to secure a loan. For example, in a case 
where a bank lender has secured a loan through some type of chattel as collateral and has 
sought to perfect its lien on the chattel through a UCC filing at the state level, it can be 
fairly assumed that the debtor has a bank account with the secured party. Thus, a bank 
account asset may be identified as a recoverable asset.   
• Consumer credit reports and business credit reports searches may help develop a clearer 
picture of the target’s potential for asset recovery in terms of credit capacity and 
creditworthiness. Although access to consumer credit reports is restricted by the Fair 
Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), business credit reports are not governed by the FCRA. 
Business credit reports often contain information that is useful in verifying information, 
understanding business relationships, and developing basic financial information about 
an organization. 
 
Finding Legal Records  
The searches available to find these records can be grouped in three broad categories: on- 
site court searches, index or broad coverage searches, and public filings. 
 
ON-SITE COURT SEARCHES  
On-site court records searches  are performed by individuals who travel to county and municipal 
courthouses to search for records that match the search criteria that have been provided to 
them.  
 
These searches are directed by court, by county, or, as is the case with federal records, by the 
district court for the particular area. Accordingly, the examiner must carefully consider the 
potential location of court records. Such considerations should take into account the 
locations of the suspect’s current and past reside nces and his current and past businesses or 
employers. The results will include any litigation in which the individual was involved, 
including civil actions, criminal actions, divorces, and judgments. However, it will not return 
information concerning litigation that has been sealed by the court or information 
concerning juvenile offenders.  
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.522   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The coverage for these searches varies according to the service used. Additionally, each court 
has varying rules regarding how the search is conducted, the times when searches may be 
conducted, the repository location, and the search methods. If the subscriber is interested in 
a particular type of record, such as a divorce record, it may be necessary to call the 
company’s customer-support unit to adjust the search query. Types of records available 
include: 
• Federal civil court records, including bankruptcy records, are available for all types of 
civil litigation conducted in federal court. 
• Federal criminal court records are available for felony charges. 
• State civil court records are available based on a division of upper and lower court 
records. The division is a function of the differences within each state concerning the 
amounts in controversy. 
• State criminal court records can be obtained on a ten- or seven-year search basis for 
felonies, misdemeanors, or a combination of both. 
 
INDEX/BROAD COVERAGE SEARCHES  
These searches are useful when an examiner needs a search strategy broader than the by 
court/by county method used with on-site court record searches or that makes use of an 
index of basic information in court records. 
• Searches of defendant suits are available in all states, but provide coverage limited to 
specific counties and courts. When searching a specific state’s database, the examiner 
should review the help menu to determine the scope of the search abilities. 
• Searches of statewide criminal convictions are available in some jurisdictions. Review the 
help menu for special release requirements, the number of years available, if the record is 
for convictions only, and if the search encompasses both felonies and misdemeanors. 
• Searches of marriage/divorce indexes are available in some states. 
 
PUBLIC FILINGS 
In the United States, public companies, nonprofits, and some private companies must 
submit financial filings and forms to different government entities. Public companies, for 
example, submit various filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission (e.g., the annual 
report and the 10-K). These public filings provide a wealth of information about the filing 
company, including the nature of its business, its history, its organizational structure, its 
auditor, its balance sheets, and its income statements. Similarly, public filings are available for 
nonprofits, which must file the Form 990 to the Internal Revenue Service.  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.523 
Public filings are available for free, as well as through fee-based services.  
 
Conducting Background Checks  
This type of search activity generally involves two broad areas: discovering what the public 
records reveal with respect to individuals and businesses with whom the subscriber may wish 
to do business and discovering information about prospective employees. In general, online 
public records databases are generally the best sources of background information. 
 
But before conducting any background checks, consult with legal counsel.  
 
DUE DILIGENCE 
As business organizations seek to identify vendors, clients, or strategic partners or seek to 
loan or collect money, they frequently conduct public record inquiries focused on other 
businesses or individuals who are principals of business organizations. This type of public 
record inquiry involves such issues as verification of application information, debt burden, 
adverse financial information, credit capacity or worthiness, business relationships (the so-called 
family tree), litigation history, and criminal background. Useful searches include the 
following: 
• Corporate/limited partnership searches are available in all states to verify information, 
identify principals, and develop other business relationships. 
• Bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and judgments searches respond to issues of adverse 
financial information and credit capacity/worthiness. 
• UCC filings answer questions of debt burden. This search will be helpful to identify 
hidden ownership or partnership interests, and it will be helpful to locate address 
information on debtors. 
• State and federal civil court records provide answers to questions concerning litigation 
history, past business relationships, and the potential for debt burden either as a function 
of an adverse judgment or as a function of financing expensive litigation. 
• State and federal criminal court records identify the possibility of a criminal background. 
• The use of consumer credit reports and business credit reports helps resolve questions 
concerning credit capacity and creditworthiness. In addition, the business report is useful 
in verifying information, understanding business relationships, and developing basic 
financial information about an organization. 
• Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) searches may be useful in 
developing adverse information or verifying information given by a prospective vendor, 
client, or strategic partner. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.524   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Aircraft mechanics, airmen, medical license, DEA controlled substances, and other 
licenses may serve to verify that basic professional and occupational standards are met by 
a prospective vendor, client, or strategic partner. 
 
EMPLOYMENT BACKGROUND 
Online record inquiries regarding employment history have increased significantly over the 
past few years. Corporate downsizing has disaffected an increasing number of workers to the 
point that it is easier for them to rationalize employee defalcation, fraud, or embezzlement. 
The same economic phenomenon of downsizing, combined with business pressure to 
increase productivity and the friction of modern life, have apparently produced an increase 
in workplace violence. Liabilities for employers and businesses have expanded through 
negligence standards and the respondeat superior doctrine for such tortious conduct as vehicle 
operation, assault, battery, false imprisonment, sexual harassment, and discrimination. 
Finally, the potential to be held liable for negative references has deterred past employers 
from responding to prospective employers’ inquiries about an employee. Therefore, 
prospective employers must increasingly rely on public information.  
 
Some of the searches useful in developing background information are listed below (where 
permitted by law): 
• Credit header searches are useful in confirming address and Social Security number 
information. 
• State and federal criminal court records and statewide criminal convictions may be used 
to uncover past criminal problems presaging similar difficulties. Indeed, criminal 
background checks may be mandated by law. For example, the Violent Crime Control 
and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 makes it a felony for insurance companies, as well as 
persons employing anyone to conduct the business of insurance, to hire any individual 
convicted of a felony involving dishonesty or a breach of trust.  
• Aircraft mechanics, airmen, medical license, and other licenses are available to ensure 
that basic job requirements are met in the appropriate circumstance. 
• Consumer credit reports may be obtained for purposes of employee selection, retention,  
and promotion. 
• Public filings such as bankruptcy filings, tax liens, and judgments may be obtained to 
identify adverse financial matters that can serve as potential motivators for fraud, 
defamation, and embezzlement. 
• Where a prospective or current employee drives a personally owned vehicle or an 
employer-owned vehicle in furthering the interests of the employer, such activity may 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.525 
expose the employer to liability for damages;  therefore, DMV driving records must be 
checked. 
• Basic information concerning job qualification can be verified through education 
verification and employment verification searches. Note: These are verification tools 
only; they are not definitional in terms of discovering past or current employment. 
• Although workers’ compensation searches may return the subject’s name, Social Security 
number, date of birth, employer’s name, date and type of accident, and nature and extent 
of inquiry, the Americans with Disabilities Act may limit usage of the search results. The 
Act purports to prevent prospective employers from using workers’ compensation 
records in denying employment to otherwise qualified applicants. 
 
Public Record Database Vendors 
Listed below is information about some of the larger commercial database vendors. You can 
shop various services to find the one that meets your needs in the most cost-effective 
manner and the one that fits your current case. In some instances, it may be necessary to use 
more than one service to get an accurate and complete profile. These companies get their 
information from various sources and on various update schedules, so a search in any one 
database may return different results than a search done elsewhere. 
 
Asset Locator and Business Background Check by KnowX 
KnowX is a product of the LexisNexis Risk and Information Analytics Group, and it claims 
to be the most comprehensive source of public information on the Web. It offers easily 
navigable public records searches in various categories, among them asset searches, adverse 
filings, property valuation, and people- and business-locator tools. One can also verify 
licenses, conduct background checks, and look up a company’s history. KnowX is an 
altogether user-friendly source of information.  
 
Most importantly, users can run KnowX’s business background check to uncover 
bankruptcies, judgments, lawsuits, liens, and UCC filings against a business with one search. 
In addition, KnowX’s asset locator service enables users to locate assets such as real estate, 
aircraft, and watercraft with one search. This software can also be used to verify ownership 
and assess property value. 
 
KnowX can be found at www.knowx.com. 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.526   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
US Datalink 
US Datalink is an employee background check service. Although it cannot retrieve 
information as quickly as some other vendors, US Datalink is the only company that relies 
entirely on manual searches for its information. US Datalink exclusively sends its researchers 
to the county courthouse to look up the requested information, as opposed to the electronic 
and possibly faulty information that other online investigative databases use. Therefore, if a 
fraud examiner has the time to wait for his inquiry, US Datalink might be the most reliable 
option. US Datalink also has media resources, and it can be found at www.usdatalink.com. 
 
infoUSA 
infoUSA compiles business and consumer data, and it offers a wide range of data processing 
services. infoUSA users have access to information on 14 million U.S. businesses, 13 million 
executives and professionals, and 210 million U.S. consumers. Searches of infoUSA’s 
database can produce results for a broad range of information, including sales volume, 
corporate linkage, contact names and titles, company history, credit ratings, and any 
headlines involving the business. Furthermore, the versatility of the searches is one of 
infoUSA’s better features; searches can be performed according to business size, location, 
length of time in operation, gender or race of owners, and industry. infoUSA is located at 
www.infousa.com. 
 
Veris 
Veris is a Social Security validation service; it specializes in providing verification of Social 
Security numbers, possible mail drop addresses, dates of birth, and death records. Veris 
allows an investigator to match a Social Security number to a name; however, this service is 
costly (cost per search begins at $115, but the actual cost depends on the type of search and 
number of searches being conducted) but very accurate. Veris can be accessed at www.veris-ssn.com. 
 
CSC Diligenz 
CSC Diligenz is a Web-based due diligence service. It is a great database for retrieving 
information about businesses. With its weekly database updates, CSC Diligenz’s strength lies 
in the reliability of its public record information. CSC Diligenz can produce a business’s 
financial statements, records pertaining to corporate status, business credit, and licensing 
information. UCC filings, bankruptcy, judgments, and corporate good-standing searches are 
just a few of their services. Diligenz is located at www.diligenz.com. 
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.527 
Dialog 
Dialog is a ProQuest company, and it offers users with access to more than 1,200 databases. 
It contains nearly 2 billion records, including references and abstracts of published literature; 
statistical tables; the full text of selected articles; and directory, business, and financial data. 
Dialog can be accessed at www.dialog.com. 
 
D&B 
D&B is a business information service provider. The variety of information available 
through D&B is impressive. It is probably one of the most comprehensive and diverse 
sources available, with facts on more than 130 million companies in more than 190 
countries. D&B is renowned for products like Business Information Report  and Industry Norms 
and Key Business Ratios,  both excellent tools. It is located at www.dnb.com. 
 
Hoover’s 
Hoover’s, a D&B company, is a one-stop reference for business information. Hoover’s 
provides comprehensive, up-to-date business information for professionals who need 
intelligence on U.S. and global companies, industries, and professionals. Hoover’s database 
consists of 65 million companies with in-depth coverage of 40,000 public and non-public 
U.S. and international companies. Subscribers also have access to information on more than 
15 million small, private business across the United States. Hoover’s is located at 
www.hoovers.com. 
 
LexisNexis 
LexisNexis is a legal and business information database that provides its subscribers with 
daily newspapers for either a flat fee or a per-use fee. LexisNexis maintains a cavernous 
database of U.S. and international media sources, including daily newspapers, magazines, and 
television transcripts. In addition, LexisNexis offers a service in which the user can request 
immediate information on difficult-to-find topics. LexisNexis will research the topic and give 
the user the information as quickly as possible. For more information, visit www.lexis.com. 
 
In one form or another, LexisNexis has been in the information business for nearly 30 years. 
It is now one of the leading electronic data firms in the world. Users can obtain access to 
public records, media publications, and court cases and records. For more information, visit 
www.lexisnexis.com. 
 
DCS Information Systems 
Founded in 1967, DCS Information Systems is an established source for investigative 
information. DCS provides online investigative solutions for business and government — 
from financial institutions to law enforcement or investigators. Their online database 
products help organizations prevent and detect fraud; verify application information; screen 
potential employees; and locate debtors, missing  persons, heirs, or assets. DCS provides 
information comprising public records and publicly available information. Its AmeriFind 
online resource system is separated into three areas, making searches simple: 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.528   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• PrimeData provides banking and finance information. 
• QuickFind serves general investigations, security, and fraud prevention and detection. 
• FraudTracer serves insurance fraud investigations and claims. 
 
G.A. Public Records Services 
G.A. Public Records Services specializes in onsite county-level criminal record information. 
It can usually provide a report within 24– 72 hours, has access to records in thousands of 
counties coast to coast. G.A. Public Records Services provides search services for 
employment screening, corporate due diligence, fraud investigations, private investigations, 
and tenant screening. For more information, visit www.gaprs.com. 
 
Experian 
Experian is one of the major providers of consumer credit information, and it provides a 
variety of other public information. Experian provides services on consumer and business 
credit, direct marketing, and real estate information services. Experian maintains credit 
information on more than 210 million U.S. consumers and more than 18 million U.S. 
businesses. Its National Consumer Database is updated 65 times per year with information 
on more than 110 million U.S. households. The National Business Database is updated 
monthly, has facts on more than 18 million companies in all industries, and has more than 
200 million cross-industry application records to help detect inconsistencies in incoming 
applications.  
 
Some of the services provided by Experian include: 
• Business Snapshot Reports that summarize credit histories, including payment patterns 
and legal filings, of small businesses or contractors. 
• Precise ID with Knowledge IQ consist of  scoring, analytics, and knowledge-based 
authentication, and it provides real-time and online validation and verification and fraud 
assessment of names, addresses, Social Security numbers, dates of birth, drivers’ licenses, 
and telephone numbers. 
 
TransUnion  
TransUnion is one of the big three credit report companies, and it offers credit information 
and services for consumers and businesses alike. More specifically, TransUnion is a global 
provider of business intelligence services with technology-based intelligence products, 
including innovative credit-decision and fraud-prevention tools, advanced target-marketing 
products, risk and profitability models, and portfolio management.  
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.529 
TransUnion also offers a Fraud Victim Assistance Department (FVAD). Since its inception, 
the FVAD has helped millions of consumers resolve or prevent problems with credit fraud. 
The FVAD comprises three distinct teams: 
• The Consumer Protection Team (CPT) 
• The Fraud Investigation Response and Support Team (FIRST) 
• The Fraud Assistance and Support Team (FAST) 
 
Search Systems 
Search Systems is a public records directory with more than 55,000 searchable public record 
databases. Its search capabilities include business information, corporate filings, property 
records, deeds, mortgages, criminal and civil court filings, inmates, offenders, births, deaths, 
marriages, unclaimed property, and professional licenses. One of its many directories, the 
criminal records and offenders search, has access to more than 300 million criminal records, 
and its Search Systems Premium offers instant access to more than 100 million bankruptcy, 
judgment, and tax liens. For more information, visit http://publicrecords.searchsystems.net. 
 
Westlaw  
Westlaw is an online legal research service, and it provides access to a comprehensive and 
current collection of public records. Its People Finder database directory contains 
information on individuals compiled from numerous public sources, including telephone 
directories, publishers’ mailing lists, change of address files, real estate filings, utility records, 
public demographic and consumer household data, voter registration records, driver’s license 
data, federal and state death records, and credit header data. For more information, visit 
www.westlaw.com.  
 
Newspaper/Media Databases 
Newspapers, periodicals, and journals can be excellent sources of information in a fraud 
investigation, particularly when searching for background information on an individual or a 
business. For example, in a Texas case, a person accused of insider trading was cleared using 
materials from an media database search. Defense attorneys gathered more than 300 
published comments about the company’s financial prospects and showed that someone 
following the advice distributed freely in the press would have made more money than  
the accused.2 
                                                 
2 Bernstein, Paul. Computers for Lawyers: A Complete Guide to Law Office Automation. 2nd ed. Chicago: ATLA Press, 
1997. 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.530   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Searchable databases containing information from literally hundreds of published sources 
can usually be accessed for free at most libraries. There are also a number of online 
databases that deal specifically with news and media resources. These databases compile a 
number of different media resources and allow the user to search for a specific topic, 
returning articles or transcripts that pertain to the requested subject. Most publications allow 
users to search their archives for free; the full text of articles is available, but usually for a fee. 
Using one of the following services allows users to search many publications at once. 
 
Factiva 
Factiva, from Dow Jones, is tailored for business and financial news searches, maintaining a 
catalog of more than 28,000 of the world’s leading news and business sources from 159 
countries, 350 geographic regions, and in 23 languages. Factiva allows users to pay only for 
the articles downloaded and does not require an annual subscription. For more information, 
visit www.factiva.com. 
 
Highbeam Research  
HighBeam has an extensive archive containing millions of documents from leading 
publications that are updated daily or going back as far as 20 years. Searchable sources 
include newspapers, magazines, journals, transcripts, books, dictionaries, and almanacs. For 
more information, visit www.highbeam.com. 
 
ProQuest 
ProQuest is a data service that offers access to thousands of online journals and magazines 
covering a wide array of subjects. ProQuest’s vast content pools are available to researchers 
through libraries of all types and include the world’s largest digital newspaper archive; 
periodical databases comprising the output of thousands of titles and spanning more than 
500 years, with many in full-text, full-image format; an extensive dissertation collection; and 
various other scholarly collections. For more information, visit www.proquest.com. 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.531 
Other News Database Services 
• Newspapers on the Net (www.onlinenewspapers.com) 
• Newswise (www.newswise.com) 
 
 
Useful Websites 
The following is a list of websites grouped by topic that should prove useful to fraud 
examiners and other anti-fraud professionals. 
 
 
Search Engines 
About.com http://www.about.com
All the Web http://www.alltheweb.com
AltaVista http://www.altavista.com
Ask.com http://www.ask.com
Bing http://www.bing.com
Complete Planet http://aip.completeplanet.com
Copernic http://www.copernic.com
Dmoz http://www.dmoz.org
Dogpile http://www.dogpile.com
Exalead http://www.exalead.com
Excite http://www.excite.com
Go.com http://go.com
Google http://www.google.com
HotBot http://www.hotbot.com
Icerocket http://www.icerocket.com
IWon http://home.iwon.com
Infomine http://infomine.ucr.edu
Internet 101 http://www.internet101.org
Law Crawler — Legal Issues http://lawcrawler.findlaw.com
Legal Engine http://www.legalengine.com
Lococitato http://www.lococitato.com
LookSmart http://www.looksmart.com
Lycos http://www.lycos.com
Mamma http://www.mamma.com
Meta 360 http://www.meta360.com
Metacrawler http://www.metacrawler.com
Monster Crawler http://www.monstercrawler.com
My Way http://goto.myway.com
Northern Light Business http://www.nlsearch.com/bresearch.php
Search Engine Watch http://searchenginewatch.com
Search Monger http://www.searchmonger.com
Search.com http://www.search.com
Search Site http://www.searchsite.com
Snap http://www.snap.com
Spokeo http://www.spokeo.com
Surf Canyon http://www.surfcanyon.com
SurfWax http://www.surfwax.com
Technorati http://technorati.com
WebCrawler http://www.webcrawler.com
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.532   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Web Ferret http://www.webferret.com
Yahoo! http://www.yahoo.com
YoName http://www.yoname.com
Zoominfo http://www.zoominfo.com
  
 
Social-Networking Sites 
Twitter www.twitter.com
MySpace www.myspace.com
Facebook www.facebook.com
Classmates Online www.classmates.com
LinkedIn www.linkedin.com
Reunion www.reunion.com
Bebo www.bebo.com
Orkut www.orkut.com
Hi5 http://hi5.com
Xanga www.xanga.com
Spoke www.spoke.com
Alt www.alt.com
  
 
News Sources 
ABCNews.com http://abcnews. go.com
BNET Research Center http://findarticles.com
CBS http://www.cbsnews.com
CNN Interactive http://www.cnn.com
CRAYON http://www.crayon.net
Dialog Web http://www.dialogweb.com
Dow Jones Factiva http://www.factiva.com
FOX http://www.foxnews.com
Highbeam http://www.highbeam.com
Investigative Reporters and Editors http://www.ire.org
LexisNexis http://www.lexisnexis.com
Market Watch http://www.marketwatch.com
MSNBC http://www.msnbc.msn.com
MSN Money http://moneycentral.msn.com/home.asp 
NBC http://www.nbc.com
CNET News http://news.cnet.com
NewsLink http://newslink.org
Online News papers http://www.onlinenewspapers.com
Refdesk http://www.refdesk.com
Reuters http://www.reuters.com
Salon http://www.salon.com
Slate http://www.slate.com
The Council of State Governments http://www.csg.org
Wired News http://www.wired.com
  
 
Newspapers 
Annapolis Capital-Gazette http://www.hometownannapolis.com
Augusta Chronicle http://chronicle.augusta.com
Baltimore Sun http://www.baltimoresun.com
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.533 
Boston Globe http://www.boston.com/boston globe
Casper Star-Tribune (WY) http://www.trib.com
Chattanooga Times Free Press http://www.timesfreepress.com
Chicago Sun-Times http://www.suntimes.com
Chicago Tribune http://www.chicagotribune.com
Christian Science Monitor http://www.csmonitor.com
Colorado Springs Gazette http://www.gazette.com
Daily Gazette (NY) http://www.dailygazette.com
Dallas Morning News http://www.dallasnews.com
Desert News (UT) http://www.deseretnews.com
Detroit Free Press http://www.freep.com
Evansville Courier & Press (IN) http://www.courier press.com
Florida Times-Union http://www.jacksonville.com
Fort Worth Star-Telegram http://www.star-telegram.com
Gainesville Sun http://www.gainesville.com
Houston Chronicle http://www.chron.com
Knoxville News-Sentinel http://www.knoxnews.com
Los Angeles Times http://www.latimes.com
Miami Herald http://www.miamiherald.com
Missoulian (MT) http://www.missoulian.com
New York Daily News http://www.nydailynews.com
New York Post http://www.nypost.com
New York Times http://www.nytimes.com
Newsday http://www.newsday.com
Norfolk Virginian-Pilot http://hamptonroads.com/pilotonline
Orange County Register http://www.ocregister.com
Orlando Sentinel http://www.orlandosentinel.com
Raleigh News and Observer http://www.newsobserver.com
Roanoke Times http://www.roanoke.com
Salt Lake Tribune http://www.sltrib.com
San Diego Union-Tribune http://www.signonsandiego.com
San Francisco Chronicle/Examiner http://www.sfgate.com
San Jose Mercury News http://www.mercurynews.com
Seattle Times http://seattletimes.nwsource.com
Sioux City Journal http://www.siouxcityjournal.com
St. Paul Pioneer Press http://www.twincities.com
St. Petersburg Times http://www.tampabay.com
The New York Times on the Web http://www.nytimes.com
USA Today http://www.usatoday.com
Wall Street Journal http://online.wsj.com
Washington Post http://www.washingtonpost.com
  
 
University Library Sites 
Brigham Young University http://www.lib.byu.edu
Cal State University — Long Beach http://www.csulb.edu/library
Carnegie Mellon University http://www.library.cmu.edu
Claremont Colleges http://voxlibris.claremont.edu
Cornell University http://www.cornell.edu/libraries
Drexel University http://www.library.drexel.edu
Duke University http://library.duke.edu
Eastern Michigan University http://www.emich.edu/halle
Georgetown University http://library.georgetown.edu
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.534   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Harvard University (HOLLIS—Harvard Online Library Information System) http://lib.harvard.edu 
Indiana Univ. / Purdue Univ. http://www.ulib.iupui.edu
Iowa State University http://www.lib.iastate.edu
Johns Hopkins University http://www.welch.jhu.edu
Kansas State University http://www.lib.ksu.edu
Louisiana State University http://www.lib.lsu.edu
Mansfield University http://lib.mansfield.edu/index.cfm
Miami (OH) University http://www.lib.muohio.edu
Middle Tennessee State University http://library.mtsu.edu
MIT University http://libraries.mit.edu
New Mexico State University http://lib.nmsu.edu
North Carolina State University http://www.lib.ncsu.edu
Princeton University http://libweb.princeton.edu
Tulane University http://library.tulane.edu
University of Arizona http://www.arizona.edu/home/libraries.php 
University of Cal-Berkeley http://www.lib.berkeley.edu
University of Cal-Los Angeles http://www2.library.ucla.edu
University of Cal-Riverside http://library.ucr.edu
University of Florida http://web.uflib.ufl.edu
University of Houston http://info.lib.uh.edu
University of Idaho http://www.lib.uidaho.edu
University of Iowa http://www.lib.uiowa.edu
University of Maine http://www.library.umaine.edu
University System of Maryland and Affiliated Institutions http://www.itd.umd.edu 
University of Michigan http://www.lib.umich.edu
University of Minnesota http://www1.umn.edu
University of New Orleans http://www.uno.edu
University of North Carolina http://www.ils.unc.edu/index.html
University of North Carolina-Charlotte http://www.uncc.edu
University of Virginia http://www.virginia.edu/libraries
Vanderbilt University http://www.library.vanderbilt.edu
Washington University http://www.lib.washington.edu
  
 
State Government Listings 
Alabama http://www.alabama.gov
Alaska http://www.state.ak.us
Arizona http://az.gov
Arkansas http://www.state.ar.us
California http://www.ca.gov
Colorado http://colorado.gov
Connecticut http://www.ct.gov
Delaware http://delaware.gov
Florida http://www.myflorida.com
Georgia http://www.georgia.gov
Hawaii http://www.ehawaii.gov
Idaho http://www.state.id.us
Illinois http://www.illinois.gov
Indiana http://www.state.in.us
Iowa http://www.iowa.gov
Kansas http://www.kansas.gov
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.535 
Kentucky http://kentucky.gov
Louisiana http://www.louisiana.gov
Maine http://www.maine.gov
Maryland http://www.maryland.gov
Massachusetts http://www.mass.gov
Michigan http://www.michigan.gov
Minnesota http://www.state.mn.us
Mississippi http://www.ms.gov
Missouri http://www.mo.gov
Montana http://mt.gov
Nebraska http://www.nebraska.gov
Nevada http://www.nv.gov
New Hampshire http://www.nh.gov
New Jersey http://www.state.nj.us
New Mexico http://www.newmexico.gov
New York http://www.state.ny.us
North Carolina http://www.state.nc.us
North Dakota http://www.nd.gov
Ohio http://www.ohio.gov
Oklahoma http://www.ok.gov
Oregon http://www.oregon.gov
Pennsylvania http://www.state.pa.us
Rhode Island http://www.ri.gov
South Carolina http://www.sc.gov
South Dakota http://www.sd.gov
Tennessee http://www.tennessee.gov
Texas http://www.state.tx.us
Utah http://www.utah.gov
Vermont http://vermont.gov
Virginia http://www.virginia.gov
Washington http://www.state.wa.us
West Virginia http://www.wv.gov
Wisconsin http://www.wisconsin.gov
Wyoming http://wyoming.gov
  
 
Telephone Numbers and Addresses 
AOL Hometown-home page finder http://site.aol.com/netfind/hometown.html 
AT&T AnyWho http://www.anywho.com
555-1212 http://www.555-1212.com
Big Yellow http://www.bigyellow.com
Bigbook http://www.bigbook.com 
E-mail addresses, reverse phone http://www.iaf.net
GTE Superpages http://www.superpages.com
InfoSpace http://www.infospaceinc.com
InfoUSA http://www.infousa.com
Intelius-people search http://find.intelius.com
Military Personnel Records http://www.archives.gov
PeopleFinders.com http://www. peoplefinders.com
People Search http://www. peoplesearch.net
Phone Numbers (Infobel) http://www.infobel.com/teldir
Register.com http://www.register.com
Search-By-Number http://www.search-by-number.com
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.536   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Semaphore Corp http://www.semaphorecorp.com
Switchboard http://www.switchboard.com
The PI Mall http://www.pimall.com
U.S Web Finder http://uswebfinder.com
WhoWhere? http://www.whowhere.com
Yahoo! People Search http://people.yahoo.com
Yellowbook http://www.yellowbook.com
  
 
Maps  
Bing Maps http://www.bing.com/maps
Google Maps http://maps.google.com
MapQuest http://www.mapquest.com
Maps On Us http://www.mapsonus.com
  
 
Databases — Public Record Searches 
BRB Publications, Inc. http://www.brb pub.com
ChoicePoint http://www.choice point.net
ChoicePoint: AutotrackXP http://atxp.choicepoint.com
DCS Information Systems http://www.dnis.com
Dialog http://www.dialog.com
Diligenz http://www.diligenz.com
Dun & Bradstreet http://www.dnb.com
Experian http://www.experian.com
FedWorld Http://www.fedworld.gov
G.S. Public Record Services http://www.gaprs.biz
InfoUSA http://www.infousa.com
KnowX http://www.knowx.com
LexisNexis http://global.lexisnexis.com/us
Locate Fast http://www.loc8fast.com
Merlin Information Systems http://www.merlindata.com
National Center for Health Statistics, Vital Records http://www.cdc.gov/nchs 
Noncommercial Organizations http://www.pir.org
PublicData http://www.publicdata.com
Searchsystems.net http://www.searchsystems.net
Social Security Number Verification Services http://www.veris-ssn.com
USDatalink http://www.usdatalink.net
  
 
Legal Resources 
Docusearch Investigations http://www.docusearch.com
Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts http://www.uscourts.gov
Attorney search http://lawyers.findlaw.com
California Laws http://www.leginfo.ca.gov/calaw.html
Courthouse News http://www.courthousenews.com
Cyber Securities Laws http://www.cybersecuritieslaw.com
Divorce Central http://www.divorcecentral.com
Federal Legislative Information on the Internet http://thomas.loc.gov 
FindLaw http://www.findlaw.com
FindLaw California Codes and Statutes http://california.findlaw.com
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.537 
Florida Statutes http://www.fdle.state.fl.us/statutes
Law on the Web http://www.law.com
Lawyers http://www.lawyers.com
Lawyer Directory http://www.lawyers.findlaw.com
Legal Ethics http://www.legalethics.com
Legal Info Institute of Cornell http://www.law.cornell.edu
Legal Research on the Web http://gsulaw.gsu.edu/metaindex
Legal Studies at the University of Massachusetts http://www.umass.edu/legal 
Martindale http://www.martindale.com
Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing http://www.occ.treas.gov/BSA/BSAmain.htm 
National Center for State Courts http://www.ncsconline.org
Nolo http://www.nolo.com
Online Sunshine — Florida Legislature http://www.leg.state.fl.us
Practical Law Company http://us.practicallaw.com
Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press http://www.rcfp.org
Reporters Committee — Taping Conversations http://www.rcfp.org/taping/index.html 
Supreme Court of the U.S. http://www.supremecourt.gov
U.S. Supreme Court Decisions - before 1975 http://supcourt.ntis.gov
U.S. Supreme Court Internet Sites http://llrx.com/features/scourtsites.htm 
University of Chicago Law School http://www1.lib.uchicago.edu
  
 
Government Sites and Criminal Justice Resources 
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) http://http://www.atf.gov/ 
Bureau of Industry and Security’s List of Denied Persons http://www.bis.doc.gov/dpl 
Central Intelligence Agency http://www.cia.gov
Class Action http://www.classaction.com 
County Sheriff’s Offices — By State http://www.corrections.com/links
Court Websites http://www.uscourts.gov
Courtlink http://www.lexisnexis.com/courtlink/online 
Database of Government Websites http://www.usa.gov
Federal Citizen Information Center http://www.pueblo.gsa.gov
FBI Law Enforcement Bulletin http://www.fbi.gov/publications/leb/leb.htm 
U.S. Department of Homeland Security http://www.dhs.gov
FedWorld  http://www.fedworld.gov
Federal Bureau of Investigation http://www.fbi.gov
Federal Bureau of Prisons http://www.bop.gov
Federal Election Commission http://www.fec.gov
Federal Election Commission information http://www.fec.gov/ans/answers.shtml 
Federal Inspector General http://www.ignet.gov
Federal Judicial Center http://www.fjc.gov
Florida Department of Corrections http://www.dc.state.fl.us
Florida Department of Law Enforcement http://www.fdle.state.fl.us
Florida Department of State http://www.dos.state.fl.us
Florida Government Website http://myflorida.com/portal/Government 
GovSpot http://www.govspot.com
Internal Revenue Service http://www.irs.gov
Investigator’s Guide to the Sources of http://www.gao.gov/special.pubs/soi.htm 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.538   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Information (GAO/OSI-97-2) 
Library of Congress http://www.loc.gov
National Address Server http://www.cedar.buffalo.edu/adserv.html 
National Archives  http://www.archives.gov
National Center for State Courts http://www.ncsconline.org
National Criminal Justice Reference Service http://www.ncjrs.org
Noblis http://www.noblis.org
Nonprofit Gateway http://www.usa.gov/Business/Nonprofit.shtml 
Directorate of Defense Trade Controls http://pmddtc.state.gov
Police Officers Internet Directory http://www.officer.com
Public Access to Electronic Records — PACER http://pacer.psc.uscourts.gov 
Published List of Recalls — National Highway Traffic Safety Administration http://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov 
Royal Canadian Mounted Police http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca
SEC Enforcement Regulatory Actions http://www.sec.gov/rules.shtml
SEC Division of Enforcement http://www.sec.gov/divisions/enforce.shtml 
Securities & Exchange Commission EDGAR http://www.sec.gov/edgar.shtml 
Securities Class Action Clearinghouse http://securities.stanford.edu
Selective Service System http://www.sss.gov
Sex Offenders Registry http://www.fbi.gov/hq/cid/cac/states.htm 
Social Security Death Index Search http://ssdi.rootsweb.com
SSN Validation Database http://usinfosearch.com/ssn_validation_database.htm 
State and Federal Prisons http://www.bop.gov
State and Local Government on the Internet http://www.statelocal gov.net 
State Legislatures http://www.ncsl.org
Superior Information Services http://www.superiorinfo.com
Texas Department of Public Safety—Crime Records http://records.txdps.state.tx.us 
USA.gov http://www.usa.gov
U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission http://www.cftc.gov 
U.S. Department of Justice http://www.usdoj.gov
U.S. Department of Justice — Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section http://www.cybercrime.gov 
U.S. Federal Inspectors General http://www.ignet.gov
U.S. Federal Communications Commission http://www.fcc.gov
U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation http://www.fdic.gov
U.S. Federal Food & Drug Administration http://www.fda.gov
U.S. General Services Administration http://www.gsa.gov
U.S. Government Printing Office http://www.access.gpo.gov
U.S. Federal Trade Commission http://www.ftc.gov
U.S. Government Accountability Office http://www.gao.gov
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office http://www.uspto.gov
U.S. Postal Service http://www.usps.gov/ncsc
U.S. Supreme Court http://www.supremecourtus.gov
United Nations Crime & Justice Information Network (UNCJIN) http://www.uncjin.org 
Vital Records Database http://www.vitalrec.com
Voter’s Registration http://www.global-locate.com
White House http://www.whitehouse.gov
  
 
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.539 
Other Fraud-Related Websites  and Websites of Interest 
ACL — Data Analysis Software http://www.acl.com
Active Most Wanted and Criminal Investigations http://www.activemostwanted.com 
Association of College and University Auditors http://www.acua.org 
AFU and Urban Legends Archive http://www.snopes.com
Any Birthday http://www.anybirthday.com
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners http://www.ACFE.com
Better Business Bureau Web Server http://www.bbb.org
Broward County Sheriff’s Office http://www.sheriff.org
CBA: Consumer Tips for Visa and MasterCard http://www.cba.ca
Company Site Locator http://www.switchboard.com
Computer Security Institute http://www.gocsi.com
Consumer Education — Fraud http://www.ftc.gov/bcp/consumer.shtm 
Corrections Connection http://www.corrections.com
CPA Directory http://www.cpadirectory.com/index.cfm 
Check Fraud http://www.ckfraud.org
Black Book Online http://www.blackbookonline.info
Cyber Space Law Center http://www.findlaw.com/01topics/10cyberspace/index.html
Dan Moldea http://www.moldea.com
EndFraud.com http://www.endfraud.com
Financial Scandals http://www.ex.ac.uk/~RDavies/arian/scandals 
Forensic Accounting Information http://www.forensic-accounting-information.com 
Fraud Index http://www.scambusters.org
Fuld & Company’s Internet Intelligence Index http://www.fuld.com 
High Technology Crime Investigation Association http://htcia.org 
Hoover’s http://www.hoovers.com
Identity Theft—Privacy Rights Clearinghouse http://www.privacyrights.org  
Identity Theft Assumption and Deterrence Act http://www.identitytheft.org 
Internet Anti-Scam http://www.nerdworld.com/nw1319.html 
Internet Center for Corruption Research http://www.icgg.org
Internet Crime Complaint Center http://www.ic3.gov
Inventor Fraud Center, National http://www.inventorfraud.com
Investor Protection Trust http://www.investor protection.org
Justice Reference Service, National http://www.ncjrs.org
Loss Prevention Concepts http://www.lpconline.com
Missing Money http://www.missingmoney.com
Municipal Bond Scandals http://www.lissack.com
BBB Wise Giving Alliance http://give.org
National Consumers League’s Fraud Center http://www.fraud.org
National White Collar Crime Center http://www.nw3c.org
Network Solutions — Website operator Information http://www.networksolutions.com 
Nigeria - The 419 Coalition Website http://home.rica.net/alphae/419coal
Noble Ventures — Asset Searches http://www.nobleventures.com
Offshore Business News & Research http://offshorebusiness.com
Ponzi Schemes http://www.crimes-of-persuasion.com
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.540   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Compliance Headquarters http://www.complianceheadquarters.com 
Privacy Tools http://www.privacytools.com
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse http://www. privacyrights.org/links.htm 
Scambusters http://www.scambusters.org
Scams and Swindles http://www.swindles.com
ScamWatch http://www.scamwatch.gov.au
Security Management Online http://www.securitymanagement.com
Software & Information Industry Association - Anti-Piracy Division http://www.siia.net/piracy 
SSA Fraud Reporting http://www.socialsecurity.gov
Taxpayers Against Fraud http://www.taf.org
TD Bank Fraud Prevention http://www.tdbanknorth.com/bank/fraud_ prevention.html
Urban Legends Reference Pages http://www.snopes.com
U.S. Postal Inspection Service — Consumer Fraud http://postalinspectors.uspis.gov 
Verizon Business http://www.verizonbusiness.com/us
Virus Bulletin http://www.virusbtn.com/resources/ prevalence 
Website hoax— F-Secure http://www.f-secure.com/virus-info/hoax 
Website hoax — Vmyths http://www.vmyths.com
Website hoax — Symantec http://www.symantec.com/business/security_response
Whistleblower’s Website: Phillips and Cohen http://www.phillipsandcohen.com
World Bank http://www.worldbank.org
  
 
Health Care/Insurance Fraud  
AMA Select http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/home/index.shtml 
America’s Health Insurance Plans http://www.ahip.org
American Bar Association—Medicine & Law Committee http://www.abanet.org/tips/medicine/links.html#fraud 
American Medical Association http://www.ama-assn.org
Coalition Against Insurance Fraud http://www.insurancefraud.org
Corrections Links — Health Care http://www.corrections.com/networks/healthcare 
Department of Health and Human Services OIG http://www.hhs.gov 
Ed Hayes — Indexes to medical sites http://www.edha yes.com
Excluded Parties List System http://www.epls.gov
Health Information Technology — U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services http://www.hhs.gov/healthit/federalprojectlist.html 
HIPAA  http://www.cms.hhs.gov/HIPAAGenInfo 
International Association of Special Investigation Units http://www.iasiu.org 
Medical Economics Magazine http://www.memag.com
Medical Information Bureau http://www.mib.com
Medicare Fraud and Abuse Training — Online http://www.cms.hhs.gov/Contr actorLearningResources 
National Association of Insurance Commissioners http://www.naic.org 
National Coalition on Health Care http://www.nchc.org
National Fraud Information Center http://www.fraud.org
National Health Care Anti-Fraud Association http://www.nhcaa.org 
National Insurance Crime Bureau http://www.nicb.org
National Practitioner Data Bank http://www.npdb-hipdb.com
Office of Inspector General, Health and http://oig.hhs.gov
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.541 
Human Services Office of Inspector General, Social Security http://www.ssa.gov/oig/guideline.htm
PDR — Physician Desk Reference http://www.pdr.net
Property Casualty Insurer’s Association of America http://www.pciaa.net/sitehome.nsf/main 
Research America — medical links http://www.researchamerica.org/links
The HMO Page http://www.hmo page.org
Ultimate Insurance Links http://www.ultimateinsurancelinks.com 
University of Florida—College of Medicine — Compliance http://www.med.ufl.edu/research/rac/compliance 
Insurance Quotes http://www.insurance quotes.com
  
 
State Insurance Fraud Divisions  
Alabama http://www.aldoi.gov
Alaska http://www.commerce.state.ak.us/insurance 
Arizona http://www.id.state.az.us/fraud.html
Arkansas http://insurance.arkansas.gov
California http://www.insurance.ca.gov/0300-fraud/index.cfm 
Colorado http://www.dora.state.co.us/Insurance
Connecticut http://www.ct.gov/cid
Delaware http://www.delawareinsurance.gov
Florida http://www.fldfs.com/fraud
Georgia http://www.inscomm.state.ga.us
Hawaii http://dccakaku1.hawaii.gov/dcca/areas/ins 
Idaho http://www.doi.idaho.gov
Illinois http://www.insurance.illinois.gov
Indiana http://www.in.gov/idoi
Iowa http://www.iid.state.ia.us
Kansas http://www.ksinsurance.org
Kentucky http://insurance.ky.gov
Louisiana http://www.ldi.state.la.us
Maine http://www.maine.gov/pfr/insurance
Maryland http://www.mdinsurance.state.md.us
Massachusetts http://www.mass.gov/doi
Michigan http://www.michigan.gov
Minnesota http://www.state.mn.us
Mississippi http://www.mid.state.ms.us
Missouri http://insurance.mo.gov
Montana http://sao.mt.gov/insurance/index.asp
Nebraska http://www.doi.ne.gov
Nevada http://www.doi.state.nv.us
New Hampshire http://www.nh.gov/insurance
New Mexico http://www.stopfraud.org/
New Jersey http://www.state.nj.us/dobi/index.html 
New York http://www.ins.state.ny.us/nyins.htm
North Carolina http://www.ncdoi.com
North Dakota http://www.nd.gov/ndins
Ohio http://www.ohioinsurance.gov
Oklahoma http://www.oid.state.ok.us
Oregon http://www.cbs.state.or.us/external/ins 
Pennsylvania http://www.insurance.pa.gov
Puerto Rico http://www.ocs.gobierno.pr
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.542   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Rhode Island http://www.dbr.state.ri.us/divisions/insurance 
South Carolina http://www.doi.sc.gov
South Dakota http://www.state.sd.us/drr2/reg/insurance 
Tennessee http://www.state. tn.us/commerce/insurance 
Texas http://www.tdi.state.tx.us
Utah http://www.insurance.utah.gov
Vermont http://www.bishca.state.vt.us
Virginia http://www.scc.virginia.gov/division/boi 
Washington http://www.insurance.wa.gov
West Virginia http://www.wvinsurance.gov
Wisconsin http://oci.wi.gov
Wyoming http://insurance.state.wy.us
  
 
Telecom Fraud/Security  
Federal Communications Commission http://www.fcc.gov
Financial Industry Regulatory Authority http://www.finra.org
Help Net Security http://www.net-security.org
International Engineering Consortium http://www.iec.org
Neural Technologies http://www.neuralt.com
Travelassist Magazine — Phone Card Fraud http://www.travelassist.com/mag/a27.html 
 
 
Auditing 
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants http://www.aicpa.org 
COSO http://www.coso.org
Government Auditing Standards http://www.gao.gov/govaud/ybk01.htm 
Institute of Internal Auditors http://www.theiia.org
Internal Auditing World Wide Web http://www.bitwise.net/iawww
International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board http://www.ifac.org/IAASB 
UNC Business Manual  http://www.unc.edu/finance/busman
  
 
Investment Resources 
Corporate Information http://www.corporateinformation.com
EDGAR Online http://freeedgar.com
Kiplinger http://www.kiplinger.com
Thestreet.com http://www.thestreet.com
Wall Street Network http://www.wallstreetnet.com
  
 
International Sites 
 
Global Search Engines 
Bubl link http://bubl.ac.uk
Euroseek  http://www.euroseek.com
Matilda — Mega Search Engine Australia http://www.aussieseek.com
Search Engine Colossus http://www.searchenginecolossus.com
Search New Zealand http://www.searchnz.co.nz
Voila http://www.voila.fr
WebWombat http://webwombat.com.au
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.543 
Newspapers 
BBC News http://news.bbc.co.uk
Evening Standard http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/standard 
Financial Times http://news.ft.com/home
International Herald Tribune http://global.nytimes.com
Internet Public Library http://www.ipl.org/div/news
Le Monde http://www.lemonde.fr
Newspaper Society http://www.newspapersoc.org.uk
Onlinenewspapers.com http://www.onlinenewspapers.com
The Daily Telegraph http://www.telegraph.co.uk
The Guardian Unlimited http://www.guardian.co.uk
The Independent http://www.independent.co.uk
The Irish Times http://www.ireland.com
The Newspaper Society Database http://www.nsdatabase.co.uk/index.html 
The Scotsman http://www.scotsman.com
The Times Online http://www.timesonline.co.uk
Times Higher Education Supplement http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/ 
Times of India http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com


News and Information Services 
BBC News http://www.bbc.co.uk
Canada.com http://www.canada.com/index.html
Euronews  http://www.euronews.net
Future Events News Service http://www.fens.com
Global Investigative Journalism http://www.globalinvestigativejournalism.org 
Hansard (House of Commons Debates http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmhansrd.htm
ITN Online http://itn.co.uk
Microsoft Network News http://uk.msn.com
NewsNow http://www.newsnow.co.uk
NineMSN http://ninemsn.com.au
Sky News http://news.sky.com/skynews/home
The Economist http://www.economist.com
The Press Association http://www.pressassociation.com
UK Business Park — Media News http://www.ukbusiness park.co.uk
Yahoo! UK & Ireland News http://uk.news.yahoo.com
  
 
Libraries 
Aberdeen University http://www.abdn.ac.uk/library
British Library http://www.bl.uk
Cambridge University http://www.lib.cam.ac.uk
Edinburgh University http://www.lib.ed.ac.uk/lib
Exeter University  http://www.as.ex.ac.uk/library
Glasgow University http://www.lib.gla.ac.uk
King’s College, London http://www.kcl.ac.uk/iss
Oxford University http://www.ox.ac.uk/libraries
Public Libraries (UK) http://dspace.dial.pipex.com/town/square/ac940/weblibs.html
University, London’s Global http://www.ucl.ac.uk
University of Bath http://www.bath.ac.uk/library
University of East Anglia http://www1.uea.ac.uk/cm/home/services/units/is 
 
 
Accessing Information Online  Investigation 
3.544   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Telephone Numbers 
AOL International Directories http://site.aol.com/netfind/international.html 
Infobel World http://www.infobel.com/teldir
UK Business Directory http://www.freeindex.co.uk
Yellow Pages http://www.yell.com
  
 
Maps 
MapMachine http://plasma.nationalgeographic.com/mapmachine 
Maporama http://world.maporama.com
MapQuest http://www.mapquest.com
MultiMap http://www.multimap.com/map/places.cgi 
Ordnance Survey http://www.ordnancesurvey.co.uk/oswebsite 
Street Map http://www.streetmap.co.uk
The RAC http://www.rac.co.uk
  
 
Legal Resources 
Access to Law http://www.Accesstolaw.com
Centre for Commercial Law Studies — University of London http://www.ccls.edu 
Consumer Law Center http://www.hg.org/consume.html
Dundee University Legal Websites Directory http://www.Dundee.ac.uk/law
FindLaw International Resources http://www.findlaw.com/12international 
Her Majesty’s Court Service  http://www.hmcourts-service.gov.uk
InfoLaw Gateway http://www.infolaw.co.uk
LawLink http://www.lawlink.ie
The Law Commission http://www.lawcom.gov.uk
The Law Society of England and Wales http://www.lawsociety.org.uk/home.law 
 
 
Government Sites and Law Enforcement Sites 
Australia — Attorney General’s Department http://www.ag.gov.au
Australia’s Ministerial Council on Consumer Affairs http://www.consumer.gov.au 
Australian Courts and Legislation http://www.nla.gov.au/oz/law.html
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade http://www.dfat.gov.au 
Australian Privacy Commissioner http://www.privacy.gov.au
City of London Police http://www.cityoflondon.police.uk
Department for Business Enterprise & Regulatory Reform http://www.berr.gov.uk 
Government Information Centre http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/index.htm 
Information Commissioner Office http://www.ico.gov.uk
Financial Services Authority http://www.fsa.gov.uk
Foreign and Commonwealth Office http://www.fco.gov.uk
HM Treasury http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk
International Centre for Criminal Law Reform and Criminal Justice Policy http://www.icclr.law.ubc.ca 
Ministry of Economic Development http://www.med.govt.nz
National Criminal Intelligence Service http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/index.htm 
New Zealand Ministry of Consumer Affairs http://www.consumeraffairs.govt.nz
New Zealand Government Online http://newzealand.govt.nz
Investigation  Accessing Information Online 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.545 
New Zealand Police Links http://www.policeassn.org.nz/links.htm 
Organized Crime—Nathanson Centre http://www.yorku.ca/nathanson
Intellectual Property Office http://www.ipo.gov.uk
Royal Canadian Mounted Police http://www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca
Serious Organised Crime Agency http://www.soca.gov.uk
The European Commission http://ec.europa.eu
The Home Office  http://www.homeoffice.gov.uk
The National Archives http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/default.htm 
nited Kingdom Parliament http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk 
Worldwide Embassies and Consulates http://www.embassyworld.com
  
 
Specialized Fraud-Related Websites and Websites of Interest  
Association of British Insurers http://www.abi.or.uk
Australian Institute of Criminology http://www.aic.gov.au
Department for Work and Pensions http://www.dwp.gov.uk
HM Treasury Fraud Reports http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk
Serious Fraud Office http://www.sfo.gov.uk
The Insolvency Service http://www.insolvency.gov.uk
  
 
Auditing 
UK National Audit Office http://www.nao.org.uk
HM Revenue and Customs http://www.hmrc.gov.uk
Insolvency Procedures and Corporate Rescue http://www.insolvency.gov.uk 
Association of Business Recovery Professionals http://www.r3.org.uk 
Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales http://www.icaew.co.uk 
Association of Charted Certified Accountants http://www.acca.co.uk 
Charted Institute of Management Accountants http://www.cimaglobal.com 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of cotland http://www.icas.org.uk 
Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland http://www.icai.ie 
London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange — Euronext http://www.euronext.com 


 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.601 
DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING TOOLS 
 
In today’s world, computers are an integral part of fraud examination. Whether using the 
Internet in an investigation or to analyze data, it is essential that the fraud examiner have 
access to a computer and its applications. Computers contain volumes of data—financial 
data, marketing data, customer data, correspondence, and more, and evidence of fraud could 
be located within that data. Unfortunately, fraudulent data often looks like legitimate data 
when viewed in the raw. Taking a sample and testing it may not uncover fraudulent activity. 
 
Fortunately, for fraud examiners, software companies have developed computer programs 
that enable users to sift through mounds of information. These programs identify current 
customers, potential customers, and future trends within their respective industries, and can 
be configured to identify breaks in audit control programs and anomalies in accounting 
records.  
 
In general, these software programs perform two primary functions that fraud examiners use 
to explore and analyze large amounts of data: data mining and data analytics. Data mining  is 
the science of extracting information from large data sets or databases. Data analysis  refers to 
any statistical process used to analyze data. And if properly used, these processes can provide 
the ultimate system of red flags, detecting a fraudulent situation long before previously 
possible. 
 
 
Data Mining 
Data mining has roots in statistics, machine learning, data management and databases, 
pattern recognition, and artificial intelligence. All of these are concerned with certain aspects 
of data analysis, so they have much in common;  yet they each have a distinct and individual 
flavor, emphasizing particular problems and types of solutions. 
 
Data mining has great potential to help organizations shift their energy and focus to the 
most important information in their databases. Data mining tools comb databases for 
obscured patterns, finding predictive information that even experts may not recognize. 
Using data mining technologies, companies can evaluate a plethora of information, spotting 
patterns in their marketing and business procedures.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.602   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Although data mining technologies provide key advantages to marketing and business 
activities, they can also manipulate financial data that was previously hidden within a 
company’s database, enabling fraud examiners to detect potential fraud.  
 
Previously, the data-mining process required a computer programmer to oversee the 
process; however, this is no longer necessary. The current method uses a computer and 
computer software to assist in the data-mining process. Data mining software provides an 
easy to use computerized process that gives the fraud examiner the ability to get to data at a 
required level of detail.  
 
Data mining combines several different techniques essential to detecting fraud, including the 
streamlining of raw data into understandable patterns.  
 
Data mining can also help prevent fraud before it happens. For example, SPSS Business 
Intelligence, a consulting group for businesses in electronic commerce, reports that some of 
their customers use data mining tools and applications to develop anti-fraud models that 
score transactions in real-time. The scoring is customized for each business, involving 
factors such as locale of the order, frequency of the order, payment history, and other 
factors. Once a transaction is assigned a high-risk score, the merchant can decide whether to 
accept the transaction, deny it, or investigate further.  
 
Data mining is an effective way for fraud examiners to develop fraud targets for further 
investigation. It can mine databases for various fraud indicators, such as: (1) specific types of 
transactions; (2) patterns within the data; or (3) a relationship between two data fields that 
should not have a relationship (e.g., the same address or telephone number for companies 
with different names). Targets are then examined to develop an investigative strategy 
involving site visits and face-to-face interviews. Data mining can also be refined based on 
interviews of targets.  
 
One of the most sophisticated uses of data mining is known as computer matching. Also called 
data matching  (in Australia and Canada), this approach involves the comparison of two 
discreet data sets to identify questionable overlaps.  
 
But before applying data mining processes, it is important to identify the sources from which 
the data will be collected. Data may be stored in any of the following locations: 
• Mainframe software 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.603 
• Laptop installed software 
• Security system software 
• Hand held devices issued by the company’s employees (e.g., smart phones, thumb drives, 
inventory scanning equipment, etc.) 
• Company vehicle GPS systems 
• Telephone systems  
• Time card systems 
• Key card access 
 
Often, companies use data warehouses to manage data for analysis. Data warehouses  are 
repositories of a company’s electronic data designed to facilitate reporting and analysis. By 
storing data in a data warehouse, data users can query and analyze relevant data stored in a 
single location. Thus, a company with a data warehouse can perform various types of 
analytic operations (e.g., identifying red flags, transaction trends, patterns, or anomalies) to 
assist management with its decision-making responsibilities. 
 
Although this section focuses on electronic data, examiners should also identify manually 
generated data, such as: 
• Visitor check-in logs 
• Appointment logs or individual calendars 
• Customer receipts for cash payments 
• Return merchandise slips 
• Any manually maintained lists 
 
After the examiner has identified the data sources, he should identify how the information is 
stored. This means reviewing the database schema and technical documentation, which 
should allow the investigator to determine how information is stored. One must be ready to 
face a number of pitfalls when attempting to identify how information is stored, from weak 
or nonexistent documentation to limited collaboration from the IT department.  
 
Moreover, once collected, it is critical to ensure that the data is complete and appropriate for 
the analysis to be performed. Depending on how the data was collected and processed, it 
could require some scrubbing to make it usable for analysis purposes; it may be necessary to 
modify certain field formats (e.g., date, time, currency, etc.) to make the information usable. 
 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.604   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data Analysis 
Once data has been extracted using data mining  techniques, it must be analyzed. While data 
analysis is used mainly as an audit technique, it can be an important part of the fraud 
detection toolkit. Although it cannot be used as evidence that a fraud was committed or that 
a specific individual was involved, it can serve to identify red flags associated with a wide 
variety of frauds. It will thereby provide investigators with a trail to follow. 
 
 
Using Data Analysis Software 
 
Advantages of Using Data Analysis Software 
There are five significant advantages to using data analysis software. First, data analysis 
software allows the fraud examiner to centralize an investigation, relying less on others to 
gather pertinent information. Because of the amount of information data mining software is 
able to sort through, the examiner no longer has to rely on different sources for information. 
In the past, when analyzing a company’s books for possible discrepancies, the examiner 
would have to ask for the assistance of several persons within the accounting department to 
locate the pertinent information. Now, however, the data analysis program will do all the 
“leg work,” ensuring an above-the-board investigation without many variables. 
 
Second, data analysis software allows the fraud examiner to ensure that an investigation is 
accurate and complete. In the past, an audit or fraud examination could only be complete to 
the extent that the investigator was able to sift through information. When looking at one 
month’s worth of a company’s transactions, a fraud examiner might be forced to research 
more than one million transactions. Given the amount of time an auditor generally has to 
conduct a single examination, the depth of a manual audit can be suspect at best. By using a 
data analysis program, the fraud examiner can run several different analysis patterns in a 
matter of hours, enabling him to look at greater volumes of information from a number of 
different angles. These procedures lead to a more comprehensive examination. 
 
Third, data analysis allows the fraud examiner to base predictions about the probability of a 
fraudulent situation on reliable statistical information. By utilizing data mining software, the 
fraud examiner can base any strong suspicions of fraudulent activities on hard numbers. 
Because the software will compare one month’s expenditures with the same data for the rest 
of the months of the year, the fraud examiner can point conclusively to troubled areas. With 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.605 
hard data to support a fraud examiner’s suspicions, a company is more likely to conduct 
further investigations into the wrongdoing. 
 
Fourth, data analysis allows the fraud examiner to search entire data files for red flags of 
possible fraud. The number of checkpoints a fraud examiner can set up using a data analysis 
program is staggering. By cutting down on the paperwork involved in an investigation, the 
fraud examiner is able to execute a number of different searches and analyses of the 
company’s raw data.  
 
Finally, data analysis can assist the fraud examiner in developing reference files for ongoing 
fraud detection and investigation work. By performing audits and examinations with data 
analysis software, the fraud examiner will begin to recognize trends and set up a list of 
precedents for individual accounting situations, such as a monthly statement reconciliation. 
In doing so, the fraud examiner can establish a “norm” with which to compare individual 
months or years. These precedents can also be used by the fraud examiner in general terms, 
and the knowledge can be applied to nearly any fraud investigation. 
 
Core Data Analysis Software Functions 
Computers can scan database information for several specific types of information, creating 
a red-flag system. To perform this, most software packages use a combination of different 
functions. These functions are: 
• Sorting 
• Record selection 
• Joining files 
• Multi-file processing 
• Correlation analysis 
• Verifying multiples of a number 
• Compliance verification 
• Duplicate searches 
• Vertical ratio analysis 
• Horizontal ratio analysis 
• Date functions 
• Graphing 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.606   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sorting 
To sort means to arrange data in a meaningful order. Sorting is nothing new; most reports 
you read are sorted in some way. With sorted data, you can quickly pick out what is 
important. An investigator can ask a program to sort information using different methods, 
such as alphabetically or numerically. For instance, when searching for a suspected 
fraudster’s name out of thousands in a check disbursement file, the software can quickly sort 
a list of payee names. 
 
Sample customer sales data  
 
Date Invoice Customer Amount 
5/4/10 M3158001 J789889 $12,500.00 
7/5/10 M5958256 Q189425 $14,580.00 
8/9/10 M8897158 T681897 $38,889.00 
7/25/09 M1569897 T888971 $87,569.56 
12/20/10 M3158001 P123089 $12,500.00 
1/8/10 M2098159 W555258 $56,347.23 
 
Data sorted by invoice number  
 
Date Invoice Customer Amount 
7/25/09 M1569897 T888971 $87,569.56 
1/8/10 M2098159 W555258 $56,347.23 
5/4/10 M3158001 J789889 $12,500.00 
12/20/10 M3158001 P123089 $12,500.00 
7/5/10 M5958256 Q189425 $14,580.00 
8/9/10 M8897158 T681897 $38,889.00 
 
Data sorted by amount  
 
Date Invoice Customer Amount 
5/4/10 M3158001 J789889 $12,500.00 
12/20/10 M3158001 P123089 $12,500.00 
7/5/10 M5958256 Q189425 $14,580.00 
8/9/10 M8897158 T681897 $38,889.00 
1/8/10 M2098159 W555258 $56,347.23 
7/25/09 M1569897 T8 88971 $87,569.56 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.607 
Record Selection  
Specific record selection is accomplished by a request or query of the computer to find the 
occurrences of items or records in a field. This type of request will only return instances 
where the record did occur, effectively reducing large amounts of information into concise 
lists. Often, additional criteria placed on the record selection or query will reveal a more 
pertinent list of information. Most data analysis programs include simple Find macros to 
help locate specific records.  
 
Joining Files  
The Join function gathers together the specified parts of different data files. Joining files 
combines fields from two sorted input files into a third file. Join is used to match data in a 
transaction file with records in a master file, such as matching invoice data in an accounts 
receivable file to a master cluster. For example, you may need to compare two different files 
to find differing records between files. The following is an example of how joining two files 
can easily provide that information. 
 
File 1 
Customer Account Balance Last Invoice 
Jerry’s Cleaners 555221 $12,500 12/30/10 
Quality Garments 555658 $9,283 11/15/10 
Beverly’s Tailoring 554891 $27,588 01/15/10 
 
File 2 
Customer Account Balance Last Invoice 
Quality Garments 555658 $9,283 11/15/10 
McCloud’s Fabrics 556897 $10,888 09/24/10 
Beverly’s Tailoring 554891 $27,588 01/15/10 
 
The JOINED exception file 
Customer Account Balance Last Invoice 
McCloud’s Fabrics 556897 $10,888 09/24/09 
Jerry’s Cleaners 555221 $12,500 12/30/09 
 
Multi-File Processing  
Multi-file processing allows the user to relate several files by defining relationships between 
multiple files, without the use of the Join command. A common data relationship would be 
to relate an outstanding invoice master file to an accounts receivable file based on the 
customer number. The relationship can be further extended to include an invoice detail file 
based on invoice number. This relationship will allow you to see which customers have 
outstanding invoices sorted by date.  
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.608   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Correlation Analysis 
Using this function, investigators can determine the relationships between different variables 
in the raw data. Investigators can learn a lot about computer data files by learning the 
relationship between two variables. For example, we should expect a strong correlation 
between these independent and dependent variables because a direct relationship exists 
between the two variables. Hotel costs should increase as the number of days traveled 
increases. The gallons of paint used should increase as the number of houses built increases. 
You can probably use many more of such relationships. 
 
Independent Variable Dependent Variable 
Number of days traveling Hotel cost 
Number of documents printed Reams of paper used 
Number of houses built Paint used 
 
Verifying Multiples of a Number 
With this function, an auditor can determine whether regularly disbursed checks, such as 
reimbursement for mileage, are consistent within the regular rate. For instance, if the mileage 
checks do not measure up to the 30-cents-per-mile rate, a red flag should automatically be 
raised. 
 
Compliance Verification 
This function determines whether company policies are met by employee transactions. If a 
company limits the amount of its reimbursements, the software can check to see that this 
limit is being observed. Many times fraud exam iners can find early indications of fraud by 
testing detail data for values above or below specified amounts. For example, when 
employees are out of town, do they adhere to the company policy of not spending more 
than $30 a day for meals? For starters, we can look at the expense reports and select those 
with meal expenses exceeding $30. With the in formation returned from this simple query, we 
have a starting point for suspecting fraud. Even though these variances are small ($2 and $3), 
the time taken to research small variances can be well invested. The trail might lead to 
something big. After further investigation, you might learn that the employee did not have 
supporting documentation to submit because a vendor’s sales representative paid for all the 
meals. If this is the case, you have two fraud suspects, the employee and the employee’s boss 
who approved the report. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.609 
Duplicate Searches 
Fraud examiners and auditors can perform searches on invoice disbursements numerically to 
see if any invoices have been paid twice. By cross-checking the invoices with the vendors 
paid, duplicate billing can be easy to catch. 
 
Vertical Ratio Analysis 
Vertical analysis is a technique for analyzing the relationships between the items on an 
income statement, balance sheet, or statement of cash flows by expressing components as 
percentages. In the vertical analysis of an income statement, net sales is assigned 100 percent; 
on a balance sheet, total assets or total liabilities and equity is assigned 100 percent. All other 
items are expressed as a percentage of these two numbers.  
 
By performing this function, you can determine whether paid expenditures over a period are 
reasonable amounts. If one area of company expenses seems abnormally large for a short 
amount of time, a red flag should immediately be raised. 
 
Horizontal Ratio Analysis 
Horizontal analysis is a technique for analyzing the percentage change in individual financial 
statement items from one year to the next. The first year in the analysis is considered the 
base year, and the changes to subsequent years are computed as a percentage of the base 
year.  
 
This function determines the trends of a company’s expenses, inventory, and so on. 
Discrepancies in a company’s net profit or a large shift in amount of inventory would 
suggest that something is not right within the company.  
  
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.610   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
Date Functions 
Various software programs allow you to check for differences in dates, such as invoice dates. 
By verifying that check disbursements are consistent, you can ensure that no suspicious 
payments were arranged by an employee. Analysis programs will also allow for aging of data. 
The following is an example of accounts receivable aging.  
 
 
BALANCE SHEET Vertical Analysis Horizontal Analysis
  Year One Year Two Change %C hange
 Assets
   Current Assets
     Cash 45,00 0           14 % 1 5,0 0 0           4% (30,0 0 0)          -67 %
     Accts Receivable 150,0 0 0         45 % 2 0 0,0 0 0         47 % 5 0,0 0 0           33 %
     Inventory 75,00 0           23 % 1 5 0,0 0 0         35 % 7 5,0 0 0           10 0 %
  Fi xed Assets (net) 60,00 0           18 % 6 0,0 0 0           14 % -                0%
 Total 33 0,0 0 0        10 0 % 4 2 5,0 0 0        100 % 9 5,0 0 0         29 %
  
 
Acc'ts Payable 95,00 0           29 % 2 1 5,0 0 0         51 % 1 2 0,0 0 0         12 6 %
 Long-term Debt 60,00 0           18 % 6 0,0 0 0           14 % -                0%
 Stockholder's Equity -                
   Common Stock 25,00 0           8% 2 5,0 0 0           6% -                0%
     Paid-in Capital 75,0 0 0           23 % 7 5,0 0 0           18 % -                0%
    Retained Earnings 75,00 0           23 % 5 0,0 0 0           12 % (25,0 0 0)          -33 %
 Total 33 0,0 0 0        10 0 % 4 2 5,0 0 0        100 % 9 5,0 0 0         29 %
 INCOME STATEMENT Vertical Analysis Horizontal Analysis
 Year One Year Two Change %Change
 Net Sales 250,0 0 0         10 0 % 4 5 0,0 0 0         100 % 2 0 0,0 0 0         80 %
 Cost of Goods Sold 125,0 0 0         50 % 3 0 0,0 0 0         67 % 1 7 5,0 0 0         14 0 %
 Gross Margin 125,0 0 0         50 % 1 5 0,0 0 0         33 % 2 5,0 0 0           20 %
 Operating Expenses   
  Selling Expenses 50,00 0           20 % 7 5,0 0 0           17 % 2 5,0 0 0           50 %
   Administrative Expenses 60,00 0           24 % 1 0 0,0 0 0         22 % 4 0,0 0 0           67 %
 Net Income 15,00 0          6% (25,0 0 0)        -6% (40,0 0 0)        -26 7 %
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.611 
Graphing 
Graphs, like pictures, are worth a thousand words. Data analysis programs can provide 
numerous types of graphs to give fraud examiners a quick glimpse of the data. For example 
an inquiry should be made as to why November expenses are $10,000 more than the 
monthly norm. 
 
 
General and Administrative Expenses 2010  
(in thousands)
 0  
5  
10  
15  
20  
25  
30  
35  
Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec
  
Examples of Data Analysis Queries 
The following are typical examples of data analysis queries that can be performed by data 
analysis software. 
 
General Ledger Analysis 
• Select specific journal entries for analysis. 
• Create actual to budget comparison reports. 
• Analyze and confirm specific ledger accounts for legitimate transaction activity. 
• Speed account reconciliation through specialized account queries. 
• Calculate financial ratios. 
• Calculate percentage comparison ratio between accounts. 
• Prepare custom reports, cash flow, profit/loss, and asset and liability total reports. 
• Compare summaries by major account in any order (low-high, high-low). 
• Create reports in any format by account, division, department, etc.  
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.612   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Accounts Receivable 
• Create a list of customer limit increases and decreases. 
• Age accounts receivable in various formats. 
• Identify gaps in sequential forms such as invoices. 
• Identify duplicate invoices or customer account numbers. 
• Show specified reports on credits taken by customers. 
• Report customer summaries by invoice, product, etc.  
• Identify customer activity by age, product, etc. 
• Compare customer credit limits and current or past balances. 
 
Sales Analysis 
• Create a report of all system overrides and sales exceptions. 
• Analyze returns and allowances by store, department, or other areas. 
• Summarize trends by customer type, products, salesperson, etc. 
• Compare ratios of current sales to outstanding receivables or other variables. 
• Generate reports on a correlation between product demand or supply and sales prices. 
 
Accounts Payable 
• Audit paid invoices for manual comparison with actual invoices. 
• Summarize large invoices by amount, vendor, etc. 
• Identify debits to expense accounts outside of set default accounts. 
• Reconcile check registers to disbursements by vendor invoice. 
• Verify vendor 1099 requirements. 
• Create vendor detail and summary analysis reports. 
• Review recurring monthly expenses and compare to posted/paid invoices. 
• Generate a report on specified vouchers for manual audit or investigation. 
 
Asset Management 
• Generate depreciation to cost reports. 
• Compare book and tax depreciation and indicate variances. 
• Sort asset values by asset type or dollar amount. 
• Select samples for asset existence verification. 
• Recalculate expense and reserve amounts using replacement costs. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.613 
Cash Disbursement 
• Summarize cash disbursements by account, bank, department, vendor, etc. 
• Verify audit trail for all disbursements by  purchase order, vendor, department, etc. 
• Generate vendor cash activity summary for analysis. 
• Identify disbursements by department, supervisor approval, or amount limits. 
 
Payroll 
• Summarize payroll activity by specific criteria for review. 
• Identify changes to payroll or employee files. 
• Compare timecard and payroll rates for possible discrepancies. 
• Prepare check amount reports for amounts over a certain limit. 
• Check proper supervisory authorization on payroll disbursements. 
 
Purchasing 
• Track scheduled receipt dates versus actual receipt dates, in summary and detail. 
• Compare vendor performance by summarizing item delivery times and amounts. 
• Isolate purchase order types for analysis. 
• Analyze late shipments. 
 
Data Analysis Checklist 
The following are some key issues to address as one conducts a data analysis. 
• Ensure data validity and data integrity. There is always a concern when the examiner 
moves data from one venue to another. One of the concerns is data validity. Is the data 
valid and pertinent to the investigation? The second concern is integrity. Is the valid data 
that was selected correct? A simple check or au dit of the validity and integrity of the data 
should be the first step in the data analysis.    
• Consider data format and structure. This consideration is important when the examiner 
wishes to import or export data with his computer. A date can be formatted into a 
number of different styles, such as mm/dd/yyyy. The structure of the data will also be 
important along with the extension. A text file will have a .txt extension associated with 
it. What format is the current data in? What format will the computer require? How does 
the examiner get the data from here to there if the data formats and structures are 
different? 
• Count the zeros. The examiner should perform a preliminary analysis to ensure that the 
key strategic issue he is about to develop is worth the effort before initiating his fraud 
investigation. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.614   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Consider the spectrum of distinct levels of aggregation at which fraud monitoring is 
required. Determine the lowest level (transaction level), the highest level (multiparty 
criminal conspiracies), and the intervening layers that may be present in your industry 
and respective data. 
• Begin with the end in mind. In his book, The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen 
Covey states that beginning with the end in mind is good habit. When you develop your 
fraud intelligence action plan, be certain to consider the end result. One question to ask 
may be, “Will this algorithm/consultant hold up under the intense scrutiny of a court of 
law?”  
 
Evaluating Data Analysis Software 
In short, there are no silver bullets. But any data analysis software should possess the 
following minimum requirements: 
• Data import/export capabilities. Considering your data format and structure, how easily 
is data imported/exported? 
• Data visualization. How easy is it to move your data from a spreadsheet into a graphic 
for analysis and interpretation? 
• Look for a suite of tools. Just as there is not one screwdriver for every job, there is not 
only one software program for the examiner’s  fraud intelligence efforts. Therefore, he 
should choose the most appropriate set of tools according to his data and then select the 
software that best fits his current and future needs.  
• Develop a two-pronged effort of using the computer to acquire fraud intelligence. Use 
commercial software currently on the market and begin collaborative activities with the 
academics at your local university. There are numerous software packages in various 
stages of development in academia that are in need of data to be tested. This can prove 
to be a win-win for both parties. The examiner has the data and the academics have the 
prototype software. 
 
Evaluating Data Mining Software 
Because no single software tool can satisfy all user purposes, examiners must consider the 
applications with respect to their particular needs. Ken Collier, an expert in data 
warehousing, business intelligence, software engineering, and agile methods, and his 
colleagues established a framework for evaluating data mining.3 The framework divided the 
criteria into the following four areas: 
                                                 
3  Collier, K, Carey, B, Sautter, D. and Marjaniemi, C. “A Methodology for Evaluating and Selecting data Mining 
Software,” Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 1999, IEEE. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.615 
• Performance : Performance refers to the ability to handle a variety of data sources.  
• Functionality : Functionality refers to the variety of capabilities, technical methods, and 
methodology for data mining included in the program.  
• Usability : Usability refers to the conformation of different levels and types of users 
without losing usefulness or functionality. 
• Support of ancillary activities : Ancillary task support permits the user to perform the variety 
of tasks that support data mining.  
 
Evaluating Data Mining Consultants 
If, however, an entity intends to use a data mining consultant, the following qualities should 
be assessed: 
• Innovation : How does the individual stay current? Look for professional associations, 
publications, and training in your area of investigation.  
• Creativity : Can the individual work in a creative environment, such as fraud intelligence? 
Can the individual work unsupervised and be expected to produce results? Since fraud is 
a moving target, how has a past client’s platfo rm altered from the original investigation? 
Why/how did that occur? What were the results?  
• Experience : Does the individual have experience in the type of investigation you are 
planning? Does the individual have experi ence in the type of software/tools you are 
planning to use? Does the individual have experience in the type of data you have? 
 
The embodiment of this expertise might take one, two, three, or more people. You really 
need people who understand what it is they are looking for—and what they can do with it 
once they find it. 
 
 
Types of Data Mining and Analysis Software 
There are many types of data mining and data analysis software on the market these days, 
and every year new products and new versions of old products emerge. Because every fraud 
examination involving data analysis is different, it would be impossible to recommend one 
software product to serve every purpose. Choosing a data analysis tool is something that the 
fraud examiner must evaluate on each individual case. A fraud examiner should research 
applications intensively to decide which package is most appropriate for the current 
investigation.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.616   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Data mining and knowledge discovery software are generally classified into the following 
categories: 
• Public domain/shareware/freeware: This type of software is available free or for a 
nominal charge through websites, ftp sites, and newsgroups. Many shareware programs, 
such as WINKS SDA, allow users a trial period, after which they must pay a fee to 
reactivate the software. Freeware, however, is available at no cost or for an optional fee. 
These types of programs can be located through Internet search engines and through 
software download services such as ZDNet. 
• Beta software: Beta software is pre-release software that is still in test mode. Generally, 
this type of software is free, and users are asked to review the software’s performance, 
report malfunctions, and so on.  
• Commercial applications: Commercial applications are general release products that 
usually come with technical support and warranty. The most prominent commercial 
applications, which are discussed below, include: 
–  ACL 
–  IDEA 
–  Excel 
–  ActiveData for Excel 
–  AutoAudit 
–  SNAP! Reporter 
–  DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
–  Arbutus Query 
–  Oversight Systems 
 
ACL 
ACL is a generalized audit software program; it  is one of the preferred software tools of 
audit and financial professionals for data extraction, data analysis, fraud detection, and 
continuous monitoring. ACL provides a combinat ion of data access, analysis, and integrated 
reporting. It reads and compares enterprise data—flat or relational databases, spreadsheets, 
or report files on PCs or servers — allowing the source data to remain intact. ACL employs a 
single, consistent client interface and provides easy, immediate access to data.  
 
Commands are already pre-programmed for data analysis. Automate your analysis through 
continuous monitoring and real-time notification. 
 
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.617 
With ACL you can: 
• Analyze data independently from your IT department, with a user interface, pull-down 
menus, toolbars, and point-and-click commands 
• Analyze transactional data in files of any size to ensure 100-percent coverage and 
confidence in your results 
• Produce reports 
• Identify trends, pinpoint exceptions, and highlight potential areas of concern 
• Locate errors and potential fraud by comparing and analyzing files according to end- 
user criteria 
• Identify control issues and ensure compliance with standards 
 
For more information, visit www.acl.com.  
 
IDEA  
Like ACL, IDEA (Interactive Data Extraction and Analysis) is a generalized audit software 
program. More specifically, it is a PC-based file interrogation package that allows 
accountants, auditors, and financial managers to view, sample, and analyze data from any 
other computerized system. This software provides some functionality previously only 
available to electronic data processing (EDP) auditors and systems specialists. IDEA lets the 
user make inquiries of data files, perform random unit sampling, and calculate totals and 
averages. The software will perform specific criteria searches, unusual item queries, and 
identify gaps or duplicates in sequences. Additionally, to differentiate normal audit patterns 
from suspect ones, examiners can use IDEA to perform data analysis using Benford’s Law.  
 
Additionally, IDEA includes a number of tools to prevent and detect fraud, including 
personal vetting tools, the power to authorize transactions independently, and the ability to 
observe employees. This software considers purchasing, payroll, and banking the most 
common places for the occurrence of fraud. 
 
General Functions 
IDEA’s general functions are discussed below.  
 
FILES, FILE MANAGEMENT, AND FILE MANIPULATION 
IDEA’s file management and manipulation applications allow the user to import/export files 
from almost any format, including XML and specific accounting packages; use an easy, 
industry-standard file management program; generate a single database from several other 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.618   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
databases; use a compare-database option to identify differences in a numeric field within 
two files for a common key; combine fields from two databases into a single database to test 
for data matches across files; and use the append-databases option, concatenate two or more 
files into a single database for audit testing.  
 
DATA APPLICATIONS 
With IDEA’s data applications, users can exercise extraction or exception testing to identify 
items that satisfy a specific characteristic, The Equation Editor allows you to create simple or 
very complex extractions, and the @Functions are used to perform more complex 
calculations and exception testing. The Search function can seek text or numeric values 
across selected fields in multiple databases using standard or advanced search techniques. 
IDEA Duplicates can identify items within a database in which up to eight fields of 
information are the same. Users can also search for gaps in numeric sequence or 
alphanumeric sequences with a user-defined mask. The Chart Data option allows data files 
to be graphed or test results exhibited in bar, stacking bar, pie, plot, or area charts. Data 
Action Fields allow users to set up relationships across multiple files. 
 
SAMPLING 
IDEA offers five sampling methods with the ability to calculate sample sizes based on 
parameters entered and evaluate the results of sampling tests. The sampling methods 
available are systematic, random, stratified random, monetary unit, and classical variables 
sampling.  
 
ANALYSIS 
IDEA’s analysis applications allow users to apply Benford’s Law, stratification, 
summarization, aging, and pivot tables to raw data.  
 
PRODUCTIVITY 
With the productivity application, there are several different functions that can display the 
data, save the operations carried out on a database, generate statistics for all numeric and 
date fields within a database, and create a script with the help of object-oriented 
programming language. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.619 
Fraud Tests 
Fraud examiners and auditors can use IDEA’s data  analysis applications to identify potential 
signs of fraud. The following are a few examples of the types of fraud schemes that 
examiners can identify with IDEA’s data analyses applications.   
 
EMPLOYEE FRAUD 
• Identify employee accounts at financial institutions that have excess numbers of credit 
memos.  
• Identify employee accounts at financial institutions that have large deposits. 
• Compare employee home addresses, Social Security numbers, telephone numbers, and 
bank routing and account numbers to those of vendors from vendor master file. 
• At financial institutions, compare employee Social Security numbers against those of 
deposit and loan accounts to identify those not properly coded as employee accounts. 
• Analyze all debits to income accounts, particularly debit memos. 
• Monitor the activity in suspense accounts, including the age of suspense items and the 
rolling of similar amounts. 
• Analyze claims paid by corporate medical insurance providers. 
• Obtain a Social Security number listing from an outside vendor to test for valid Social 
Security numbers and determine whether the holder is alive or deceased. 
 
QUESTIONABLE INVOICES 
• Identify invoices without a valid purchase order. 
• Look for invoices from vendors not in the approved-vendor file. 
• Find invoices for more than one purchase order authorization. 
• Identify multiple invoices with the same item description. 
• Extract vendors with duplicate invoice numbers. 
• Look for multiple invoices for the same amount on the same date. 
• Find invoice payments issued on non-business days (Saturday and Sundays). 
• Identify multiple invoices at or just under approval cut-off levels. 
 
PHANTOM VENDOR SCHEMES 
• Match names, addresses, phone numbers,  and Social Security numbers between 
employee and vendor files. 
• Check vendor addresses against mail drop address lists. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.620   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
KICKBACK OR CONFLICT OF INTEREST SCHEMES 
• Look for vendor prices greater than the standard. 
• Identify price increases greater than acceptable percentages. 
• Check for continued purchases in spite of high rates of returns, rejects, or credits. 
• Look for high volume purchases from one vendor. 
 
DORMANT ACCOUNT SCHEMES 
• Check that all applicable accounts have been flagged as dormant. 
• Identify dormant accounts with activity. 
• Check for transfers from dormant accounts to employee accounts. 
• Check changes of addresses on dormant accounts. Cross-check new addresses with 
employee addresses. 
 
MONEY LAUNDERING SCHEMES 
• Identify accounts with large average values of transactions. It is common for there to be 
a small number of high-value transactions through an account being used for money 
laundering. 
• Identify matched debit and credit transactions on the same account within a short time 
period.  
• Search for large, rounded transaction values. 
• Identify multiple accounts for particular individuals. 
• Identify large cash deposits. 
• Test customer identification procedures by searching for missing data fields, such as date 
of birth, Social Security number, or driver’s license number. 
• Cross check customer addresses against mail drop address lists. 
 
For more information about IDEA, visit www.audimation.com. 
 
Excel 
Excel is a spreadsheet program by Microsoft that can be used for storing, organizing and 
manipulating data. Many accountants, auditors, and fraud examiners use Excel for basic data 
analysis tasks. For example, Excel allows users to sort, subtotal, filter, and merge data. They 
can create calculated fields, as well as perform statistical analysis such as regression.  
 
Excel, however, has many limitations that limit its usefulness for detecting fraud. These 
limitations are discussed in the next section, which examines ActiveData for Excel. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.621 
ActiveData for Excel 
ActiveData for Microsoft Excel is an easy-to-use tool for advanced data manipulation and 
analysis within the Excel environment. 
 
ActiveData for Excel was designed to overcome Excel’s many limitations: 
 
Excel Limitation ActiveData for Excel’s Compensation  
Does not document the fraud 
examiner’s work in easy-to-access 
logs for reference and storage. 
ActiveData for Excel provides a log of each 
processed step (as a comment in cell A1 of the 
worksheet created). Then, using the Index Sheets 
function, a summary page of all comment fields 
can easily be created for review, in essence 
creating an audit log of all work performed with 
the spreadsheet data. 
Has difficulty performing data-
 analysis and management tests such 
as relating tables. Although it can be 
accomplished, it is an onerous task. 
ActiveData for Excel provides more than 100 
data-analysis and management features that 
automate functions, some of which may be 
possible but extremely difficult in Excel. 
Does not have functionality 
specifically tailored to the fraud 
examiner. For example, an examiner 
can calculate a sample in just a couple 
of clicks with minimal training using 
specifically designed audit software. 
In Excel, it can be done, but it does 
take much effort and guidance. 
ActiveData for Excel has more than 100 features 
that are tailored to the auditor, accountant, and 
fraud examiner. For example, you can use 
ActiveData for Excel to find duplicate records in 
a few clicks (rather than setting up complex 
formulas in Excel). 
 
The following are some examples of how ActiveData can be used for fraud detection. 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for Accounts Payable 
VENDOR SUMMARY TOTALS PERIOD ONE TO PERIOD TWO COMPARISON 
This is a basic analytical report to identify trends in a vendor’s purchase history. A trend 
analysis should be completed to identify key vendors with whom activity has increased or 
decreased substantially. This can best be assessed using the dollar and percentage variance 
fields, which can be added as calculated fields in Excel. Based on the changes in the business 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.622   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
environment and/or new company projects, a reasonableness assessment should be 
performed on the vendor changes. 
 
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS/BENFORD’S LAW ANALYSIS 
Descriptive statistics provide maximum amount, minimum amount, average amount, and 
other high-level statistics. These statistics should be reviewed for reasonableness; for 
example, a high number of negative amounts or a maximum amount that looks too high 
might not be reasonable. 
 
After obtaining the descriptive statistics of a data set, the software provides a Benford’s Law 
analysis of the first two digits of the data, as well as a list of all amounts from highest to 
lowest frequency, for review.  
 
To review, Benford’s Law distinguishes between natural and non-natural numbers. Natural 
numbers  are those numbers that are not ordered in a particular numbering scheme and are not 
generated from a random number system. For example, most accounts payable files will be 
populated by dollar values that are natural numbers. Conversely, non-natural numbers  like 
Social Security numbers and telephone numbers are designed systematically to convey 
information that restricts the natural nature of the number. 
 
Benford’s Law provides that the distribution of the initial digits in natural numbers is not 
random; instead, it follows a predictable pattern. The table below shows the expected 
occurrence for the distribution of the first digit in natural numbers, according to this law: 
 
First Digit Probability
 1 30.1%
 2 17.6%
 3 12.5%
 4 9.7%
 5 7.9%
 6 6.7%
 7 5.8%
 8 5.1%
 9 4.6%
 Total 100.0%
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.623 
That is, Benford’s Law maintains that certain di gits show up more than others do. A “1” will 
appear as the first non-zero digit roughly 30 percent of the time; “2” will be the leading digit 
almost 18 percent of the time; “9” will lead o ff only 4.6 percent of the time. Moreover, zero 
is most likely to be the second digit, appearing 12 percent of the time.  
 
Benford’s Law makes it possible to detect fraudulent numbers in large data files by 
comparing the frequency of the appearance of initial digits in a list of numbers to those 
anticipated by Benford’s Law. For example, when embezzlers invent numbers, they tend to 
fake data containing too many instances of initial digits of “7,” “8,” and “9” and too few 
instances of “1,” “2,” and “3.” Thus, with Benford’s Law, examiners can tell if someone 
fakes data that are derived from other data, and they can also identify errors within the data 
that appear “out of place” given the data’s frequency of appearance. 
 
The Benford’s Law analysis should be executed first so the most statistical outliers can be 
reviewed.  
 
Furthermore, as a follow up to these tests, examiners should use a Query Sheet to query 
outlier activity for additional review. 
 
ABOVE-AVERAGE PAYMENTS TO A VENDOR (MORE THAN TWO TIMES THE AVERAGE) 
Unusually large payments to a vendor in relation to the average are a sign of error (e.g., a 
key-punch error) or fraud (e.g., a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid additional 
amounts that are kicked-back to the employee entering the payment into the system). 
 
For vendors with unusual payments above the average, a sample of the “average” payment 
invoices, as well as the unusual payment invoices should be reviewed. The reasonableness of 
the purchase should be assessed based on the documentation reviewed. The auditor should 
be keenly aware of the potential for a key-punch error regarding the unusual payment 
and/or the possibility of the vendor purposely overcharging the organization. 
 
DUPLICATE PAYMENT TESTING  
Duplicate payments to vendors normally represent errors that the computer system was 
unable to detect. In most systems, a check will be made as to whether the vendor number, 
invoice number, and amount are the same. This test could be run to ensure this basic control 
is operational and also to test for other permutations of duplication. Any results from this 
test should be reviewed first for trends. For example, rent payments that occur on a monthly 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.624   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
basis may appear to be duplicate payments when, in fact, they are simply regularly occurring 
payments. Note also that certain accounting packages allow the issuance of partial payments 
(e.g., a payment to the same vendor with the same invoice number and amount). Therefore, 
the auditor should determine whether the system allows such payments and, if so, omit them 
prior to running this application. 
 
Voided checks should also be reviewed; if a payment is made first on a regular check and 
then on a voided one, only one payment was technically made. 
 
EMPLOYEE-TO-VENDOR ADDRESS MATCH 
This test identifies identical or similar fields between the master tables of vendors and 
employees in an attempt to identify fraudulent payments to employees. While this test 
explains how to complete this task for addresses, the same could be done for phone 
numbers, tax identification numbers, and other personal information. 
 
Once the results are produced, the auditor should  scan them to determine if there are any 
valid address matches between the employee and vendor tables. As a next step, a Query 
Sheet could be created of the actual invoices posted to any questionable vendor to determine 
if they are fraudulent. Two notes when completing this review are: 
• Because this exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or 
vendor information independent of the accounts payable department (who may be 
culpable for creating the false vendor account). 
• Because it is common to pay employee travel and entertainment expenses or employee 
advances, this should be the key reason to not consider the payments fraudulent. If 
possible, the vendor file should be filtered for all employee travel and entertainment 
vendor accounts prior to running this test. 
 
IDENTIFYING PAYMENTS MADE AFTER PERIOD END FOR VALID LIABILITIES AT PERIOD END 
This report works to identify unrecorded liabilities. A common scheme is for an  
organization to “hold” an invoice by not enterin g it into the system. Then, after period end, 
the invoice will be entered into the system, thereby evading the expense charge in the period 
under review. 
 
The invoices identified in this test should be reviewed for reasonableness and materiality. If 
not material, further test work may not be considered necessary. If material, trends may be 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.625 
identified in the types of invoices or the vendor. The final analysis should include pulling the 
actual invoices to determine whether they are for services rendered or products received 
before the period end. 
 
IDENTIFY EXCEEDED PURCHASE ORDERS 
This report works to identify authorization issues within an accounts payable process 
whereby the invoices paid exceed the approved purchase order amounts. Aside from 
assessing the authorized limits, this report tests the system control that should not allow an 
invoice to be paid above a predetermined limit (normally between 5 and 10 percent). 
The report may also highlight frauds: 
• In which a valid purchase order is provided to authorize payment, yet inflated payments 
are made to assist the fraudster in some way. 
• In which vendors working with an employee create a purchase order with valid unit 
prices, yet inflate those prices when the invoices are sent. 
 
This test may highlight a control issue within the computer system (which should check for 
exceeded purchase orders), or it may identify numerous overrides to the computer system. 
These overrides may be within the normal course of business (e.g., purchase order prices 
were meant to be at the invoice price rate, but were entered in error on the purchase order), 
but may also highlight fraudulent activity. Regardless, the auditor should walk through the 
process of entering a purchase order and associated invoices to understand the system 
controls. Once understood, the differences presented in this test can be investigated by 
vouching to purchase order and invoice documentation. 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for the General Ledger 
STRATIFY GENERAL LEDGER DETAIL INFORMATION 
Look at the multitude of activities in a gene ral ledger and ask yourself, “How can I survey 
this data in an extremely quick manner while efficiently planning my audit?” This test should 
provide the answer because it helps the auditor focus on large-dollar postings, while 
assessing the administrative burden of maintaining low-dollar activity. 
 
The stratification report should be reviewed for: 
• Unreasonably large balances for which the activity could be queried for recalculation and 
proper classification 
• A high number of transactions with low accumulated activity for possible consolidation 
• Planning detailed testing of the journal entry approval process 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.626   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
JOURNAL ENTRY GAP TESTS 
Gaps may signal incomplete data processing or, in the situation of journal entries, possible 
hidden entries. Usually, a method of documenting these occurrences, along with a review by 
an independent party, is sufficient to ensure the completeness and accuracy of processing. 
However, it is rare that a journal entry gap test is performed in the accounting department (it 
is more common in the accounts payable area related to the check sequence), so this may be 
the first time this test is being performed. 
 
Gaps in the journal entry sequence should be reviewed with the accounting department. The 
test work should answer the following questions: 
• What procedures are in place to document and approve all gaps in the sequences? 
• How are gaps communicated to management? 
 
IDENTIFY NONSTANDARD JOURNAL ENTRIES MADE IN A TIMEFRAME AFTER YEAR 
END RELATED TO SPECIFIC ACCOUNTS 
Nonstandard journal entries are generally those that are posted manually, rather than 
through an automated feed from a fixed asset or accounts receivable sub-ledger. Such entries 
are more prone to error and fraud mainly due to human error, the judgment applied to 
support the entry, and the possibility of an override by management in authorizing the entry. 
This is especially true for entries made just after year end (related to the prior year), as these 
entries are more prone to be adjustments for the fiscal year’s annual reporting. 
 
Given the above, the test for these entries should include: 
• Reviewing the journal entry and associated supporting documentation 
• Ensuring the approvals are appropriate for the size and nature of the journal entry 
• Assessing whether generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) are being applied 
 
SUMMARIZE ACTIVITY BY USER ACCOUNT 
This test looks for: 
• Standard names such as “default” or “test.” These names usually have equally simple 
passwords for a hacker to guess and should generally be avoided. Replacements to these 
generic user IDs would be specific IDs associated with the person using the system (e.g., 
“jsmith”). 
• Unrecognized or terminated employees. This test focuses on the responsiveness within 
the MIS function to ensure that only authorized employees have system access. Compare 
the list created by this test to an active employee roster to spot any violations. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.627 
• Users who have access beyond their level of responsibility. This access may highlight a 
nonsegregation of duties in which a person has an opportunity to commit fraud by being 
able to initiate, authorize, and/or record a transaction. 
 
The resulting report should be reviewed bearing in mind the above considerations. 
Recommended steps include: 
• Delete default passwords and replace them with specific IDs 
• Delete employees who are not on the active employee roster 
• Review users who are posting high activity or who may have access to other non-
 segregated functions and assess whether other controls are needed to mitigate the such 
individuals’ access 
 
Fraud Detection Techniques for Revenue 
MISSING/UNUSUAL CUSTOMER  MASTERFILE INFORMATION/MATCH TO PRIOR YEAR 
FOR CHANGES 
This report will identify changes in the customer masterfile, such as additions and deletions. 
Given that most systems do not track the changes in the customer masterfile (e.g., there is 
no “Last Maintained on Date” field), this report is sometimes the only means of determining 
changes in the customer master.  
 
The fraud examiner should review major additions and/or deletions to the customer 
masterfile. Given that there is a high potential for fraud on newly added customers (e.g., 
posting false sales invoices to phony customer accounts to inflate period-end sales balances), 
the names and addresses for such customers should be reviewed against employees with the 
ability to enter invoices into the system. This can be done using the accounts payable test 
described in this book that matched vendor addresses to employee addresses. Since this 
exercise may detect fraud, it may be beneficial to locate the invoices or customer files 
independent of the accounts receivable department (which may be culpable for creating the 
false customer accounts). 
 
CASH RECEIPT TO OPEN INVOICE MATCHING 
This test helps assess the existence and valuation of open invoices at period end based on 
the cash received subsequent to year end. Therefore, it is one of the most popular tests used 
by fraud examiners in assessing the existence of period end invoices. 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.628   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Based on this test, the fraud examiner can easily assess whether open invoices were paid with 
cash (and therefore existed at year end), and for those still outstanding, whether they should 
be reviewed further from the perspective of year-end valuation. Such invoices probably 
relate to customers who regularly pay late, but they could represent new customer payment 
issues and/or fraudulent sales posted at year-end that will never receive cash. 
 
AGE RECEIVABLES, EXTRACT OLDER BALANCES, AND SUMMARIZE BY CUSTOMER 
This test mainly recalculates the aging of the invoices in the accounts receivable ledger for 
review against the company-derived report. Any differences between this calculation and the 
report used by management may be due to a system error, a poorly designed report, or fraud. 
To orchestrate fraud, management may hide the true payment patterns of customers to 
minimize their bad debt valuation reserve at year end. 
 
The aging report should be reconciled to the organization’s accounts receivable aging report. 
Any differences should be investigated. One approach is to extract a sampling of invoices 
(see previous test on reviewing a sample of invoices) within a specific aging group and 
reconcile to the aging report on an invoice by invoice basis. This work may identify report 
errors or an attempt by the organization to hide the true aging of accounts receivable.  
The focus of test work should be on more current aging categories that may be 
inappropriately inflated. 
 
Once the invoices are summarized by customer, the aging report also highlights customer 
balances, older than a pre-defined “old” limit. This may be 180 or 270 days after which 
payment of such invoices is unlikely. Large customer balances could be reviewed with 
management as to their collectability and, possibly, with the actual customer. This analysis 
would further support the year-end bad debt reserve calculation. 
 
CALCULATE THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SHIP AND INVOICE DATES, AS WELL AS INVOICE DATES WITH NO SHIPMENTS 
Untimely, erroneous, and/or fraudulent sales invoices may be detected if invoices are sent 
without valid shipments. In this case, revenue is potentially being recorded prior to being 
earned. Further research of these invoices should be done independent of the sales and 
accounts receivable functions in order to ensure an independent analysis. 
 
For more information about ActiveData for Excel, visit www.informationactive.com. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.629 
AutoAudit 
AutoAudit is a comprehensive, integrated audit automation system. In addition to the 
workpapers and reporting functionality, AutoAudit has entity-level and process-level risk 
assessment, staff scheduling, resource planning, issue tracking, time reporting, expense 
reporting, quality assurance, department metrics, and an ad hoc reporting module. All of 
these modules are integrated, and data automatically flows from one module into the next. 
AutoAudit is designed to automate all of the primary processes that occur in an audit 
department.  
 
Although AutoAudit automates many parts of any type of audit, of particular interest to 
fraud examiners are its risk assessment functions. AutoAudit offers an integrated risk 
assessment module with the option of following a horizontal methodology (business process 
risk assessment), a vertical methodology (audit universe made up of user-defined auditable 
entities), or a combination of both methodologies. Specific risks and processes are identified 
by the client, and the risk factors and weights can be customized to fit the specific needs of 
the department and industry. Information about the inherent and residual risks helps 
determine issues during the audit, and the information obtained during fieldwork can be 
pushed back into the risk assessment to use as the starting point for the next cycle of 
planning and auditing. 
 
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 
SNAP! Reporter 
Snap! Reporter is a data mining software program designed for use with Lotus Notes, 
Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, and Access databases.  Its chief virtue is its ease of use. Most 
software requires a familiarity with databases and data mining techniques, but anyone with 
basic spreadsheet skills can produce reports and graphics with this product. In Snap!, data 
retrieval and analysis are automated with one-button functions; some tasks are accomplished 
by drag-and-drop.  
 
Snap! produces Gantt Charts (i.e., graphical representations of projects) and counts 
occurrences of key words rather than only charting actual numbers. The software also 
creates stacked non-columnar reports and generates multiple Relationized Data Sets from 
one originating record—functions not available in other products. Snap! is not as powerful 
as some other data mining software, but it is easier to use. It is adequate to most tasks, 
though some complex cases may need a stronger package. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.630   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
For more information, visit http://paisley.thomsonreuters.com. 
 
DataWatch Corporation’s Monarch for Windows 
Monarch is report-mining software. Monarch is unique because it extracts data from existing 
reports created by other programs, and then converts the data into actionable data (e.g., text 
files, spreadsheets, or database tables). For example, electronic data that is retrieved from an 
accounting system, or downloaded from an online source, can be broken down into 
individual records by Monarch’s model. Monarch can read report files produced on any 
mainframe, midrange, client/server, or PC system. These files are commonly known as print 
files, spool files, TXT files, formatted ASCII files, PRN files, and SDF files. Monarch can 
also read DBF files and delimited ASCII files.  
 
Once the data is actionable, it can be analyzed. That is, the records can be manipulated by 
data analysis applications like Access and Excel. 
 
Monarch specializes in reading complex reports in ASCII (plain text) format. Its data mining 
capabilities are useful for data integrity testing. Monarch can be used by itself or in tandem 
with other audit software such as ACL., but it will provide the most benefit when used in 
conjunction with another data analysis tool. 
 
Monarch serves three main functions for investigators: 
• Performs automated auditing tests and tests of various program controls 
• Verifies data on management or exter nal party report-generation accuracy 
• Proactively identifies errors and fraudulent activity 
 
Moreover, examiners can use Monarch to perform several functions in a financial analysis or  
risk assessment: 
• Summary window: To summarize information by a different criteria than the report did 
• Sorting data within the Table window: To generate an alphabetically sorted list or to identify 
the largest or smallest transactions 
• Time series analysis : To compile information from 12 separate reports into a month-by-
 month summary, allowing the investigator to identify trends 
• Graphing data within the Summary window : To graph any information in the Summary 
window into a pie, area, line, or bar chart quickly to visualize composition, trends, or 
distribution (this chart function is much more straightforward than in spreadsheet 
programs, such as MS Excel and Lotus 1-2-3) 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.631 
• Create calculated fields: To perform custom calculations on ex isting data fields or new fields 
not present in the original file 
 
Here are a few practical examples of Monarch’s investigative capabilities. The software 
allows investigators to: 
• View the 20 largest vendors by invoice am ount to compare the amounts with their 
expectations of those amounts 
• Summarize by purchase order number to determine if the sum of all transactions related 
to a purchase order exceed the amount authorized by the purchase order 
• Measure transaction volume and amount processed by each input clerk to identify 
unusual activity 
• Compare budget versus actual figures by computing a difference field 
• Chart customer delinquency trends for the past 12 months 
 
For more information about Monarch, visit www.datawatch.com. 
 
Arbutus Query 
Arbutus Query is a comprehensive query tool with built-in data-analysis capabilities. With 
Arbutus Query, users are able to query a wide range of data sources without having to know 
the location or structure of the underlying data. Arbutus Query employs Arbutus Analyzer to 
provide direct, read-only queries of data. Arbutus Analyzer uses a familiar spreadsheet 
interface to browse, analyze, or report on the data. The software can handle unlimited file 
sizes and has powerful data analysis and manipulation commands that support even the most 
advanced tasks.  
 
For more information on the Arbutus programs, visit www.arbutussoftware.com. 
 
Oversight Systems 
Oversight Systems offers software that helps businesses check for fraud, errors, and other 
problems. Its software provides continuous monitoring and continuous auditing with 
investigation, resolution, and tracking capabilities for continuous protection against fraud, 
misuse, and errors in business transactions. Oversight’s products also identify errors and 
control violations as they happen, so companies can address these issues when they are less 
complex and less costly to correct. Oversight’s products include features that integrate 
investigation, reconciliation, and documentation of data. For more information, visit 
www.oversightsystems.com. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.632   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting and Case Management Software 
There are a number of programs that can assist the fraud examiner in managing the data and 
information gathered. These programs can also be used to create reports, graphs, and charts 
of a particular case. Some of the most useful of these programs for fraud investigations are 
discussed below. 
 
i2’s Analysis Product Line 
i2 offers a line of analytical tools that allow users to search, store, visualize and analyze data. 
Some of those tools are discussed below.  
 
Analyst’s Notebook 
i2 Inc. offers a professional visualization and analysis tool called Analyst’s Notebook. 
Analyst’s Notebook is a visual investigative analys is software program that brings clarity to 
complex investigations and intelligence analysis. It enables investigators and analysts to turn 
large volumes of disparate data into actionable intelligence. It creates charts and graphs to 
allow users to:  
• Visualize large volumes of investigative data to understand the big picture. 
• Reveal patterns and hidden connections to help focus the investigation. 
• Create analytical charts manually or automatically generate link and timeline charts from 
structured data. 
• Communicate complex cases with intuitive briefing charts that capture and organize 
supporting data. 
 
iBase 
iBase is i2’s investigative database that is. It allows users to configure a data store, capture 
data, and perform data analysis in a controlled environment.  
 
Data Miner 
Data Miner is a data mining application that can only be installed with Analyst’s 
Workstation. It allows users to analyze large amounts of data and find any patterns that may 
exist.  
 
Analyst’s Workstation 
Analyst’s Workstation is an integrated collection of analytical tools, including Analyst's 
Notebook, iBase, and Data Miner. 
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.633 
For more information on i2’s product line, visit www.i2inc.com. 
 
CaseMap by CaseSoft 
CaseMap is a case analysis tool that makes it easy to organize, evaluate, and explore the facts, 
characters, and issues in a case. It is designed for use on all types of cases and by all types of 
litigators and investigators. CaseMap software integrates with numerous other litigation-support 
and electronic-discovery tools, including Adobe Acrobat, Applied Discovery, 
Binder, Concordance, JFS Litigator’s Notebook, KPMG’s Discovery Radar, LiveNote, and 
Sanction. 
 
Spreadsheets 
When a CaseMap file is created, the program auto matically sets up a series of spreadsheets 
used to organize critical case knowledge. These spreadsheets can be used to organize 
information about the facts, documents, characters, issues, and case law in every case.  
 
 
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.634   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
  
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.635 
FACTS SPREADSHEET 
The facts spreadsheets include a case chronology in which the investigator can enter facts, 
dates, times, and the source of each piece of information. Investigators can also distinguish 
between disputed and undisputed facts and keep track of the status of each item. 
 
 
 
OBJECTS SPREADSHEET 
The objects spreadsheet allows investigators to organize the cast of characters—a list of the 
individuals and organizations involved in the case, and it should also catalog key documents 
and other important pieces of physical evidence.  
 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.636   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
ISSUE SPREADSHEET 
The issue spreadsheet provides an outline of the issues, including both legal claims and 
critical factual disputes. The outline can be any number of levels deep.  
 
QUESTION SPREADSHEET 
Because many questions occur during the early stages of an investigation, the question 
spreadsheet allows users to filter and sort their open items using various criteria.  
 
RESEARCH SPREADSHEETS 
CaseMap has three research spreadsheets: Authorities, Extracts from Authorities and a 
combination of Authorities and Extracts. The research spreadsheets will organize and 
explore the user’s knowledge about the precedents and statutes relevant to their case, and it 
include links to actual case law using the authorities and extracts. The authorities spreadsheet 
can be used to manage top-level information about precedents, statutes, and other types of 
case research. The extracts spreadsheet can be used to capture details about particular 
sections of interest excerpted from important case law and statutes.  
 
Linking 
CaseMap also provides the ability to link pieces  of data in one spreadsheet with the source 
data or other relevant data in another sheet. 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.637 
 
 
Filtering 
Once information is organized, CaseMap users can explore it. The most powerful case-exploration 
tool in CaseMap is the filtering function. A filter operation limits the rows that 
appear in a spreadsheet and on your printed report to those that meet criteria you specify.  
 
 
 
For more information, visit www.casesoft.com. 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.638   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Actimize Enterprise Risk Case Manager 
Actimize Enterprise Risk Case Manager is case managements software that empowers 
companies to address enterprise-wide risk and compliance management. It is designed to 
help companies detect and react to fraud attacks more efficiently by consolidating all fraud 
and compliance issues into a central location. According to Actimize, the Risk Case Manager 
supports risk operations with workflow management, evidence collection, and 
documentation, and as a result, it allows users to: 
• Improve risk and compliance operations 
• Detect more issues; reduce risk, losses, and fines 
• Enable efficient and collaborative investigations 
• Reduce IT and operational costs 
 
Xanalys Suite 
Xanalys offers a suite of case management software applications to help users collect, 
manage, analyze, and share investigative intelligence. It offers three products: PowerCase, 
Link Explorer, and Indexer.  
 
PowerCase 
PowerCase provides an end-to-end platform for conducting large-scale investigations. It 
manages all aspects of an investigation team’s activities through the entire investigative 
process by providing the following functionality: 
• Provides centralized data storage 
• Establishes a document workflow to ensure that all evidence is examined a reviewed 
• Checks new case information against existing data for commonalities and associations 
• Assigns and tracks lines of investigation  
• Provides a range of search features 
• Allows users to visualize case data 
• Generates a complete audit trail of all user activity within the system 
 
Link Explorer 
Link Explorer allows users to construct database queries in natural, everyday language and 
displays the results in graphic form. Simply ask a question by dragging and dropping icons 
onto a query screen. Xanalys Link Explorer then  generates easy-to-read interactive charts 
that map how people, events, telephone calls, e-mail messages, and other case details are 
linked. As new information arrives, the displays are instantly updated. Information can be 
viewed in a variety of ways. In addition to powerful link analysis charts, Link Explorer can 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.639 
display results in numerous other formats, including a report, a timeline with events 
organized in a chronological order, or a hierarchy chart showing relationships among people. 
Link Explorer offers several methods to import,  enter, merge, or modify data, as well as to 
create new objects and links. These include a text importer, flexible data importer, data entry 
forms, QuickChart toolbox, and object cards.  
 
 
 
Indexer 
Indexer is a text extraction program that clearly and automatically reveals critical connections 
between information stored in a database. Indexer automatically extracts relevant 
information from unstructured text using entities (such as a person, company, or an event), 
attributes (such as occupation, sex, or company title), and relationships (such as located at, 
works for, and involved in event). Xanalys provides various ways to ensure that the 
information represented in the Index Plan is useful. These include loading them into a 
database for analysis by Link Explorer or other reporting or analysis tools, in addition to 
embedding the technology into third-party applications. With the key entities and 
relationships contained in a structured environment, it is now possible to access and query 
this information. Once a number of documents have been processed, a list of all the people 
mentioned in the documents or a list of companies, vehicles, or phone numbers associated 
with those listed people could be obtained. As new documents arrive, these can be 
incorporated and augment the existing results. The full power of Indexer capabilities can be 
embedded into a company’s own products and technologies. On the Windows platform, it 
Data Analysis and Reporting Tools  Investigation 
3.640   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
includes a COM interface to direct the information extraction output into any required form, 
such as input to some other process or to a database. 
 
For more information on Link Explorer or Indexer, visit www.xanalys.com.  
 
Enterprise Investigation Management 
Norkom Technologies’s Enterprise Investigation Management software is case management 
software for anti-money laundering and fraud investigations. It links information from 
multiple insider sources like foreign travel reporting databases and debriefings, employee 
security background information, network logs, and cyber activity logs to compose a picture 
of potential insider security threats. This composite approach puts otherwise disconnected 
pieces of information in context to help prevent sensitive information and capabilities from 
being compromised. For more information on Enterprise Investigation Management visit 
www.norkom.com. 
 
Multi-Channel Fraud 
Norkom Technology’s multi-channel fraud management solution provides an end-to-end 
fraud solution — from advanced detection to investigation, response, and recovery — and is 
built on Norkom’s unique, configurable financial crime and compliance platform, which 
enables users to customize the technology as their needs change and new fraud techniques 
emerge. Norkom’s sophisticated detection analytics are optimized to detect a wide range of 
fraud, including plastic fraud, applications fraud, check fraud, deposit fraud, sleeper fraud, 
electronic banking fraud, phishing, internal fraud, insurance fraud, account takeover, and 
identity theft. The solution provides fraud detection by uniting the analytical power of 
specialized techniques, including pre-defined fraud detection scenarios, in-depth behavioral 
and peer group profiling, unusualness analytics, predictive modeling, and network analytics. 
For more information on Multi-Channel Fraud visit www.norkom.com. 
 
i-Sight Case Management Software 
i-Sight Case Management Software is a type of case management software for investigations, 
complaints, corrective and preventive action management, and other business processes that 
require case management. It allows users to record investigation notes, create and assign 
tasks with due dates and reminders, send e-mails from within a case record, use template 
letters, record investigative findings, record investigative resolutions, create follow-up tasks, 
track time and costs, effectuate corrective actions, keep an audit trail, and attach documents.  
 
Investigation  Data Analysis and Reporting Tools 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.641 
EthicsPoint Issue and Event Manager 
EthicsPoint provides hotline and anti-fraud reporting and case management services. Its 
Issue and Event Manager helps businesses ma nage reported issues (e.g., HR management 
issues, work-related injuries, security investigations, conflict of interest, competitor 
misconduct, any code of conduct violation, etc.). EthicsPoint’s offers web report forms to 
help streamline issues documentation, providing management with a reporting mechanism 
that automatically integrates an entity’s re ported data within a centralized database.  
 
 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.701 
DIGITAL FORENSICS 
 
Conducting an Investigation Involving Computers 
The increasing usage of the Internet and other technology in all aspects of our personal and 
professional lives has created new opportunities for technology to be used in perpetrating 
almost every type of fraud, and in most fraud cases, investigators gather some type of digital 
evidence. 
 
Fraud examiners must therefore be prepared to address the myriad issues related to 
examinations involving digital evidence.  
 
Computer Investigation Versus Computer Forensics 
While at first, the term computer investigation may appear synonymous with computer 
forensics, there is an important distinction between the two. An investigator leading an 
investigation into a crime that involves a computer is not necessarily and, in most cases, 
should not be the forensic examiner. It is important to keep these areas separate. Combining 
the two, especially in cases in which the suspect is already named, invites questions about the 
objectivity of the forensic examination. It could also subject investigators to unwelcome 
scrutiny regarding whether they suppressed exculpatory evidence that may have been found 
during an examination by a more objective investigator. 
 
Digital Evidence 
Digital evidence, when boiled down to its basics, is simply binary data (ones and zeroes) that 
is interpreted by the computer. Everything that is digitally stored is made up of these ones 
and zeroes, from the programs themselves to the data with which the programs interact. 
Interpreters built into the program show these ones and zeroes as hex code. This hex code is 
then translated onto the page or website seen on the computer screen. 
 
As the professional use computer technology increases, so does the criminal use. Financial 
crimes and frauds committed are probably the most common types of computer crimes 
committed. The investigation of financial crimes generally requires a level of expertise not 
commonly held by all investigators; therefore,  there is additional knowledge and experience 
required when conducting a forensic computer examination in a financial or fraud case.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.702   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are three types of situations in which computer evidence is generally discovered: (1) 
computers as the target of crime, (2) computers as the instrument of crime, and (3) 
computers as the repository of evidence. 
 
Computers themselves can be the targets of crime. Crimes committed against computers 
include computer and computer-component theft, system intrusions, software piracy, and 
software theft. 
 
Computers can also be used to facilitate a crime. When this occurs, the computer is known 
as the tool or instrument  of crime. In such cases, as one would expect, examiners commonly 
encounter computers that have been used in offenses such as the solicitation of minors in 
chat rooms, check fraud, and counterfeiting. 
 
Generally speaking, in all computer investigations the examiner attempts to locate the 
storage of potential digital evidence, in one form or another, on the computer system. The 
computer system involved in the investigation is a potential repository of evidence whether 
the user intended to store an item or not. Therefore, the examiner is interested in 
incriminating evidence that the user intentionally or unintentionally stored on the computer 
system. 
 
Integrity of Digital Evidence 
Electronic evidence is more volatile than paper information, and because it can be easily 
altered or destroyed, it must be handled properly. For example, computer files can be altered 
simply through the normal startup process. Most  of the Microsoft operating systems, such as 
Windows XP, change the time and date stamps on a number of files during startup and 
delete a number of temporary files during the shutdown process. These pieces of 
information could be critical to the investigation. 
 
The destruction of digital evidence through improper handling can result in a finding of 
spoliation of evidence by a judge or can raise questions about the alteration of exculpatory 
evidence by the defense.  
 
Additionally, if a judge determines that the authenticity of the evidence cannot be 
satisfactorily made, then he may rule that the evidence is inadmissible. Although digital 
evidence is different from tangible evidence, the rules regarding its admissibility in court is 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.703 
really no different from the admissibility of any other type of evidence. To be admissible, 
digital evidence must be: 
• Relevant  
• Supported by a foundation for its introduction into court 
• Legally obtained 
• Properly identified 
• Properly preserved 
 
Therefore, should the fraud examiner discover digital evidence, he must be able to state 
unequivocally that the evidence was not changed in any way by his actions. This requires that 
strict forensic methodologies be followed to satisfy the stringent evidentiary standards 
necessary to ensure the integrity of the evidence “beyond a reasonable doubt” for 
presentation in court. 
 
Forensic Experts 
Also, when conducting an examination involving computers, the examiner should determine 
whether an outside forensic examiner is needed or whether the expertise is available in-house. 
Some organizations have their own in-house personnel, whom they have trained and 
outfitted with the proper equipment and software tools to conduct the examination and 
analyze digital evidence while others may prefer the use of an outside examiner who will be 
able to conduct a thorough examination, prepare a proper report, and deliver expert 
testimony if needed in legal proceedings. 
 
Sometimes information retrieval is as easy as obtaining a warrant and searching the hard 
drive of the target computer. But many fraudsters anticipate their exposure and delete 
incriminating files from their machines. In these instances, it is important to know that there 
are a variety of ways of recovering deleted or hidden data from a target computer and its 
peripherals. 
 
A computer-forensic examiner is a trained professional who is capable of analyzing digital 
media at the hexadecimal level. The hexadecimal level means that every sector and all the 
bytes in those sectors are available for viewing. This includes deleted files, both purposefully 
deleted and those that were deleted through various Windows-automated processes. This 
can also include temporary auto-save files, print-spool files, deleted e-mails, and link files. 
The hexadecimal level also contains various items found in restore points and registry files 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.704   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
that define hardware, such as external drives and websites visited, in addition to the 
document revisions and files created and maintained by the user. 
 
The increased sophistication of Windows allows the computer system to store more 
information about how people use their computers. The forensic examiner will be able to 
uncover a large amount of data that relates to the use of a computer, what is or has been 
stored on it, and the details about the user. In Micr osoft’s effort to “be all” to the user, it has 
incorporated ways to make computer use more secure, such as offering encryption and other 
methods to protect data from unwanted access. In the future, these types of innovations will 
stall the examiner and will sometimes successfully prevent system access. However, these 
encryption packages are not always foolproof. The Encrypted File System offered by 
Microsoft has in fact been cracked by a number  of password-cracking software makers. In 
addition to encryption files, other encryption algorithms exist that are easily installed and can 
be used to encrypt the entire hard drive. In situations such as this, it becomes necessary for 
the examiner to be able to identify whether a drive is encrypted before seizing and 
disconnecting the system. 
 
Moreover, computer-forensic examiners have special tools and software designed to 
facilitate a thorough and legally sufficient analysis of items that contain digital evidence. It is 
important to allow a trained examiner to conduct a proper seizure and examination on a 
piece of evidence so the investigator will have the best chance of using that evidence in a 
legal proceeding. Whether an agency or company is defending against an unlawful 
termination suit or filing a criminal complaint, it is vital that the digital evidence is handled 
properly. 
 
Furthermore, whether technical specialists are needed to assist with an investigation will 
depend on the complexity of the examination required. The more technical the nature of the 
crime, the more technical and specialized the analytical skills required. Some computer 
investigations, however, do not require extremely sophisticated technical skills. For example, 
in cases where the computer is the instrument used to commit the crime (e.g., scams 
involving payroll applications, cooking the books, fraudulent electronic funds transfers, 
insider trading, etc.), the fraud examiner need only know how to search a database and 
analyze the results. 
 
Additionally, this determination will depend on the examiners skill levels. Therefore, an 
examiner conducting an examination involving computers must have a basic understanding 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.705 
of his skill levels and must be aware of his limitations in the field of computer technology 
because, in many instances, one or more technical specialists are needed to assist with an 
investigation.  
 
Within the computer forensics field, there are several different types of special experts: 
• Operating and file system experts : These experts are proficient in certain operating systems 
(e.g., Windows 7, Unix, Solaris, OS X, or AS400) and the various file systems they 
employ (e.g., Joliet, NTFS, FAT, VFS, Ex t2), and they have the ability to convey 
operational characteristics and observe artifacts. 
• Data recovery experts : These experts operate clean rooms designed to magnetically extract 
information from a damaged media source. Using special tools and equipment, these 
experts can disassemble a hard disk, separate the platters, and extract and reassemble the 
information for subsequent examination. 
• Forensic accounting experts : A forensic accountant can prov ide various services, including 
audits, accountant performance reviews, and examinations of financial documents for 
fraud, misconduct, or industry standard violations. 
• Tape and archival extraction experts : These are experts in extracting information from tape or 
other system backups. Typically, backup solutions archive data in proprietary formats, 
making extraction very cumbersome. 
• Intrusion and malicious code experts : These experts specialize in investigating computer 
network intrusions. Specialists can determine attack vectors, the tools employed, what 
occurred during access, and what, if anything, was taken. 
 
But given the diversity of computer-related fraud, no person can be an expert in all aspects 
of computer technology. 
 
Locating Evidence 
To conduct a successful examination, examiners must know what to look for and where to 
look for it, but this can be difficult because digital data can be stored large volumes and in a 
number of different locations.  
 
The efficiency of computer technology has allowed users to create more voluminous pieces 
of data than was once possible. Computer hard drives are packed with digital data, and data 
storage now exceeds gigabytes. Therefore, it is necessary to reference larger storage 
capacities. Here is a chart that will help: 
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.706   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Name  Abbr.  Size  
Kilo K 2^10 = 1,024 
Mega M 2^20 = 1,048,576 
Giga G 2^30 = 1,073,741,824 
Tera T 2^40 = 1,099,511,627,776 
Peta P 2^50 = 1,125,899,906,842,624 
Exa E 2^60 = 1,152,921,504,606,846,976 
Zetta Z 2^70 = 1,180,591,620,717,411,303,424 
Yotta Y 2^80 = 1,208,925,819,614,629,174,706,176 
 
Furthermore, digital evidence may be located in a number of different locations. In addition 
to being stored on computers, evidence will be located in any form of technology that can be 
used to transmit or store data. Therefore, it is also important to investigate any suspect 
workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be used to 
transmit or store data, and the information stored on the company’s network. 
 
Workstation 
In addition to investigating the suspect’s mainframe, it is also important to investigate the 
suspect’s workstation, including any peripherals or other portable media devices that can be 
used to transmit or store data. As data moves to and from peripheral devices, it leaves 
evidence of its presence and sometimes leaves full copies of its contents.  
 
Therefore, fraud examiners should consider the many different types of peripherals that 
might contain evidence. Items to be seized might include any or all of the following items 
listed below, depending upon the nature of the fraud case. 
 
PRINTERS 
Examiners must also be aware that it might be possible to recover previously printed 
documents. Although the odds of recovery can be low depending on a variety of factors, 
understanding how retrieval can be achieved can be of great value to the investigator.  
 
In addition to using printer-spool files to recover previously printed documents, many 
printers have internal hard drives that may contain information relevant to a fraud 
examination. In general, any information sent to and stored by a printer is recoverable unless 
the printer has overwritten the data.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.707 
Furthermore, some printers have memory buffer — temporary storage area of jobs waiting to be 
printed — which may also contain important information. Information contained in memory 
buffer, however, is generally limited to recently created and stored data.  
 
COPIERS AND SCANNERS 
Like some printers, copiers and other multifunction machines may have internal storage 
devices that store relevant data. In fact, almost every copier built since 2002 has a hard drive 
that stores images of documents the machines have copied, scanned, or e-mailed. Some 
copiers store user access records and a history of copies made. And, as with most file 
systems, it may be possible to retrieve information from a copier’s hard drive that has been 
deleted. As a result, copiers may be brimming with important information.  
 
FAX MACHINES 
Although some kinds of stand-alone fax machines simply scan and send data without storing 
it, like many printers and copiers, some fax machines store faxing data on their own internal 
hard drive. This data may remain in the machine’s memory until overwritten.  
 
BACKUP TAPES  
Backup tapes are a type of removable media that stores data and can be easily removed from 
a computer system or device. Most computer users archive their activities on backup tapes 
or some other form of external storage devices, and most companies use backup tapes to 
store old data, including e-mail data, that was once stored on their servers.  
 
REMOVABLE STORAGE DEVICES 
In addition to backup tapes, a suspect’s removable storage devices should be examined. 
Removable storage devices such as CDs, DVDs, USB flash drives (also known as thumb 
drives), mp3 players, and various other devices provide users with the ability to store large 
amounts of data. Such devices can be used to facilitate a variety of frauds. They provide 
users with the ability to store files that go undetected by anyone accessing the computer. 
Removable media can also be used to store copies of files containing sensitive information in 
order to facilitate unapproved use.  
 
SMART PHONES 
The proliferation of smart phones has made them an extremely valuable source of 
information. Smart phones (e.g., the iPhone and Blackberry) are cell phones that also have 
the ability to store personal data, search the Internet, check e-mail, instant message (IM), 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.708   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
make video calls, download/upload content to and from the Internet, take pictures, and 
record video. The information that can be stored on these small devices can be very 
important in many cases.  
 
Network 
In addition to searching for evidence on the suspect’s operating system and workstation, it is 
also important to examine information stored on company servers. A wealth of information, 
which is separate from a user’s workstation, may be stored on company servers. Data stored 
on company networks may include documents posted to a suspect’s own home directory on 
the network; collaborative work saved to a shared folder or directory; e-mail messages that 
have been sent, received, deleted, or archived; calendars; contact lists; and so on.   
 
Law Enforcement Assistance 
Before conducting a forensic examination, examiners must consider whether a crime has in 
fact been committed. If, at the beginning of the investigation, it is determined that the victim 
company will make a formal referral to law enforcement or prosecuting agency, then the 
authorities must be notified before the investigation begins to determine whether law 
enforcement personnel should participate in the examination. In some jurisdictions, an 
examiner from the law enforcement community may not be available. 
 
  
Computer Investigations and Computer Forensics 
 
Preparation 
Before the examiner can seize evidence, he must take certain steps to help ensure that the 
evidence is admissible: he must determine whether an employee has a privacy interest in the 
item(s) to be searched, he must take certain steps to prepare for an investigation that 
involves the use of a search warrant, and he must take steps to ensure that his equipment is 
sound (e.g., only use licensed software applications, independently validate all forensic 
equipment, and maintain the validation on file). 
 
Privacy Issues  
Before searching and seizing an item, the examiner must determine whether an employee has 
a privacy interest in the item(s) to be searched. In every case where it becomes necessary to 
seize a computer or other device capable of storing digital evidence, the investigator should 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.709 
consult with legal counsel. It is imperative that legal counsel be involved in the seizure 
process and be knowledgeable of case law pertaining to workplace seizures.  
 
Case law governing workplace seizures in the private sector is different from case law 
governing seizures in the government workplace, but generally, it all comes down to the 
employee’s expectation of privacy. Although the Fourth Amendment constitutional right 
guarantees protection against unreasonable searches and seizures, typically, the Fourth 
Amendment does not protect private sector employees.  
 
In the private sector, disputes over unreasonable searches and seizures usually come down 
on the side of the corporation. The case law in the private sector tends to support the 
argument that corporations have the right to decrease the level of privacy employees can 
expect with regard to workplace searches of computers and other digital media. Thus, 
companies to adopt a written policy establishing that all computer systems (e.g., the Internet, 
e-mail communications, hardware, and files) are solely for business use and that the 
company reserves the absolute right to review, audit, and disclose all matters sent over the 
system or placed in storage. And as long as written policies are in effect that support 
management’s actions, the corporation can avoid liability for violating an employee’s right to 
privacy. 
 
Additionally, when conducting an internal investigation or inquiry into allegations of 
misconduct or illegal activities in both the private and governmental sector, it is important to 
be aware of what the employee policy protects against and what it allows. It should also be 
determined whether steps have been taken to nullify any expectations of privacy. 
 
Governmental employees, whether local, state, or federal, have been provided special 
protections that do not generally apply to employees in the private sector. In all cases where 
it becomes necessary to seize a governmental employee’s computer or other digital device, it 
is imperative that the investigator consult with the entity’s legal counsel.  
 
Bryan R. Lemons, Branch Chief of the Legal Di vision Office of Training Operations at the 
FLETC training center in Georgia, has written an excellent paper on the subject of 
governmental workplace searches and seizures, in which he summarizes a number of cases 
where the courts have rendered opinions on governmental workplace searches and seizures. 
In his paper, Mr. Lemons defined the term workplace to include those areas and items that are 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.710   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
related to work and are generally within the employer’s control, which includes file cabinets, 
desks, and computers. 
 
Case law on this issue has attempted to answer several questions. Can a government 
employee have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the workplace? If so, what standards 
should be followed to ensure that a supervisor is conducting a lawful search of an 
employee’s work space? Is there a lesser standa rd employed in the case of mere suspicion? 
 
The Supreme Court case of O’Conner v. Ortega  was the hallmark case in the argument about 
the reasonableness of searches and seizures, but there were a number of other issues that 
were decided at the lower-court level. In O’Conner, the Supreme Court held that “the 
realities of the workplace” made some exp ectations of privacy among public employees 
unreasonable when the intrusion was by a supervisor rather than a law enforcement official. 
Work-related searches, the Court found, were “m erely incident to the primary business of 
the agency,” and a warrant requirement would “seriously disrupt the routine conduct of 
business.” The Court thus held that a standard  of “reasonableness” was sufficient for work-
 related intrusions by public employers. 
 
To simplify the decision-making process when considering a workplace search, Lemons 
explains that there is a two-part analysis that will offer some guidance. The first part requires 
a determination of the employee’s reasonable ex pectation of privacy in the area to be 
searched. Second, if a reasonable expectation of privacy does exist, then any search that 
occurs in the workplace must be reasonable under the given circumstances.  
 
In United States v. Gonzalez 4, the court dealt with the search of a government employee’s 
personal belongings. In this case, the employee (Gonzalez), as a condition of employment, 
signed a paper that indicated, among other things, his personal belongings might be searched 
in an effort to discourage employee theft. Gonzalez worked at a military exchange. He was 
stopped one day during his departure from the store and his backpack was searched by store 
security. The search revealed that Gonzalez’s backpack contained merchandise stolen from 
the store. On appeal, Gonzalez claimed that his Fourth Amendment rights had been 
violated. The court looked to the paper that was originally signed by Gonzalez and stated 
                                                 
4  United States v. Gonzalez, 300 F.3d 1048 (9th Cir. 2002). 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.711 
that Gonzalez was put on notice that his personal belongings might be searched and as a 
result his expectation of privacy was limited by his knowledge of store policy. 
 
In Gossmeyer v. McDonald, the court dealt with the question of whether there was a reasonable 
expectation of privacy regarding personally purchased items that were used to store work-
 related materials in the government workplace. In this case, a local detective received an 
anonymous tip from one of Gossmeyer’s coworkers that Gossmeyer was storing illegal 
pornographic material in a storage container that was purchased at Gossmeyer’s own 
expense. The local detective relayed the information to Gossmeyer’s supervisor who 
proceeded to search Gossmeyer’s workplace, including the storage cabinet. The supervisor 
found evidence to substantiate the allegation but no charges were ever filed. Gossmeyer filed 
a lawsuit alleging that her Fourth Amendment rights had been violated by the search of her 
personal property. The court disagreed, stating that the cabinet was not merely an item of 
personal property such as a purse or briefcase brought into the workplace, but that it was 
being used to house work-related materials and therefore, the cabinet was a part of the 
workplace and not a part of her personal domain. 
 
In O’Conner, the Supreme Court ruled that it is possible to reduce the expectation of privacy 
on the part of government employees, for example, in the form of a written notice signed by 
the employee that gives the employer the right to access or inspect information stored on the 
employee’s computer. In the case of United States v. Simons,  the defendant, Simons, was found 
to have visited several illicit websites that were prohibited by agency policy. The policy 
specifically prohibited access to unlawful material and further prohibited any personal use of 
the agency’s Internet. A remote audit of the hard drive on Simons’s government-owned 
computer revealed that the computer contained several illegal images. In Simons’s challenge 
of the search under the Fourth Amendment, he claimed that his rights were violated when 
the hard drive was searched remotely. The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals held that Simons 
had no legitimate expectation of privacy because of the agency’s Internet use policy. The 
policy’s language placed employees on notice of  their diminished expectation of privacy. 
 
When determining whether to conduct a search of government-workplace computers it is 
important to determine whether a reasonable expectation of privacy exists. To answer that 
question, one must look at whether there was a prior notice that diminishes the expectation. 
One can also look at the policy practices of the agency. Having a policy and only selectively 
enforcing it tends to diminish the policy to the point that it may not negate the privacy 
expectation. One must also look to the openness and accessibility of the workplace to other 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.712   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
employees. Finally, was there a written waiver of the employee’s expectati on of privacy? If an 
expectation of privacy does not exist, then the Fourth Amendment will not apply. If it is 
determined that an expectation of privacy does exist, then what is the purpose behind the 
search? Is it a work-related search, such as looking for a missing file, or is it due to an 
allegation of misconduct? If it is a work-related  search, the search must be justified based on 
the overall circumstances; it must be justified in its inception and permissible in scope. If the 
search under these conditions is solely for the purpose of a criminal investigation, then a 
probable cause warrant will generally be necessary in addition to the employee consent. 
 
It should also be noted that personal digital devices are becoming more common in the 
workplace. Employees often carry smart phones, thumb drives, or MP3 players into the 
office. Each of these devices is capable of storing large amounts of data and can easily be 
used to steal a company’s intellectual property. Because these devices are often purchased by 
the employee for personal use, a search warrant may be needed to seize or search these 
devices because employees may have a “reasonable expectation of privacy” in these types of 
personal devices. Therefore, it is extremely important to include such devices in the 
company’s search policy. The policy should cl early state that any personal electronic devices, 
including laptops, cell phones, smart phones, thumb drives, MP3 players, and so forth, are 
(just like handbags and briefcases) subject to search if brought onto the company’s premises. 
 
Search Warrants  
If, however, a search warrant is required, additional considerations must be addressed. A 
search warrant  is a court order that grants authorities the right to search a premises or property 
for information pertinent to the case. 
 
All warrants must satisfy the requirements under the Fourth Amendment. That is, all 
warrants for searches must be judicially sanctioned and supported by “probable cause,” and 
they must “particularly” describe the place to be searched or things to be seized. Only a 
judge can issue a search warrant and only law enforcement can seek and serve a search 
warrant. 
 
To obtain a valid search warrant, law enforcement officers prepare affidavits. The affidavits 
will detail the probable cause or legal reasoning behind the request for the warrant. Often 
law enforcement personnel will need guidance from the fraud examiner as they conduct pre-
 search preparation and construct the search warrant affidavit.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.713 
But because the requirements for these affidavits have been affected by technological 
innovations, fraud examiners must consider several new issues must when constructing a 
search warrant affidavit involving digital evidence. The fraud examiner must know how to 
write a warrant to seize tangible property that contains intangible evidence. Further, the 
fraud examiner must be allowed to convert that evidence into a human-readable form (e.g., 
storage devices such as disks, which contain information that cannot be viewed without the 
aid of some electronic device). Likewise, the warrant must allow for the ability to seize data 
files pertinent to the case that are mixed with data files, which have nothing to do with the 
case but reside on the same storage device.  
 
Additionally, the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizure of all 
computer evidence relevant to the investigation, but narrow enough to exclude all material 
that is not, and this can be an extremely difficult standard to meet at times and might depend 
on the magistrate to whom the affidavit is presented. However, with some thought fraud 
examiners should be able to justify the search and seizure of everything that they need to 
complete the search for evidence. Items to be seized might contain any or all of the 
following, depending on the nature of the fraud case: 
• Computers 
• Computer components 
• Computer peripherals 
• Word-processing equipment 
• Modems 
• Monitors 
• Printers 
• Plotters 
• Optical scanners 
• Data storage devices 
? Magnetic 
? Laser 
? Optical 
? Tape 
? PCMCIA 
? Portable drives, such as flash or thumb drives 
? Cables, wiring, cords 
? Storage media 
? Disks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.714   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
? Magnetic tape (reels) 
? PCMCIA RAM cards 
? CD-ROMs 
? Magnetic/optical disks 
? Digital audio tape (DAT) 
? Personal data managers 
? Flash RAM cards (consider digital-camera storage) 
? Computer programs 
? Operating systems 
? Application software 
? Utility programs 
? Compilers 
? Interpreters 
? Documents 
? Manuals 
? Printouts 
? File listings 
 
Moreover, to satisfy the “particularity” requirement of the Fourth Amendment, the affidavit 
must be able to justify each item that might contain evidence. For example, stating that “all 
printers” should be seized might be overly broad unless the fraud examiner can justify the 
need for each specific printer. But with some thought, fraud examiners should be able to 
justify the search and seizure of everything they need to complete the search for evidence.  
 
Also, all related documentation should also be seized with the target computer system, and, 
therefore, it should be covered by the search warrant’s wording. Such documentation is 
important because it may be critical when analyzing the system’s hardware and software. 
Documents could indicate system changes that will help to avoid damaging the system. 
Documents could also contain other helpful pieces of information (e.g., the fact that access 
control products have been added to a system might be a helpful piece of information).  
 
Thus, obtaining as much intelligence as possible regarding the location of the potential 
evidence is very desirable before writing the search warrant affidavit. Considerations include: 
• Determine the type of computer systems that will be involved in the search. What 
operating system is used? Are the computers networked together? 
• Determine how many people will be needed to conduct the search.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.715 
• If expert witnesses with a specific expertise are required during the search, identify and 
clear them before the search warrant is written. Depending on the circumstances, their 
credentials should possibly be included in the warrant affidavit before they are approved 
by the magistrate issuing the search warrant.  
• Determine the resources that will be required to conduct the search. If a great deal of 
equipment is to be seized, consider how the equipment will be transported from the 
location. Obtain sufficient boxes, labels, bags, and other supplies at this time. 
• Consider the timing of the search.  
 
Four Phases 
There are several definitions and different schools of thought for investigations involving 
computer forensics, but all practitioners in the field will agree that investigations typically 
involve four phases: seizure, image acquisition, analysis, and reporting and testifying.  
 
Each phase is dependent on the phases that come before it. For instance, if the seizure phase 
is handled incorrectly, then each of the following phases can suffer and ultimately render the 
reporting and testifying phase moot. 
 
Seizing Digital Evidence 
Perhaps the most critical step in the forensics process is how data is collected or acquired. 
Acquisition of digital evidence must be completed in such a way as to ensure that all relevant 
evidence is seized and secured in a forensically sound manner so that the evidence is not 
tainted or destroyed.  
 
In fact, there are a number of practical considerations and procedures to employ when the 
decision is made to go forward with a computer seizure. One of the primary considerations 
that is often neglected is debriefing the subject, which involves asking the subject for 
passwords and whether any encrypted data exists on the target computer. 
 
The Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) from the Organization of 
American States has published a document, titled Best Practices for Computer Forensics, 
which provides a good foundation for digital forensics examiners. Although a complete 
                                                 
5  Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence of the National Center for Forensic Science. Best Practices for 
Computer Forensics V2, 2006. http://www.oas.org/juridico/s panish/cyb_best_pract.pdf.  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.716   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
review of the entire document is beyond the scope of this course, several guidelines deserve 
review. According to the SWGDE, examiners should adhere to the following guidelines: 
• Before obtaining evidence, ensure that there is legal authority to seize evidence and 
review the data associated with the evidence. This may require obtaining a warrant in a 
criminal matter or ensuring that internal policies authorize seizure for an internal 
investigation.  
• If removing evidence from the scene is impractical, copy or image the items of evidence 
according to established procedures. 
• Remove all suspects, witnesses, and bystanders from the proximity of the digital 
evidence. Keep in mind that remote access to computers can put potential evidence at 
risk even if no person has physical access to the computer. Also, consider the wide range 
of mobile data storage devices today (e.g., USB flash drives) that can be hidden. 
• Ensure that no suspects, witnesses, and bystanders possess any items containing 
potential evidence.   
• Thoroughly and systematically search the scene for potential evidence. Once again, 
consider the wide range of data storage media and devices.  
 
Unless completely unavoidable, data should not be analyzed on the machine from which it 
was collected. Instead, the examiner should make forensically sound copies of all data 
storage devices — primarily hard drives — and analyze the data on these copies.  
 
To ensure that a machine can be fully analyzed, the examiner should take the following 
steps: 
• Examine and document the machine’s surroundings. 
• Secure the evidence. 
• Power down carefully. 
• Inspect for traps. 
• Implement a system to manage the evidence. 
 
EXAMINE AND DOCUMENT THE MACHINE’S SURROUNDINGS 
The first step in the evidence collection process is to examine and document the machine’s 
surroundings. This includes collecting all printouts, disks, notes, and other physical evidence 
for further analysis. Document the scene with photographs or a diagram, depending on the 
complexity of the setup, remembering that it may be a year or longer before testimony about 
what the office looked like on the day of the seizure will be asked for in a legal proceeding.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.717 
When documenting the condition of the evidence, the examiner should consider: 
• Documenting what is on the screen, if the system is on. 
• Documenting any processes that are currently running. 
• Taking photographs of the various views of the equipment and media to document any 
damage or defects. 
• Taking photographs of the equipment’s physical connections. 
• Making a drawing of the location to document the layout and relative locations from 
which evidence was seized. 
 
Additionally, because many people have a habit of writing down or recording their 
passwords near their computers, examiners should look around for notes that may appear to 
be passwords. This may aid in discovering passwords needed to access encrypted data if the 
subject of the investigation is being uncooperative. 
 
Take good notes on the machine’s state at the ti me of the seizure. Record the time and date 
that the system was seized and the personnel involved in the seizure. The status of the 
system should also be noted. Was it on, off, or on standby? Was there anything unusual 
attached to the system? Was there any obvious damage? Did any files have to be saved? 
Also, if the computer was active, record any open applications. Make sure to start a chain of 
custody document and note each person and storage location through which each piece of 
evidence passes. 
 
In addition to documenting the machine’s state at the time of seizure, the examiners should 
document any serial numbers and other potential identifying markings (e.g., manufacturer, 
model number, asset tracking number, etc.), and he should photograph and diagram the 
system’s entire configuration. 
 
SECURE THE EVIDENCE 
When securing a computer system, follow the two golden rules. The first rule is, if the 
computer is off, don’t turn it on. Also, if a comp uter is on, an investigator will not want it to 
go through its normal shutdown routines because Windows is very good about cleaning up 
after itself. A number of temporary files will be deleted and possibly overwritten during a 
normal shutdown, and some of these files may be important to the investigation. In most 
cases, the investigator should simply unplug a running computer. Once the investigator takes 
possession of the computer he should not allow anyone access it, with the exception of a 
trained forensic examiner. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.718   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There are other reasons to conduct the seizure in this way. By preserving the state of the 
system at the time of seizure one can help to defeat an argument by opposing counsel that 
exculpatory information was somehow tainted or erased due to mishandling of the system. If 
one bit is changed in the system’s data, it will ha ve a completely different hash value; that is 
to say, it would be different than the original, even though the average person may not be 
able to recognize any difference at all.  
 
All data is composed of bits (binary digits). It takes eight bits to make one byte, which is 
what we are commonly used to hearing when we talk about storage capacity, such as 256 
megabytes. One megabyte equals 1024 kilobytes, and one kilobyte equals 1024 bytes. As you 
can see, one bit is a relatively infinitesimal piece of data, but it is important that not even one 
bit of data be altered by the forensic process. 
 
The second golden rule when securing a computer is, do not peek through the files. This 
also applies to disks. If a system is running, the examiner may be tempted to click on the My 
Computer icon to look for evidence or copy files to a flash or optical storage device. This 
should never be done, because each file the investigator touches will have its original time 
stamps changed; once this is done the original time stamps cannot be recovered. It will be 
obvious to the forensic examiner that this has occurred. 
 
There are two methods for shutting down a running system, a hard shutdown and a graceful 
shutdown. Generally, the hard shutdown is preferred. There may be extenuating 
circumstances that would lead the investigator to perform a graceful shutdown, so it is 
important to evaluate the best shutdown option based on the type of data being preserved 
and the possible ramifications of a hard shutdown based on the type of operating system 
installed. A hard shutdown is basically pulling the power cord from the back of the PC. 
 
Laptop computers, however, require additional considerations. When seizing a laptop, it is 
important to remove the battery first and then pull the plug. It is essential when seizing a 
laptop to recover all of the components that belong to the laptop, such as flash drives, CD-ROMs 
and DVD–ROMs, and power supplies. Often, laptop computers must be imaged with their 
drives installed, and because of the proprietary nature of the laptops themselves, they will 
only function with their own components. Many  times these components can be located in 
the laptop carrying case. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.719 
Similarly, networked computers also present unique considerations. When powering down a 
networked computer, remove the power supply from the back of the computer.  
 
When handling servers, however, it is important to use extreme caution when removing 
power from a server without using proper shut-down methods because this can damage the 
system and expose the examiner to liability.  
 
Once a computer is seized, it is necessary to secure it in such a way that will allow the 
investigator to testify, if need be, that no unauthorized access to the suspect system 
occurred. 
 
INSPECT FOR TRAPS 
Examiners should also inspect the computer’s chassis for traps, intrusion detection software, 
and self-destruct mechanisms. Although completely destroying a hard drive is extremely 
difficult, it is not difficult to make recovery very difficult.   
 
IMPLEMENT A SYSTEM TO MANAGE THE EVIDENCE 
Examiners should have a system to track and manage physical and digital evidence. The 
most common method used to track physical evidence is to assign each item a unique 
evidence number. Although this number can be in any format, it should be consistent and 
never repeated.  
 
Image Acquisition 
To avoid altering evidence, the examiner should make forensically sound image of the 
suspect system for analysis. Image acquisition involves using a standalone hard drive 
duplicator or similar device to duplicate a computer’s entire drive. This process is known as 
imaging because the hard drive can be imaged to another hard disk drive, a tape, or other 
media. 
 
The examiner has to be sure that the image is created and preserved in a manner that will 
withstand a legal challenge; therefore, before  imaging a hard drive, the examiner must 
determine the best method for acquiring an image and the proper procedures to facilitate the 
image capture.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.720   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
During the imaging process, examiners should use some type of write-protection device or 
application to ensure no information is written onto the original drive, and after the hard 
drive is duplicated, the original drive is moved to a secure location to prevent tampering. 
 
Analysis 
The analysis phase is arguably the most time-consuming phase, especially for a financial 
crime or fraud investigation. This phase involves the use of specialized software designed to 
give the examiner the means to locate and extract artifacts that will be used as evidence in 
the investigation. The evidence can serve to incriminate the subject of the investigation or it 
can be exculpatory by disproving the subject’s involvement. 
 
The primary concern when analyzing electronically stored information (ESI) is to maintain 
its integrity. Examiners must be careful with computer equipment because a careless 
investigator may inadvertently alter important evidence. Therefore, it is helpful to develop 
procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the methodology used 
to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or altered the evidence. It 
may also be helpful to use a hardware-based write-blocking device to protect the integrity of 
digital evidence. 
 
One method to help ensure the integrity of digi tal evidence is to maintain a chain of custody 
for all evidence gathered and analyzed. The chain of custody  is both a process and a document 
that memorializes (1) who has had possession of an object, and (2) what they have done with 
it; it is simply a means of establishing that there has not been a material change or alteration 
to a piece of evidence. Gaps in the chain of custody (e.g., when it is not clear what occurred 
with a set of records) or outright mishandling (e.g., a group of questioned documents was 
not properly sealed) can harm a case.  
 
At a minimum, the following chain of custody procedures should be followed for digital 
evidence: 
• Identify each item that contains relevant information.  
• Document each item, who it was received from, who authorized its removal, the location 
of the item, and the date and time the item was received.  
• Maintain a continuous record of the item’s custody as it changes hands.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.721 
Reporting and Testifying 
The reporting and testifying phase is where the hours of analysis are reported fairly and 
objectively. In this phase, a qualified computer forensics expert may be asked to render an 
opinion about the use or misuse of a computer system. This is where experience and training 
are tested and where examiners must know with certainty that their opinion is based on their 
research, knowledge, and experience and that an opposing expert will not find fault with 
their conclusions. 
 
 
Forensic Examination and Analysis 
While every fraud examiner should have basic knowledge of computer evidence and how to 
properly identify, collect, and store digital evidence, some fraud examiners may decide to 
pursue additional training in the area of computer forensic analysis. The process of 
developing the skill set necessary to be a computer-forensic examiner takes a considerable 
amount of time, training, and experience. Additionally, there are a number of software and 
hardware tools that are now available to conduct this type of work; the forensic examiner 
must be aware of these tools and understand how they work.  
 
Again, a forensic analysis of a computer could involve the examination of a tremendous 
volume of data. In 1993, the average hard disk was 60 megabytes (MB) in size. The standard 
size in 1999 was 8 gigabytes (GB), and currently, the average size of hard disks offered is 
between 120 GB and 1.9 terabytes. 
 
Forensic examiners will generally use at least two software tools on a project simultaneously 
to cross-validate their results. It is also important to note that many insufficiently trained 
examiners who use automated tools do not in fact understand what the automated process is 
doing. It is extremely important to understand and be able to articulate how a tool is 
conducting an automated process. This means that a forensic examiner who uses an 
automated tool should be able to explain how to conduct the same process manually.  
 
Because the primary concern when collecting and analyzing digital evidence is to maintain its 
integrity, forensic examiners must be careful with computer equipment. Therefore, it is 
helpful to develop procedures to prevent the opposing party from raising allegations that the 
methodology used to collect or analyze data was improper and could have damaged or 
altered the evidence. It may also be helpful to use a hardware or software write-blocking 
device to protect the integrity of digital evidence. These devices allow the user to acquire 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.722   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
information on a drive without damaging the drive contents by allowing read commands to 
pass and blocking write commands.  
 
A hardware write-blocking devise stops  any automated processes or incidental processes 
that an operating system or examiner may use to interact with a piece of digital media. That 
is, the devise tricks the operating system into believing that the interaction occurred so that it 
will not generate an error and thwart the acquisition process. What actually happens is that 
the write commands are intercepted and cached by the device instead of reaching the target; 
therefore, no writes to the media occur. The device allows only read permissions to the 
media.  
 
The software write blocker, however, denies access to media by prohibiting certain requests 
to the media by filtering out those requests. Only read requests are accepted and all write 
requests are denied. Software write blockers must operate at a separate level than a standard 
graphical user’s interface (GUI), such as in DOS mode. There are a number of these types of 
devices on the market today made for all applications and media types. 
 
Keyword Searches 
Once the collection process is complete, examiners are left with large volumes of digital data 
that may contain relevant or irrelevant information. At this point, the examiner must process 
and filter the digital information to reduce the amount of data (commonly known as data 
culling) that has been collected by performing keyword searches to identify relevant 
information. 
 
Keyword searches involve identifying relevant evidence by searching for words that are 
material to a case (e.g., names, dates, account numbers, etc.). This type of search will 
minimize the amount of time used to complete an analysis, and it will help protect the fraud 
examiner from allegations that his search was overly broad. 
 
Based on the information known about the case, the examiner should establish a list of 
relevant keywords. Because enormous amounts of data will need to be searched in most 
fraud examinations, examiners and investigators should take care in keeping the list as short 
and relevant as possible, and they should avoid common words or words that can be part of 
other words. As a case progresses, there is a strong likelihood that more keywords will be 
identified. Furthermore, search terms can be devised to look for patterns in data. 
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.723 
Recovering Evidence 
In addition to live files, a wealth of information can be recovered and analyzed on seized 
systems. Because Windows operating systems are the most widely used, knowledge about the 
file systems—methods used to store and organi ze computer files and the data they contain 
for easy access—used by the Windows operating system is critical. Knowledge of the 
Windows operating system will help the examiner locate relevant evidence that is commonly 
found in files stored on hard drives, storage devices, and media.  
 
Common files containing evidence stored in the operating system include user-created files, 
user-protected files, and computer-created files.  
 
User-created Files 
User-created files are files created under the user’s direction, and include text-based 
documents, spreadsheets, databases, e-mail, address books, presentation slides, audio/video 
files, image files, Internet bookmarks, and so on.  
 
User-protected Files 
Often, users hide files to prevent them from being found. There are a variety of techniques 
to hide files, but some of the most common methods are detailed below. 
 
CAMOUFLAGED FILES 
A user might camouflage certain files under an innocent name or different file extension to 
prevent others from discovering them. For example, a suspect might change a file name 
from “evidence.doc” to “install. exe” and place the file in a directory that stores program 
files. Therefore, examiners should analyze a target’s hard drive to determine whether any file 
types have been camouflaged. This is done by analyzing the file header — the first bits of data 
in a file — which contains data identifying the file format. 
 
STEGANOGRAPHY 
Steganography is the process of hiding one piece of information within an apparently 
innocent file. For example, a user can use the least significant bits of a bitmap image to hide 
a message. By hiding the message in the least significant bits of an image, there is almost no 
perceivable change in the bitmap image itself. And without directly comparing the altered 
image to the original, it is practically impossible to tell that the image was altered.  
 
  
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.724   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXAMPLE 
After a French defense contractor suspected that some of his critical designs were being 
compromised, the government conducted an invest igation. The investigation revealed that an 
employee had obtained his position at the company to steal the contractor’s trade secrets. To 
transmit the trade secrets out of the company, the employee imbedded them into graphic images 
used on the company’s public access website usin g steganography. Another party then copied the 
image files from the website and extracted the proprietary designs.  
 
Digitized audio files are another type of file that can be used to hide messages. For example, 
by encoding a message in the least significant bits of a .WAV file, a user can make the 
message almost impossible to detect. Messages can also be hidden in the unused sectors of a 
floppy disk. 
 
ENCRYPTION 
Encryption refers to procedures used to convert information using an algorithm (called cipher) 
that makes the information unreadable. Although there are many free and commercial 
encryption programs available, there are two primary ways to access encrypted information. 
First, there are numerous utility programs that can decrypt documents encrypted by many of 
the more common software applications. In addition, some encryption programs have a 
secret “key” for emergencies that may be very helpful in an investigation. There are also 
several companies that specialize in decryption. 
 
Second, there is precedent for forcing a suspect (or employee) to divulge his decryption 
code. The computer is only a container and encryption is an additional lock prohibiting the 
investigator from reviewing the files for potential evidence. An examiner with a legal right to 
examine encrypted data is no different than ordering a suspect or employee to unlock a file 
cabinet to inspect its contents.  
 
ALTERNATE DATA STREAMS 
Another method used to hide files in Windows systems is the use of the alternate data 
streams of a file or directory. This method, however, is only possible in Windows New 
Technology File System (NTFS) — one of two basic types of file systems used to organize 
data in Windows systems. Alternate data streams are a feature in the NTFS filesystem that 
offers the ability to put data into existing files and folders without affecting their 
functionality, size, or display in many traditional file-browsing utilities like command line or 
Windows Explorer. 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.725 
Although Windows Explorer does not provide a way to see what alternate data streams are 
in a file, they are easy to make and allow an individual with basic knowledge to hide files 
without having to resort to any third-party tools. 
 
Fortunately, there are forensic tools that can search NTFS partitions for alternative data 
streams.  
 
Computer-created Files 
Evidence may also be found in information generated by the operating systems. This type of 
information is important because it can identify that a certain activity has taken place, and, in 
most cases, the user is not aware that it is being written. Some common examples of 
computer-generated data available for examination include: metadata, registry, paging file, 
event logs, LNK files, Internet activity, temporary data, deleted data, and printer-spool files.  
 
METADATA 
Metadata is data about data, and these file tidbits contain a tremendous amount of 
information. It can help determine who wrote a document; who received, opened, copied, 
edited, moved, or printed the document; and when these events occurred. 
 
WINDOWS REGISTRY 
The Windows registry is a central database that stores settings and configuration for the 
operating system and most applications installed on the system. The registry is an important 
source of potential evidential data because it contains information on user accounts, typed 
URLs, networks shared, the run command history, and so on. Often, software used by the 
fraudster will create a footprint in the registry that can provide valuable insight into relevant 
activity that occurred in the system.  
 
WINDOWS PAGING FILE 
Operating systems have a limited supply of Random Access Memory (RAM), and if an 
operating system runs out of physical RAM and needs more memory, it will move some of 
the data outside physical memory and store it temporarily in a special file on the hard disk. 
This file, which is called a paging file or a swap file, is used to simulate RAM. 
 
WINDOWS EVENT LOGS 
Event logs are files that record significant events on a computer. In Windows systems, there 
are three types of events: system, applicat ion, and security. The system log tracks 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.726   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
miscellaneous system events, including events generated during system startup like hardware 
and controller failures. The application log tracks application-related events and application 
errors, such as failing to load a DLL. The security log, which is turned off by default, tracks 
security-related events like logon and logoff times and changes to access rights.  
 
LNK FILES 
LNK files, which are also called shortcuts, refer (or link) to target files that may be 
applications, documents, or system resources. Clicking on a LNK file will either cause the 
application to start or the document to open, and will prompt the applicable system 
resources to run. Although the user may create these files, the system generally creates them 
when a user performs certain tasks. These files, therefore, provide a “history” of previously 
opened documents and files.  
 
INTERNET ACTIVITY 
Web browsers create temporary files that store information about websites that a user has 
visited. These files can show websites that were recently visited and usually include time and 
date information relevant to the visit; they ca n also show images previously viewed online. 
This information allows the examiner to recover websites and images previously viewed by 
the system’s users. 
 
TEMPORARY FILES 
Applications will create temporary files like those created by Web browsers. For example, 
certain communication software like instant messaging (IM) and chat software will keep a 
history of the user’s conversations in a proprietary and sometimes encrypted format.  
 
DELETED DATA 
Deletion is a widely misunderstood function in computing because deleting data is not the 
same as destroying data. Choosing the delete option erases the file’s reference from the table 
of contents, but it does not erase the file; in fa ct, data is not erased from a computer’s hard 
drive until the file is overwritten. 
 
PRINTER-SPOOL FILES 
It is sometimes possible to recover an image of the last page printed on a printer. When 
computers running Windows operating systems print files, a print-spooling process occurs. 
The process involves writing the print job to files, allowing users to keep working while the 
print job runs in the background. After the user creates a print job, it is placed in a queue 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.727 
and is printed when the printer becomes available to perform the job. Once printing is 
complete, the operating system deletes the files;  but again, deleted files can be recovered. 
 
 
Digital Forensics Software 
In recent years, a number of products have emerged for digital forensic analysis. They range 
in complexity, features, and price. These products are continually updated as new technology 
requires new features. Below is a general listing of the most frequently used products on the 
market today. This is sure to be constantly changing. (Please note that the product 
descriptions are adapted from materials provided by the manufacturer, and the ACFE does 
not endorse any particular product.) 
 
EnCase Forensic  
EnCase Forensic is a computer forensics software program by Guidance Software. It gives 
investigators the ability to image a drive and preserve it in a forensic manner using the 
EnCase evidence file format (LEF or E01), a digital evidence container vetted by courts 
worldwide. 
 
EnCase Forensic also contains a full suite of analysis, bookmarking and reporting features. 
Guidance Software and third party vendors provide support for expanded capabilities to 
ensure that forensic examiners have the most comprehensive set of utilities.   
 
EnCase Forensic also offers powerful hidden volume detection and volume rebuilding 
capabilities, allowing investigators to review evidence that would have been irretrievable with 
other computer forensics applications. 
 
How EnCase Forensic Works 
OBTAIN FORENSICALLY SOUND ACQUISITIONS 
EnCase Forensic produces an exact binary duplicate of the original drive or media, then 
verifies it by generating MD5 hash values for related image files and assigning CRC values to 
the data. These checks and balances reveal when evidence has been tampered with or 
altered, helping to keep all digital evidence forensically sound for use in court proceedings. 
 
ADVANCED PRODUCTIVITY FEATURES 
Examiners can preview data while drives or other media are being acquired. Once the image 
files are created, examiners can search and analyze multiple drives or other media 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.728   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
simultaneously. EnCase Forensic also features a case indexer. This powerful tool builds a 
complete index in multiple languages, allowing for fast and easy queries. Indices can also be 
chained together to find keywords common to other investigations. This Unicode-supported 
index contains personal documents, deleted files, file system artifacts, file slack, swap files, 
unallocated space, emails and web pages. In addition, EnCase has extensive file system 
support, giving organizations the ability to analyze all types of data. 
 
ENSCRIPT PROGRAMMING 
EnCase forensic features EnScript programming capabilities. EnScript, an object-oriented 
programming language similar to Java or C++,  allows users create to custom programs to 
help them automate time-consuming investigative tasks, such as searching and analyzing 
specific document types or other labor-intensive processes and procedures.  
 
PROVIDE ACTIONABLE DATA  AND REPORT ON IT 
Once investigators have bookmarked relevant  data, they can create a report suitable for 
presentation in court, to management, or to another legal authority. Data can also be 
exported in multiple file formats for review. 
 
Key Features  
• Advanced search options 
• Internet and email support 
• Multiple viewers 
• Instant message analysis 
• EnScript programming 
• Bookmarking 
• Extensive system file support 
• Multiple acquisition options 
 
For more information about EnCase Forensic, visit www.guidancesoftware.com.  
 
Forensic ToolKit 
Created by AccessData, the AccessData Forensic Toolkit (FTK) offers law enforcement and 
corporate security professionals the ability to perform complete and thorough computer 
forensics examinations. The FTK features file  filtering and search functionality. FTK’s 
customizable filters allow investigators to sort through thousands of files to quickly find the 
evidence they need. FTK is also a forensic tool to perform e-mail analysis.  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.729 
Some of the main features of this product are discussed below.  
 
Integrated Computer Forensics 
• Create images, analyze the registry, conduct an investigation, decrypt files, crack 
passwords, identify steganography, and build a report all with a single solution.  
• Recover passwords from 100+ applications; harness idle CPUs across the network to 
decrypt files and perform robust dictionary attacks.  
• KFF hash library with 45 million hashes. 
 
Enterprise-Class Architecture 
• Supports large, complex datasets.  
• Because the FTK components are compartmentalized, the user will never lose work due 
to a crash (e.g., If the GUI crashes, the workers continue to process data). 
• Provides the ability to back up and archive cases. 
• Every copy of FTK 3 includes a total of four  workers to enable distributed processing  
• It incorporates Lab capabilities, such as the ability to leverage a centralized database 
infrastructure and shared distributed processing farm, as well as collaborative forensic 
analysis, central case/task management and Web review. This is of particular value to law 
enforcement and government computer forensics labs. 
 
Powerful Processing and Speed  
• Distributed processing allows the user to leverage up to three additional computers to 
reduce processing time and tackle massive data sets. 
• True multi-processor and multi-threading support that takes advantage of hardware 
advancements.  
• Pre- and post-processing refinement allows users to control how images are processed. 
• An advanced data-carving engine that allows users to carve allocated and unallocated 
data and specify criteria, such as file size, data type and pixel size to reduce the amount 
of irrelevant data carved while increasing overall thoroughness.  
• Optimized dtSearch integration delivers fast indexing and fast search results. 
 
Advanced Analytics  
• RAM dump analysis  
• An index search engine and a proper full-feature regular expression engine for binary 
searches. 
• Broad file system, compound file, and email support. 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.730   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Supports popular encryption technologies, such as Credant, SafeBoot, Utimaco, EFS, 
PGP and Guardian Edge. 
• Mac support  
 
Preview, Acquisition, and Analysis of Live Data  
• Perform network-based, secure, single-system forensic acquisition of physical devices, 
logical volumes and RAM. 
• Secure Remote Device Mounting 
 
For more information on AccessData, visit www.accessdata.com. 
 
Password Recovery Toolkit 
The Password Recovery Toolkit (PRTK) fr om AccessData is geared toward law 
enforcement and corporate security professionals. It allows examiners to find and identify 
encrypted files on handheld, desktop, and server computer systems. PRTK recovers lost, 
forgotten, or unavailable passwords. If users need access to locked files or if they have 
simply locked themselves out of their files, the PRTK can get them back in. 
 
Security Risk Assessment Tool  
How do hackers bypass an organization’s strongest security measures? Many people use the 
same password to gain access to different programs and networks. This could be one of the 
weakest links in an organization’s security profile. Some password-protected programs are 
easy to crack while others are virtually impossible. But what if the same password is used for 
both programs? By gaining access to the weakest one, fraudsters have gained access to the 
strongest one, without needing to crack both.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.731 
 
Recovery Properties & Status  
Features 
• Enables password management 
• Analyzes files and their passwords with an optional report file 
• Recovers all types of passwords regardless of password length 
• Analyzes multiple files at one time 
• Recovers multilingual passwords 
• Prevents unauthorized use with a personal security code 
 
For more information on AccessData, visit www.accessdata.com. 
 
ProDiscover Forensics  
Produced by Technology Pathways, ProDiscover Forensics is a computer security tool for 
law enforcement that enables computer professionals to find all the data on a computer disk 
while protecting evidence and creating evidentiary quality reports for use in legal 
proceedings. 
 
Features 
• Creates bit-stream copy of the disk to be analyzed, including a hidden HPA section 
(patent pending), to keep original evidence safe 
• Searches files or an entire disk including slack space, HPA section, and Windows 
NT/2000/XP Alternate Data Streams for complete disk forensic analysis 
• Previews all files, even if hidden or deleted, without altering the data on a disk, including 
file metadata 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.732   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Maintains multi-tool compatibility by reading and writing images in the pervasive UNIX 
dd format 
• Examines and cross references data at the file or cluster level to ensure nothing is 
hidden, even in slack space 
• Automatically generates and records MD5, SHA1, or SHA256 hashes to prove  
data integrity 
• Examines FAT12, FAT16, FAT 32, and all NTFS file systems, including Dynamic Disk 
and Software RAID, for maximum flexibility 
• Examines Sun Solaris UFS file system and Linux ext2/ext3 file systems 
• Integrates graphics thumbnail viewer and registry viewer 
• Integrates Windows event log viewer 
• Extracts Internet history 
• Utilizes Perl scripts to automate investigation tasks 
• Extracts EXIF information from JPEG files to identify file creators 
• Automated report generation in XML format saves time and improves accuracy and 
compatibility 
• GUI interface and integrated help function ensures a quick start and ease of use 
• Designed to NIST Disk Imaging Tool Specification 3.1.6 to ensure high quality 
 
ProDiscover Forensics is a tool for computer forensics analysis. It is not possible to hide 
data from ProDiscover Forensics as it reads the disk at the sector level. This least intrusive 
approach also allows the investigator to examine the files without altering any valuable 
metadata, such as last time accessed. ProDiscover Forensics will not alter any data on the 
disk. ProDiscover Forensics can recover deleted files, examine slack space, and access 
Windows Alternate Data Streams. It can even allow the investigator to preview, search, and 
image the Hardware Protected Area (HPA) of the disk with a patent-pending process. 
 
ProDiscover Forensics lets the investigator search through the entire disk for keywords and 
phrases with full Boolean search capability to find the data they want. Investigators can use 
the hash comparison capability to find known illegal files or to weed out known good files, 
such as standard operating system files, by employing the included data from the National 
Drug Intelligence Center in their Hashkeeper database. ProDiscover Forensics search 
capability allows searches for words or phrases anywhere on the disk, including the slack 
space.  
 
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.733 
 
 
ProDiscover Forensics automatically creates evidentiary quality reports needed to document 
results, complete with every file and hash signature where evidence was found. This saves 
time and prevents errors that might compromise an investigator’s case.  
 
For more information about Technology Pathways, visit at www.techpathways.com. 
 
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition  
Gargoyle Investigator is a software tool created by WetStone for digital investigations. It is 
used for performing incident responses, field investigations, digital forensic analysis, threat 
management, or compliance audits. Gargoyle Investigator performs a quick search on a 
stand-alone system for known contraband or hostile, or “bad,” programs. It also provides 
clues regarding the activities, motives, and intent of suspects or potential suspects. 
  
Gargoyle Investigator Forensic Pro Edition provides investigators with information 
regarding the contents of a suspect’s computer along with information about its owner’s 
computer use. Gargoyle performs searches for known bad or hostile programs, their 
associated files, and remnants of files. Once identified, Gargoyle also maps the detected files 
to the associated cyber weapons and classifies them into a category of malware.  
 
The Forensic Pro Edition is designed for forensic investigators, examiners, law enforcement 
personnel, private investigators, and forensic lab use.  
 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.734   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Gargyole 
 
Gargoyle provides the investigator with the ability to gather suspect characteristics from the 
information revealed. The computer’s sophisticat ion, covert behaviors, and paranoia levels 
(has the suspect tried to delete incriminating programs?) can all be derived when searching 
for applications with a common theme. These behaviors can assist in assessing suspect 
capability, activities, intent, threat, or consciousness of guilt. 
 
For more information about Forensic Pro Edition and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 
Stego Suite 
The Stego Suite by WetStone is a software bundle available for the investigation, detection, 
analysis, and recovery of digital steganography. It identifies the presence of steganography 
without prior knowledge of the steganography algorithm that might have been used against 
the target file.  
 
WetStone’s Stego Suite comprises four products: Stego Watch, a steganography tool; Stego 
Analyst, an image and audio file analyzer; Stego Break, a password cracker; and the recently 
added Stego Hunter, a steganography application identifier. 
  
Investigation  Digital Forensics 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.735 
 
Stego Watch  
 
 
 
 
Stego Analysis 
 
 
Stego Break 
Digital Forensics  Investigation 
3.736   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Postmortem analysis of data recovered from a digital crime scene can be a tedious process. 
When the digital data contains thousands of images, audio files, or digital video that may 
contain other hidden evidence, the process can be impossible without the aid of key 
technologies and expertise. Stego Suite’s tools provide the ability to quickly examine and 
evaluate digital image and/or audio data for the presence of hidden information  
or communications. 
 
Active Web scanning of a website to ensure that unauthorized people are not using the site 
to exchange innocuous-looking messages or smuggle proprietary data is also becoming a 
must. The tools of Stego Suite baseline a Web domain and continuously scan the domain for 
the presence of hidden data inside digital images.  
 
For more information about the Stego Suite and other products by WetStone, visit 
www.wetstonetech.com. 
 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.801 
TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS 
 
Interviewing witnesses to obtain financial data involves the systematic questioning of people 
who have knowledge of the events, the people involved, and the physical evidence 
surrounding the case. Financial interviewing is not unlike other kinds of interviewing. But in 
financial interviews, evidence often develops in bits and pieces that, when viewed separately, 
might appear to lead nowhere. Frustration is common, and tactics and techniques might 
have to be modified. Diligence, patience, and persistence are essential for successful results.  
 
 
Comprehensive Guidelines for Information to Be Collected in Financial Interviews 
The following is a checklist of general information that can be covered in the financial 
interview. 
 
Identification 
• Full name 
• Alias 
• Reason for alias 
 
Birth 
• Date and place of birth 
• Citizenship 
• Father’s name; living? (If deceased, when?) 
• Mother’s name; living? (If deceased, when?) 
 
Address During Pertinent Years 
• Resident address; phone number 
• Business address; phone number 
• Other present or prior address(es) 
• Marital status; if married, date and place of marriage 
• If divorced, when and where 
• Spouse’s maiden name 
• Spouse’s parents; living? (If deceased, when?) 
• Children’s names and ages; other dependents 
 
  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.802   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Occupation 
• Present occupation 
• Company name and address 
• Present salary 
• Length of time employed 
• Additional employment 
• Prior occupations 
• Spouse’s occupation 
 
General Background 
• Physical health 
• Mental health 
• Education 
• Professional qualifications 
• Military service 
• Passport, Social Security, and/or social insurance numbers (for identification purposes) 
• Ever been investigated for financial crimes? 
• Ever been arrested? 
• Ever filed bankruptcy? If so, who acted as receiver/trustee? 
• Hobbies and interests 
 
Financial Institutions (Business and Personal) 
• Financial institution accounts 
• Safe deposit boxes (request inventory); in whose name; contents; does anyone else  
have access? 
• Credit cards 
• Trusts; beneficiary, donor, or trustee 
• Mutual funds or other securities owned 
• Brokers; currency exchanges used 
• Life insurance 
• Indirect dealings (e.g., through lawyers or accountants) 
• Cashier’s checks 
• Money orders, bank drafts, traveler’s checks 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.803 
Sources of Income 
• Salaries, wages, business receipts 
• Interest and dividends 
• Sale of securities 
• Rents and royalties 
• Pensions, trusts, annuities, etc. 
• Gifts (money, property, etc.) 
• Inheritances 
• Loans 
• Mortgages 
• Sales of assets 
• Municipal bond interest 
• Insurance settlements 
• Damages from legal actions 
• Any other source of funds, ever 
 
Net Income and Expenditures 
• Current cash on hand, including cash in safe deposit boxes, but not cash in bank 
accounts 
• Location of current cash 
• Largest amount of cash ever on hand; location 
• End-of-year cash 
• Notes receivable 
• Mortgages receivable 
• Life insurance policies 
• Automobiles 
• Real estate 
• Stocks, bonds, and other securities 
• Jewelry, furs 
• Airplanes, boats 
• Any other assets valued 
 
Liabilities 
• Payables 
• Loans 
• Assets purchased by financing 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.804   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Mortgages 
• Bonds 
 
Expenditures 
• Debt reduction 
• Insurance premiums 
• Interest expense 
• Contributions 
• Medical 
• Travel 
• Real estate and other taxes 
• Household wages (e.g., babysitter, housekeeper, gardener) 
• Casualty losses 
 
Business Operations 
• Name and address 
• Date organized and nature (corporation, partnership) 
• Company or business registration numbers 
• Tax identification numbers 
• Title and duties 
• Reporting arrangements—to and from whom? 
• Banking and cash handling arrangements 
• Investment; where and when 
• Subsidiaries and associates 
• Key people 
 
Books and Records 
• Nature of accounting system (e.g., cash, accrual) 
• Period covered 
• Location 
• Name of person maintaining and controlling 
• Types (journal, ledgers, minute books, canceled checks, bank statements, invoices, cash) 
• External auditors 
 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.805 
Business Receipts 
• Form (electronic, check, or cash) 
• Are all receipts deposited? Where? 
• Are business receipts segregated from personal ones? 
• Are expenses ever paid with undeposited receipts? 
• Arrangements for foreign currency payments 
• Trade finance arrangements, letters of credit, etc. 
 
 
Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions 
A subject’s income can be established by the direct or indirect approach. The direct 
approach, or the specific-items method of proving income, relies on specific transactions, 
such as sales or expenses, to determine income. The indirect approach relies on 
circumstantial proof of income. Indirect methods will be discussed in the next section. 
 
To trace financial transactions using the direct method, the examiner must obtain relevant 
financial records. 
 
Financial Institutions 
Fraud examiners should recognize that in most instances bank records are not readily 
obtainable. Substantial requirements usually must be met to justify legal process (e.g., 
subpoena, search warrant, and the like), which banks will customarily demand as a condition 
for disclosure. Preliminary investigation is of the utmost importance to lay the basis for 
obtaining such records. More information on banking transactions is contained in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual.  
 
The availability of investigative avenues often determines whether a promising fraud 
examination will grind to a halt or proceed successfully. Legal advice from a prosecutor or 
civil counsel should be sought in all such instances. It should also be recognized that bank 
officials and employees can be questioned by fraud examiners in the same manner as any 
other potential witnesses and that their responses to proper inquiries might provide 
important information. 
 
Bank records are perhaps the single most important financial source available to a fraud 
examiner. In addition to their use as evidence for fraud, a bank’s records might provide leads 
on sources of funds, expenditures, and personal affairs. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.806   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The following information can be of value to fraud examiners seeking information from 
banks concerning pertinent financial transactions of economic crime perpetrators. It is based 
in part on the operational guidelines issued by the American Bankers Association to all 
member banks in the United States and on the training guides issued by the U.S. 
Department of the Treasury. 
 
Types of Financial Institutions  
Banks are classified primarily by their major services. 
• Commercial banks  offer businesses and individuals such services as checking accounts, 
loans, and exchange instruments. 
• Savings banks  and savings and loan associations  handle savings accounts and mortgage loans. 
• Trust companies  handle property for others under various types of fiduciary 
accommodations. 
 
Many banks combine all three services. Banks are organized under either state or national 
banking laws. 
 
The basic bank functions are as follows: 
• Receive deposits 
• Pay checks 
• Transfer funds 
• Make loans 
• Collect sundry financial instruments 
• Hold and administer property for others 
• Perform other services, such as renting safe deposit boxes 
 
Internal Bookkeeping Procedures 
The internal record-keeping practices and procedures of banks not only are complex but 
they constantly are changing because of the growing sophistication of computer technology. 
Banks are moving steadily toward an electronic funds-transfer system that will eliminate the 
use of checks. Such a system will automatically transfer money from the account of the 
purchaser to the account of the seller. Paper trails will disappear. Detailed familiarity with the 
intricacies of internal bank operations is not essential, however, for the fraud examiner to 
obtain the types of information necessary for investigations. What is essential is the 
knowledge that records of customers’ transactions are maintained and retained. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.807 
Electronic Banking 
Electronic banking is possibly the most common form of banking today. Electronic banking 
includes automated teller machine transactions; point-of-sale transactions using credit or 
debit cards; smart cards, which are gaining popularity in the U.S. (and are already popular in 
Europe); wire transfers; online bill payment through Internet banking and biller websites; 
and traditional automated clearing house (ACH) applications of direct payment and direct 
deposit. 
 
All of these forms of electronic banking are governed by the Electronic Fund Transfer Act 
(EFTA) (15, U.S.C., § 1693 (See Appendix A)). The EFTA currently requires financial 
institutions to keep records on all transactions of $3,000 or more. 
 
Retention of Records 
The Bank Secrecy Act set forth a system of reporting and recordkeeping requirements 
designed to help track large or unusual financial transactions. The Act consists of two titles. 
Title I contains provisions requiring financial institutions and securities brokers and dealers 
to keep extensive records of the transactions and accounts of their customers. Title II of the 
Act (originally entitled Currency and Foreign Transactions Reporting Act) requires banks, 
“financial institutions” (which include casinos, securities brokers and dealers, currency 
exchanges, and others), and, in some cases, individuals to report certain transactions to the 
government.  
 
Title I—Recordkeeping 
The regulations governing recordkeeping are set forth in Chapter 31 of the Code of Federal 
Regulations at Part 103, Subpart C. The recordkeeping requirements are set forth for banks, 
nonbank financial institutions, securities brokers, casinos, and currency dealers and 
exchangers. Under these regulations, all institutions are required to keep a record of any 
financial transaction of more than $10,000. 
 
These regulations provide, in part, that banks must keep an original, microfilm, or other 
copy or reproduction of most demand deposits (checking account) and savings account 
records must be retained for five years. The records must include signature cards; 
statements, ledger cards or other records disclosing all transactions, that is, deposits and 
withdrawals; and copies of customers’ check s, bank drafts, money orders, and cashier’s 
checks drawn on the bank or issued and payable by it. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.808   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
In addition, banks also must retain, for two years, all records necessary to reconstruct a 
customer’s checking account. These records must include copies of customers’ deposit 
tickets. They must also retain records necessary to trace and supply a description of a check 
deposited to a customer’s checking account. 
 
Although some of these requirements apply to checks written or deposits made in excess of 
$100, most banks find it cheaper to microfilm all pertinent records, including the checks and 
deposits in amounts less than $100, rather than sort their records into two categories. The 
Bank Secrecy Act also requires financial institutions to retain a record of any extension of 
credit of more than $10,000 as well as each tr ansfer of $10,000 or more outside the United 
States. 
 
Title II—Reporting and Recordkeeping 
Title II of the Bank Secrecy Act is codified as 31, U.S.C., §§ 5311–5330. The purpose of 
these sections is to require certain reports or records to be filed or kept by “financial 
institutions.” Section 5312(a)(2) defines “financial institution” very broadly to include not 
only banks, but also securities brokers; curre ncy exchange houses; insurance companies; loan 
companies; travel agencies; telegraph companie s; issuers or cashiers of checks or money 
orders; auto, boat, and airplane dealers; casinos; and persons involved in real estate closings 
and settlements. Only recently has the Treasury Department begun to reign in much of the 
non-financial institution transaction business in the by requiring registration of these diverse 
enterprises. 
 
Gaining Access to Records Held by Financial Institutions 
One of the most difficult challenges to the fraud examiner will be to gain access to the 
records held by financial institutions. Although bank records are one of the most important 
sources available to fraud examinations, they are not readily obtainable. Most suspects will 
not willingly give their records to a fraud examiner, especially if the records contain 
potentially incriminating evidence.  
 
Moreover, financial institutions’ authority to di sclose bank records is restricted by federal 
and state law. For example, the Right to Financial Privacy Act prohibits financial institutions 
from disclosing financial information about individual customers until the governmental 
authority obtains the customer’s consent, a court order, a subpoena, a search warrant, or 
some other formal demand, with limited exceptions. And even though Right to Financial 
Privacy Act applies only to demands by governmental agencies, most banks and other 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.809 
financial institutions also will not release such information to private parties absent legal 
process, such as a subpoena issued in a civil lawsuit. 
 
As a result, substantial requirements must generally be met before banks will disclose such 
information. In general, bank records can be obtained in most jurisdictions by using one of 
the following methods: 
• Civil discovery 
• Administrative subpoena or summons 
• Civil summons 
• Customer authorized disclosure 
• Court subpoena 
• Grand jury subpoena 
• Search warrant  
 
Furthermore, the cost of obtaining bank records can be quite high. Banks generally charge 
both public and private entities to search and retrieve records. There are usually additional 
costs for the reproduction of records. It might be prudent for the examiner to limit record 
requests as much as possible.  
 
Despite such complications, the examiner might attempt to obtain the financial records of 
suspects by contacting their former spouses. Former spouses might have banking records 
useful to the fraud examiner that they may be happy to turn over. Similarly, the banking 
records might also be a part of a divorce settlement or a lawsuit. 
 
Types of Financial Records 
The financial records identified and discussed below are limited to those of particular 
interest to fraud examiners. 
 
Account Opening Documents 
Account opening documents include the records required to create a bank account, but the 
types of files required may vary depending on the type of account. 
 
PERSONAL ACCOUNTS 
Signature cards are the key records required to open and use a personal account. The 
signature card is the evidence of a contract between the customer and bank. When a 
depositor opens an account, the bank requires that a signature card be signed. By signing the 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.810   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
card, the depositor becomes a party to a contract with the bank under which he accepts all 
rules and regulations of the bank and authorizes the bank to honor his orders for 
withdrawing funds. For a corporation or a partnership account, the signature card is 
accompanied by copies of resolutions of the board of directors or partnership agreements 
naming the person authorized to draw checks on the accounts. 
 
The signature card is a source of valuable information. Although its form varies, the card 
usually contains such data as banking connections and the date and amount of the initial 
deposit. The initial deposit traced through the bank’s records may disclose a source of 
income. The identification of the person who opened the account might be significant, 
especially if the depositor used an alias. 
 
Many banks investigate the references give n by a new customer. They might also make 
inquiries of various credit reporting agencies. This information is contained in a 
correspondence file or a credit file that can contain comments of the person who opened the 
account and might show information given by the depositor when opening the account. 
 
In banks using Automatic Data Processing (ADP), the signature card also contains an 
account number assigned to the customer. In tracing information about a subject’s 
transactions with the bank, the account number must be used. If it does not appear on the 
signature card, it can be located in the bank’s cross-reference file. Assigned account numbers 
are encoded on other documents relating to the depositor by means of a system called 
Magnetic Ink Character Recognition (MICR). The card also might contain the depositor’s 
Social Security number. 
 
The signature card might define the account as either a regular or a special checking account. 
The main difference between the two is the service charge made by the bank. The regular 
checking account is used mostly by businesses and individuals who maintain large average 
balances. The special checking account is used by individuals who usually have small  
account balances. 
 
When requesting the signature card, the fraud examiner should determine whether the bank 
maintains any type of central file. Most large banks have a central file that lists all 
departments with which a customer has had dealings. If the bank has such a file, the 
examiner does not need to check with each department to obtain information. The subject 
might at one time have had a bank account that later was closed. Requests for information 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.811 
from a bank about a subject should always include a reference to both active and closed 
accounts. Records of closed accounts are usually maintained in a separate file. 
 
In addition to a signature card, the account-opening file for a personal account might 
contain a copy of some form of identification (e.g., driver’s license) the account holder 
provided the bank. 
 
BUSINESS ACCOUNTS 
In addition to the documentation required for opening a personal account, the opening 
documents for a corporate account will include a copy of the corporate resolution 
authorizing the opening of a bank account and possibly the company’s articles of 
incorporation. These documents should indicate who the company’s corporate officers are 
and its date of incorporation.  
 
For an unincorporated company to open a bank account, the baking institution might 
require the company to provide a doing business as (DBA) registration, fictitious name 
registration, or business registration certificate. Generally, the required documentation 
depends on the applicable state laws. 
 
Negotiated Checks 
Canceled checks written by a subject or received from others provide the fraud examiner 
with much more than amounts, payees, and endorsees. Of particular interest are checks that 
have been cashed. All banks use a series of codes or symbols imprinted on the front of a 
check to show that the check has been cashed. The specific codes used in various areas can 
be obtained locally. 
 
A useful technique to help examine negotiated checks is to list the information from the 
checks on a spreadsheet (either manual or electronic). Checks should be listed by number 
and date on the left with the payee, amount, and purpose of the check, if known, to the 
right. This will show the subject’s routine monthly or annual expenditures that can be useful 
for computing the comparative net worth. The absence of a check for a recurring payment 
for a particular month might indicate a cash payment, which in turn would indicate possible 
undisclosed cash income. Examine the backs of checks payable to cash and note where they 
were cashed. The depository stamp can identify the bank at which the check was cashed. 
This information may provide a lead to another bank account. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.812   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
CHECK 21 
“With image exchange, and the emerging fraud detection technology, banks will be able to 
know if sufficient funds are in the account … whether the customer is who he claims to be 
… and whether the check is legitimate.” 6 
 
In July 2003, Congress issued final regulations regarding the availability of funds and 
collection of checks. These regulations, known as “Check 21,” created “substitute checks,” a 
type of negotiable instrument that became the legal equivalent of paper checks. This 
provision facilitates the efficient collection and return of checks in electronic form by 
alleviating the collection requirement that depository banks actually send the original paper 
checks to collecting banks for payment.  
 
Under Check 21, a depository bank can transfer check information electronically to a 
collecting bank via a substitute check for presentment. The collecting bank is then required 
to take presentment of the substitute check as long as it meets all the legal requirements of 
the original check. Therefore, rather than actually processing and sending an original  
paper check across cities and states, the depositing bank can now collect the substitute  
check electronically. 
 
A substitute check is a paper reproduction of the original check that states, “This is a legal 
copy of your check. You can use it the same  way you would use the original check.” Upon 
transfer, presentment, or return, a bank warrants that the substitute check submitted is an 
accurate depiction of the physical check, and that no depository bank, drawee, drawer, or 
endorser will be asked or required to pay a check that has already been paid. Essentially, this 
legend on the substitute check informs consumers of their rights to expedited recrediting of 
an amount charged if there is a disputed item and the original or substituted copy is 
necessary to prove the validity of the charge on the account. Under this law, the validity of a 
charge becomes an issue when a consumer is charged twice for a check, the substitute check 
is illegible, or the original check was not properly copied during the imaging process. 
 
Furthermore, Check 21 places the risk of loss associated with substitute checks on the 
reconverting bank that first transferred, presented, or returned the substitute check. 
                                                 
6 Robertson, Bill and Ken Gahre. White-Collar Crime Fighter. Vol. 6, No. 1, Check 21: Blackjack for Check Fraud 
Fighters?   Ridgefield, CT: White Collar Crime101, LLC., 2004. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.813 
Although the reconverting banks can allocate such loss among themselves, they may remain 
liable under warranty claim, indemnity, or recrediting claims. 
 
TRACING CHECKS 
Tracing checks is facilitated by the use of bank identification symbols. Fraud examiners do 
not have to understand the internal bookkeeping procedures used by banks. The concept of 
bank identification symbols, however, is of interest. All checks printed for banking 
institutions contain an ABA transit number. These numbers represent an identification code 
developed by the American Bankers Association. The ABA transit number enables a check 
to be routed to the bank of origin. In the process of routing, a trail is left. 
 
MAGNETIC INK CHARACTER RECOGNITION 
Magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) is a machine language and is a check design 
standard to which all banks must conform. Numeric information is printed in magnetic ink 
on the bottom of bank checks and other documents. This coding is electronically scanned by 
computers that convert the magnetic ink notations into electronic impulses readable by a 
computer. MICR information is printed in groupings called fields. The first field on the left 
on bank checks is the Federal Reserve check routing code and the next is the ABA transit 
number. These numbers also appear in the upper right corner of the check. 
 
The account number field shows the drawer’s assigned account number at the bank. When 
the check is processed through the bank, an additional field is added on the right for the 
amount of the check. The dollar amount of the check should always equal the encoded 
MICR amount. These two figures should be compared to make sure that the subject did not 
alter the returned check. All checks, drafts, and similar items that are not encoded with 
magnetic ink cannot be cleared through the Federal Reserve system without special handling. 
 
PREFIX NUMBERS OF CITIES IN NUMERICAL ORDER 
When the ABA established the city and state prefix numbering system, it did so by the 
geographical location of the reserve cities in existence at the time. The prefix numbers 
identify city and state documents. For example, numbers 1 through 49, as seen in the 
following examples, were given to the most populated reserve cities and major banking 
centers at the time. The rest of the numbers, 50 through 99, were assigned to the states from 
East to West. The principal numbers 50, 60, 70, 80, and 90 were given to the main collecting 
financial centers (New York, Pennsylvania, Illi nois, Missouri and California). The numbers 
before and after each principal number were generally designated to nearby states. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.814   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
PREFIX NUMBERS OF CITIES AND STATES  
1–49   Reserve Cities 
50–99  States 
50–58  Eastern States 
59  Alaska, American Samoa, Guam, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands 
60–69  Southeastern States  
70–79  Central States 
80–88  Southwestern States 
90–99  Western States  
 
RESERVE CITY, MAJOR BANKING CENTER, AND STATE PREFIX NUMBERS  
  1 New York, NY 34 Tacoma, WA 68 Virginia 
  2 Chicago, IL 35 Houston, TX 69 West Virginia 
  3 Philadelphia, PA 36 St. Joseph, MO 70 Illinois 
  4 St. Louis, MO 37 Fort Worth, TX 71 Indiana 
  5 Boston, MA 38 Savannah, GA 72 Iowa 
  6 Cleveland, OH 39 Oklahoma City, OK 73 Kentucky 
  7 Baltimore, MD 40 Wichita, KS 74 Michigan 
  8 Pittsburgh, PA 41 Sioux City, IA 75 Minnesota 
  9 Detroit, MI 43 Lincoln, NE 76 Nebraska 
10 Buffalo, NY 44 Topeka, KS 77 North Dakota  
11 San Francisco, CA 45 Dubuque, IA 78 South Dakota 
12 Milwaukee, WI 46 Galveston, TX 79 Wisconsin 
13 Cincinnati, OH  47 Cedar Rapids, IA 80 Missouri 
14 New Orleans, LA 48 Waco, TX 81 Arkansas 
15 Washington, D.C. 49 Muskogee, OK 82 Colorado  
16 Los Angeles, CA 50 New York 83 Kansas 
17 Minneapolis, MN 51 Connecticut 84 Louisiana  
18 Kansas City, MO 52 Maine 85 Mississippi 
19 Seattle, WA 53 Massachusetts 86 Oklahoma 
20 Indianapolis, IN 54 New Hampshire 87 Tennessee 
21 Louisville, KY 55 New Jersey 88 Texas 
22 St. Paul, MN 56 Ohio 89 --- 
23 Denver, CO 57 Rhode Island 90 California 
24 Portland, OR 58 Vermont 91 Arizona 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.815 
25 Columbus, OH 59 AL, AS, GU, HI, PR, VI 7 92 Idaho 
26 Memphis, TN 60 Pennsylvania 93 Montana 
27 Omaha, NE 61 Alabama 94 Nevada 
28 Spokane, WA 62 Delaware 95 New Mexico 
29 Albany, NY 63 Florida 96 Oregon 
30 San Antonio, TX 64 Georgia 97 Utah 
31 Salt Lake City, UT 65 Maryland 98 Washington 
32 Dallas, TX 66 North Carolina 99 Wyoming 
 
All banks in an area served by a Federal Reserve bank or branch carry the routing symbol of 
the Federal Reserve bank or branch. The Federal Reserve routing symbol (FRRS) 
encompasses the first four digits of the nine-digit routing number. This routing symbol 
identifies where the Federal Reserve bank is located. The first two numbers of the FRRS 
designate the Federal Reserve District in which the bank is located (as shown below). The 12 
Federal Reserve Districts and numbers are as follows:  
 
01—Boston, MA 
02—New York, NY 
03—Philadelphia, PA 
04—Cleveland, OH 
05—Richmond, VA 
06—Atlanta, GA 
07—Chicago, IL 
08—St. Louis, MO 
09—Minneapolis, MN 
10—Kansas City, KS 
11—Dallas, TX 
12—San Francisco, CA 
 
The next two numbers designate the specific bank location of the Federal Reserve branch. A 
thrift institution is designated when “2” is added to the first digit of the FRRS. For example, 
if there is a thrift institution in the first district (Boston) the designation would be “21.” If 
the thrift institution is in a district that has a double digit, such as San Francisco, the 
designation becomes “32.” The next four numbers of the routing number sequence are 
                                                 
7 AL: Alaska; AS: American Samoa; GU: Guam; HI: Hawaii; PR: Puerto Rico; VI: Virgin Islands 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.816   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
always unique to the financial institution; and the last number of the nine digit routing 
number is a digit derived from an algorithmic calculation. 
 
Deposit Tickets 
The deposit ticket is the principal source document for crediting the customer’s account. 
Deposits are first recorded on the deposit ticket or slip that usually segregates currency, 
coins, and checks. The checks are listed separately. In many localities the depositor writes 
the ABA number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket. Either of 
these might help to identify the source of the check. In other localities the bank writes the 
ABA number on the deposit ticket, and in some banks no identifying data is entered on the 
deposit ticket. Regardless of the detail contained on a deposit ticket, bank record-keeping 
systems allow deposits to be identified and traced to their sources.  
 
In working with deposit tickets, the fraud examiner must remember that sometimes the 
depositor splits the deposit, meaning only part of the check is actually deposited. In these 
instances, the customer either receives cash or requests that part of the proceeds be applied 
to a note or interest due to the bank. In some instances, it might be important to determine 
the total amount of cash and checks presented for deposit before deductions. When this is 
the case, the fraud examiner should inquire from the bank how split deposits are handled. 
 
Deposit items can be broken down into two types: on-us items and clearinghouse items. 
 
ON-US ITEMS 
An on-us item  is a check or draft that is presented for payment where the depository bank is 
also the payor bank. For example, a check written by a customer of one bank is deposited by 
the payee at another branch of the same bank. The bank should be able to trace the source 
of any on-us items. The source might be loan proceeds, certificates of deposit, wire transfers, 
bank checks, or checks from other deposits at that bank. If the deposit is the proceeds from 
a loan, obtain and analyze the loan file (examination of the loan file is discussed later in this 
chapter). If the deposit came from a wire transfer, trace the wire transfer to the originating 
bank to see where the funds for the wire transfer originated. This search could lead to other 
accounts, other witnesses, co-conspirators, or offshore transactions. 
 
Bank checks (such as cashier’s checks and money orders) could be an indication of smurfing 
operations. Smurfing  is the process by which a subject structures a deposit into several 
transactions, each less than $10,000, to avoid filing a currency transaction report as required 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.817 
under the Bank Secrecy Act. As the video portion of this course makes clear, smurfing is a 
very common technique for avoiding reporting requirements. Look for large numbers of 
cashier’s checks in even amounts deposited on a regular basis.  
 
CLEARINGHOUSE ITEMS 
Clearinghouse items  are those that must clear through other local banks and are therefore sent 
to a local clearinghouse for processing, and they include those items that are sent to out-of-
 town banks, such as Federal Reserve Banks. Because tracking down these items will involve 
obtaining records from third-party banks, the tracing process might be more time 
consuming and will probably require legal process. 
 
To determine whether an item is an on-us item or a clearinghouse item, first look to see 
whether the bank on which the check was drawn is the same as the bank in which it was 
deposited. If the names are not the same, check the endorsements on the back of the check. 
If the item has a different bank’s endorsement or  a Federal Reserve bank’s endorsement, it is 
a clearinghouse item. The endorsement should contain the name of the processing bank or 
its transit number. 
 
Wire Transfers 
A wire transfer  is a method of transferring money from one bank to another. These transfers 
are processed by banks and by wire remittance companies such as Western Union and 
MoneyGram.  
 
Like other transactions, banks keep records of wire transfers. The records will identify who 
sent the wire, where it was sent, the date, and the amount. If the transfer was to a bank in 
the United States, the bank should have a record of the account number of the account into 
which the funds were deposited. If the wire was sent offshore, however, tracing the transfer 
depends on the laws and policies of the country and the receiving institution. 
 
Intrabank Transfers 
Other departments within a bank can credit the depositor’s account for funds collected, such 
as the proceeds of loans or items held by the bank for collection. Items held by the bank for 
collection are not always deposited to the customer’s account but are sometimes remitted 
directly to the customer. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.818   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Savings Accounts 
These are referred to as time deposits  because sometimes they are not as readily available to the 
customer as deposits to a checking account. Funds in a savings account might be subject to a 
30-day notice of withdrawal. 
 
Certificates of Deposit 
Certificates of deposit  (CDs) are interest bearing investment products that provide limited access 
to the money invested and a modest rate of interest. CDs are intended to be held until 
maturity, at which time the money may be withdrawn together with the accrued interest. 
Many banks impose penalties on money with drawn from a CD before maturity.  
 
Bank Statements 
A bank statement is a summary of all the transactions of a bank account. Bank statements 
are provided for all types of bank accounts, including checking accounts, money market 
accounts, savings accounts, CAP accounts (used by those who often deal in securities 
transactions), and others. 
 
Bank statements are helpful because they contain important information. In general, the 
details on a bank statement include the name and address of the bank, the name and address 
of the account holder, the account number, the opening balance, a record of all debit 
transactions (e.g., cash withdrawals from a teller, automated-teller machine (ATM) cash 
withdrawals, ATM payments, check payments, online payments, debit card payments, bank 
fees, etc.), a record of all credit transactions (e.g., direct transfers, cash deposits, check 
deposits, etc.), and the closing balance.  
 
Bank statements summarize the financial activity of the account holder for a specific period 
(usually a month). If a credit card is tied to the account, the bank statement also reflects 
credit card balances but usually not specific transactions.  
 
Today, bank statements are mailed to account holders or are accessible online. Some banks 
still return original checks along with the bank statements to the account holder; others 
provide pages with smaller facsimiles of the front and back of each check. 
 
Generally, bank statements contain a wealth of information. In most bank statements, 
financial activity in the account is shown along with a tied credit card balance. Typically, 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.819 
bank statements show numerous types of transactions, including checks, electronic checks, 
and electronic fund transfers, as they are charged against the account. 
 
Other Exchange Instruments 
Exchange instruments are vehicles by which the bank transfers funds, and these instruments 
include cashier’s checks, bank drafts, traveler ’s checks, bank money orders, and certified 
checks. Bank exchange instruments are often purchased with currency; therefore, they may 
be good sources of information about a subject’s currency transactions. 
 
CASHIER’S CHECKS 
Cashier’s checks  are issued and certified by a bank with itself as the drawer. These items are 
called treasurer’s checks when issued by a trust company. They are frequently an excellent 
lead to other bank accounts, stock, real property, and other assets. Because cashier’s checks 
can be held indefinitely, subjects sometimes purchase cashier’s checks instead of keeping 
large amounts of currency on hand. In reconstructing a subject’s transactions with cashier’s 
checks, be sure that all checks are accounted for because subjects sometimes exchange 
previously purchased checks for new ones.  
 
Bank checks, such as cashier’s checks, can be extremely time consuming and expensive to 
locate unless you know the date and number of the check. However, if the subject has 
deposited a bank check into his account, or purchased a bank check using a check from his 
account, then copies of bank checks are much easier to obtain because the subject’s account 
records will reveal the date and number of the bank check. 
 
BANK DRAFTS 
Bank drafts are checks drawn by the issuing bank on its account with another bank. Often 
this other account is in the geographical area where the purchaser desires to make a 
payment. Bank drafts also can be used when a subject does not want to carry a large amount 
of cash. 
 
TRAVELER’S CHECKS 
Traveler’s checks are checks issued in predetermined amounts by the American Express 
Company and several large U.S. banks. Local banks purchase them from issuing companies 
of U.S. banks and then sell them to the public. Traveler’s checks require two signatures of 
the purchaser: one when purchased and the other when cashed. Traveler’s checks are traced 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
by their serial number. The issuing company usually keeps records of traveler’s checks sent 
to it by the selling bank. Traveler’s checks do not expire. 
 
The local bank that sold the checks might keep a copy of the sales order that lists the serial 
numbers. If the numbers are not available, the issuing bank might be able to supply the 
information if it is known when the checks were purchased. Canceled checks can be 
obtained from the American Express Company or from other issuing banks. A target can 
purchase large amounts of traveler’s checks from one bank and place them in another to 
avoid arousing suspicion by depositing cash. 
 
It is important to note, however, that traveler’s checks are declining in use. According to the 
Federal Reserve, usage of traveler’s checks has declined each year since their peak in the mid 
1990s.  
 
BANK MONEY ORDERS 
Bank money orders are similar to cashier’s checks but usually are for small amounts. Like 
cashier’s checks, money orders may be resorted to by subjects reluctant to use cash. 
 
CERTIFIED CHECKS 
Certified checks  are customer’s checks stamped with the paying bank’s guarantee that the 
maker’s signature is genuine and that there is enough money available in the holder’s account  
to cover the amount to be paid.  Certified checks are liabilities of the bank and, when paid, 
are kept by the bank. These checks are immediately charged against the customer’s account 
by debit memorandums. Some banks permit customers to retrieve the original checks by 
surrendering the debit memorandum.  
 
Loan Records 
Loan records can provide important information regarding a subject. With loan records, the 
collateral that secures them, and the results of (bank) credit investigations, a bank has a 
wealth of information. When a bank makes a commercial loan to an individual, it requires 
detailed statements of assets and liabilities from the borrower. The loan file also might 
include the results of credit inquiries regarding paying habits, loan amounts, and present 
unpaid balances. A bank credit department generally maintains the following basic records: 
• The credit or loan file: This file includes the loan application, financial statement, and 
general economic history of the customer. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.821 
• The liability ledger : This contains the customer’s past and present liability to the bank. 
These sheets also contain information such as the loan date, note number, amount of the 
loan, interest rate, due date, and payments. 
• The collateral file: A complete description of the items pledged as security for loans. 
Records of such collateral can provide valuable information about a subject’s assets. 
 
Indications of unusual loans include loans in odd amounts or loans that were not deposited 
into the subject’s bank account. Loans that show unusual repayments also should be traced. 
Lump-sum payments and odd-amount payments are unusual. Accelerated payments or large 
pay-downs on the balance might indicate sudden wealth. 
 
Loan records also might reveal collusion between  the bank and the subject. For instance, if 
the records show that a loan repayment is long overdue or the loan has an extended rollover, 
collusion might exist. Also, loans made in contravention to the bank’s normal loan or a loan 
that appears to be in excess of the individual’s ability to repay suggests a “special 
relationship” between the bank and the subject. 
 
Loan proceeds might be deposited into hidden accounts, or hidden accounts might be used 
for loan payments. Loans might be secured by hidden assets or cosigned by previously 
unknown cohorts. Alternatively, the subject might have taken out the loan for someone else. 
Tracing the ultimate disposition of the proceeds will uncover those leads. 
 
Tracing the disposition of loan proceeds is similar to tracing deposit transactions. The 
proceeds could have been deposited within the bank into the subject’s account or someone 
else’s account, or they might be used to purchase a certificate of deposit. The funds might 
have been sent to the wire transfer department for transmittal to another bank. More 
commonly, the proceeds will be given to the customer in the form of a bank check. The 
bank should be able to trace the check to determine where it was deposited or cashed. The 
loan proceeds might have been used to finance an asset, the down payment for which came 
from illegal funds. Tracing the source of loan payments will provide some leads; for instance, 
the payments might be made from a previously unknown account. Payments made by a 
third-party might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme. 
 
The loan application should contain a financial statement, or its equivalent, on which the 
subject may identify other accounts and assets. The file might also contain tax returns, credit 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.822   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
agency reports, and notes of interviews by the loan officer. The security for the loan, if any, 
might be a hidden asset. 
 
MORTGAGE LOAN FILES 
Mortgage loan files often contain the most detailed financial statements submitted by the 
subject. The loan file should identify the title company that handled the closing, the 
homeowner’s insurance carrier, the closing attorney, and perhaps the real estate broker. The 
title company files often contain copies of the cashier’s checks used for the down payment, 
which can identify new accounts. 
 
The homeowner’s insurance policy might contain a rider that lists the homeowner’s valuable 
assets, such as jewelry or furs, perhaps with appraisals and purchase receipts. The closing 
attorney will have many of the same materials found in the title company files. The real 
estate broker might keep copies of personal checks used for deposits and provide 
information about other real estate transactions by the subjects. Don’t forget to look for 
accelerated or lump sum payments on the mortgage balance. 
 
CHECK CREDIT LOANS 
Check credit is another loan service that more and more banks are offering. Under a check 
credit plan, the bank agrees to extend credit to a customer up to a maximum amount. If the 
amount of the check is not in the customer’s a ccount, the resulting overdraft is set up as a 
loan. The bank then bills the customer for the loan. Another plan is a specialized checking 
account that is used only up to a predetermined amount under a loan agreement; the 
outstanding balance is treated as an installment loan by the bank. Copies of loan agreements 
and statements under both plans can be obtained from the bank files. 
 
Credit Card Records 
Banks are increasingly doing business in credit cards. Under bank credit card plans, the 
cardholder can charge purchases at stores, restaurants, and other places that agree to accept 
the charges. Under most plans, the cardholder can elect to pay the entire balance in one 
payment or to pay in installments under arrangements similar to a loan account.  
 
The credit card records that are important to the economic crime investigator are the 
application for a card and the bank’s copies of  monthly statements sent to the cardholder.  
Credit card applications require a considerable amount of financial information, and some of 
the information may be the same as that found on an application for a bank loan. In today’s 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.823 
environment, credit cards may be tied to bank accounts and may not require a separate 
application.  
 
Credit card statements also contain a great deal of important information. Generally, these 
statements contain the name of the credit card issuer, the cardholder’s account number, a 
summary of the transactions on the account, payment information, and a list of all the 
transactions that occurred during that months billing cycle (i.e., purchases, payments, credits, 
cash advances, and balance transfers). 
 
Bank Collection Department Records 
The bank’s collection department, which is normally involved in collecting amounts due on 
installment contracts and notes, can be used to collect personal checks (usually in large 
amounts and with special instructions), thus circumventing the normal record-keeping 
associated with checking accounts. Such a transaction will not be reflected on the target’s 
regular checking account statements but will appear in the collection department records. A 
copy of the check also will be microfilmed. 
 
Safe-Deposit Box Records 
Safe-deposit boxes are private vault spaces rented by banks to customers. Because state laws 
differ, the nature of the relationship varies between a bank and the safe-deposit box holders. 
Banks keep no record of safe-deposit box contents and rarely know what the boxes contain. 
The rental contract records identify the renters, the person or people who have access to the 
boxes, their signatures, and the dates of the original agreements and later renewals. They also 
might contain other identifying information, including the name of the initiating bank 
officer. The officer’s name could be significant if the subject (who might have used an alias 
in renting the box) must be identified. 
 
Records showing access to the boxes vary from bank to bank. But generally, they contain the 
signatures of the people entering the boxes and usually the dates and times of entry. The 
entry records are filed in box-number order. The frequency of entry and the times and dates 
of entries might be significant and might correspond to the times and dates of deposits or 
withdrawals from other accounts or to the purchases and sales of securities, property, and in 
other situations. 
 
Because the bank records will not show the contents of the box, the fraud examiner can 
request permission to inventory the box with the target present, carefully noting and 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.824   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
describing the exact contents (for example, legal description on deeds, numbers of insurance 
policies, etc.). 
 
Bank Secrecy Act Documents 
Under the Bank Secrecy Act, banks and other financial institutions are required to file 
Currency Transaction Reports, Suspicious Activity Reports, and other reports detailing large 
cash transactions or suspicious activity. (See the chapter on “Money Laundering” in the 
Financial Transactions section of the Fraud Examiners Manual  for a complete description of 
each report.) These reports will reflect the identity, address, and Social Security number of 
the person making the cash transaction, total amount, and certain other information. Some 
organizations are exempt from the filing requirement, including certain high-volume cash 
businesses, governmental agencies, and payroll account holders.  
 
Stock Brokerage Records 
Many stock brokerage houses now offer the same type of services as banks, such as check-
 writing privileges, credit cards, loans (against the value of securities held), as well as their 
normal securities business. All records pertaining to the subject should be requested; 
however, make sure that the request specifically includes the following: 
• Application: When a customer opens an account, he typically will fill out an account 
application that will contain personal and financial data, such as bank accounts. 
• Customer account cards:  This card is kept in the broker’s files for reference. It will include all 
transactions conducted for the customer. 
• Signature card: A signature card should be on file, which will show all those authorized to 
conduct transactions on the account. 
• Securities receipts:  These receipts are issued to a customer when he delivers securities to the 
broker for sale. 
• Cash receipts: These receipts are issued to a customer when he delivers currency to the 
broker. 
• Confirmation slips: These are issued to a customer to show the type of transaction (buy or 
sell) and the amount involved in the transaction. 
• Securities delivered receipt:  This receipt is signed by the customer when a securities purchase 
is delivered to the customer. 
• Brokerage account statement: This statement is usually issued monthly and provides 
information on all transactions conducted during the reporting period. It lists all 
purchases and sales, the name of the security, the number of units, the amount per unit, 
the total amount of the transaction, the account balance, payments received from the 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.825 
customer, disbursements to the customer, and the securities that are held by the 
brokerage firm for the customer. 
 
Concerning stock brokerage records, the examiner is primarily interested in the source of the 
funds used to purchase securities or deposited to a cash account. The subject’s monthly 
account statements, which are somewhat more complex than equivalent bank statements, 
reflect these transactions. They can be interpreted with the help of explanatory material on 
the statement or with the assistance of an employee of the firm. Receipts for stock purchases 
and deposits should reflect whether the payment was in currency or check and the ABA 
code of the bank on which the check was drawn. Brokerage checks issued to the subject 
from stock sale proceeds also should be examined, as these might be deposited directly to a 
new account or endorsed over and paid directly to third parties for the purchase of assets. 
 
Tax Returns and Related Documents 
Personal tax returns, if available, might provide indirect evidence of illicit payments, such as 
profits or losses from previously undisclosed business ventures, or interest and dividends on 
hidden CDs and bank accounts. The returns might also reveal deductions and expenses, 
such as real estate taxes, that can lead to previously unknown funds or assets. Commercial 
bribes are often reported as consulting fees or other miscellaneous income. The target’s 
accountant and tax preparer should also be interviewed, and their files and work papers 
subpoenaed, if possible. 
 
Establish a Database 
After obtaining the relevant financial records, the examiner should establish a database or 
spreadsheet for analysis. By placing the records into a standardized format, the fraud 
examiner will be more easily able to compare records, uncover patterns, and extract various 
representations of the data.  
 
Both spreadsheets and databases have benefits and drawbacks. The benefits of using 
spreadsheets include: (1) most individuals who work in the financial sector are familiar with 
spreadsheets; (2) spreadsheets allow data to be translated easily into bar, pie, and other 
graphic charts; (3) they allow data to be filtered and sorted easily; (4) and spreadsheets allow 
for the use of pivot tables to display data. Spreadsheets, however, are restricted to a limited 
number of records and may require a large amount of hard-drive space for data storage. 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.826   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Conversely, databases are more effective than spreadsheets when dealing with large sets of 
records. Databases offer the following features: (1) data can be sorted and manipulated 
easily; (2) changes to records can automatically update queries and reports; and (3) relational 
tables and forms can be used to reduce data entry time. In some environments (such as 
Microsoft Office), data can be easily switched from a spreadsheet to a database, and vice 
versa, for ease of manipulation or display. 
 
Regardless of the type of program used, the information used is the same. The type of 
information retrieved from financial records is the data entered into the spreadsheet or 
database. Each column or field holds some type of information, and this information forms 
the basis for the columns used. As illustrated in the table below, there are 16 primary 
elements that can be pulled from banking records. An additional field for comments is added 
for miscellaneous data. 
 
1. Check number 9. Signatory 
2. Entity from 10. Account number from 
3. Bank from 11. Transaction type 
4. Date written 12. First endorser 
5. Payee 13. Transaction bank 
6. Amount written 14. Deposited to account 
7. Amount deposited 15. Date of transaction 
8. Memo written 16. Comments 
 17. Location 
 
Details on what goes into each of these fields are provided below: 
1. Check number : This field should contain the number of the financial instrument written on 
or deposited to the account. The following items, however, will not contain a check 
number: wire transaction, automated teller machine transaction, point-of-sale 
transaction, and debit memo. A deposited amount would include a check number unless 
the deposit was cash, an incoming wire, or a credit memo. 
2. Entity from : This field should contain the name of the company or person the check is 
from—the owner of the account on which the check is written.  
3. Bank from : This field should contain the name of the bank from which the check, debit 
memo, or wire transfer was issued. If desired, the ABA bank number can also be entered 
to identify the bank’s source of the funds. 
4. Date written : This field should contain the date the check was written, the transaction 
(e.g., wire transfer or debit memo) was generated, or the withdrawal was made. This is 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.827 
not the date shown on the bank statement; bank statements show the clearing dates—
 the dates that checks clear the bank. The clearing date can be used if no other dates are 
present (e.g., if there is no check copy provided by the bank, but the check is listed on 
the statement). 
5. Payee : This field should contain the name of the payee—the person or entity to whom 
the check was written.  
6. Amount written : This field should contain the amount written on the face of the check. If 
there is a discrepancy between the numerical and written amounts,  the bank will usually 
honor the written amount. Check the amount the bank has imprinted on the bottom 
right-hand side of the check in magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) to determine 
which amount the bank used. 
7. Deposited amount : This field should contain the amount of money credited to the bank 
account by a cash or check deposit, wire transfer, or credit memo. This amount is put 
into a field separate from the amount written for ease of separating, sorting, and adding 
the amounts. 
8. Memo : This field should contain any notation written on the “Memo” line or box on the 
check. 
9. Signatory : This field should contain the name of the person (or persons) who signed the 
check as the authorized signatory. When entering the data into this field, initials are 
sufficient if the person referenced is clear. 
10. Account number from : This field should contain the account number on which the check, 
debit memo, or wire transfer was written. 
11. Transaction type : This field should contain the type of transaction (e.g., check, transfer, 
wire, debit memo, credit memo, deposit, ATM deposit or withdrawal, or ATM 
purchase).  
12. First endorser : This field should contain the name of  the first endorser. The first endorser 
is the person or persons who endorsed the check (i.e., signed the check on the back as 
the endorser). On checks made out to a company,  the back of the check may be 
stamped with the company name, bank, and account number and no endorsing signature 
should be shown.  
13. Transaction bank : This field should contain the name of the bank the item was deposited 
to (or where the check was cashed). This could be the bank from which records have 
been subpoenaed, the bank stamped on the back of the check, or the bank at which the 
check was cashed. If the check was negotiated at a non-bank financial institution (e.g., 
check cashing agency, money transmitter, or casino), the name of that company can be 
placed here with other specifics entered in the “comments” field. 
14. Deposited to account : This field should contain the account number to which the check was 
deposited. It should be noted that some banks write the account number on the back of 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.828   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
checks when cashed; this serves as an identifier for the check casher. Therefore, a bank 
account number located on the back of a check may not mean that the check was 
deposited into that account. Remember to check the front of the check for a “cashed” 
stamp. 
15. Date of transaction : This field should contain the date the check was deposited or 
negotiated. 
16. Comments : The comments field is used for other comments about the transaction. NSF 
could be entered into the comments field to signify that there were non-sufficient funds 
to cover the check. Additional information about the endorser (e.g., driver’s license or 
alien registration number), the name of a secondary endorser, or notes written on the 
back of the check by the teller could also be placed in the comments field.  
1 7.  Location : This field should be used for transactions made at an automated teller machine 
or a point-of-sale if the location is important. 
 
There are three rules to follow when entering records into a spreadsheet or database:  
• Enter data as fully as possible 
• Be consistent in referring to entities 
• Have all records reviewed for accuracy 
 
Entering the data completely will help avoid having to enter data into the records a second 
time. In the past, some users of financial records entered the check and deposit data located 
on the statements first, and then entered the information from cancelled checks as the 
checks were obtained. This, however, should not be done. Although transactions that are 
found only on statements can be entered into the database, check and deposit data should be 
entered from the checks written and deposit slips.  
 
When inputting data, consistency is important. Even if check writers have not been 
consistent in their spelling or use of names, the entered data must be consisted. Otherwise, 
the sorting results will not be accurate. If, for example, a different version of a name is used, 
the various names can be placed in the comments field. 
 
Finally, all records entered should be double or triple-checked for accuracy. It is preferable 
that the review is conducted by someone who did not enter the data because it is hard to 
catch one’s own errors. For example, one way to check the amounts in a field is by tying 
them to the totals on the statements.  
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.829 
Indirect Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions 
In contrast to the direct approach method of proving income, which relies on specific 
transactions, the indirect approach relies on circumstantial proof of income using such as the 
net worth analysis. 
 
Almost all individuals and business entities determine income by the specific-items or 
specific - transactions method. Most entities engaged in legitimate pursuits maintain books 
and records in which they record transactions as they occur, and their income computations 
are based upon the total transactions during a given period. In fraud examinations, income 
can usually be established more readily by the direct approach; for this reason, it should be 
used whenever possible. 
 
In many fraud schemes, however, a subject’s books and records are not made available to 
the examiner. Therefore, an indirect approach must be taken using one of the following 
methods: the net worth analysis: asset method, the expenditures (source and application of 
funds) method, or the bank deposit analysis method. Although these methods are 
circumstantial proof, courts have approved their use in civil and criminal cases on the theory 
that proof of a subject’s unexplained funds or property might establish a prima facie 
understatement of income.  
 
Elements of Financial Examination Techniques 
To examine company books and records for fraud, the fraud examiner must know and 
understand the environment in which the entity operates, the entity’s accounting system 
(including the types of schemes relevant to the entity and the controls that are designed to 
prevent fraud), basic concealment methods, and various detection techniques. 
 
The Environment 
It is critical to understand the business (or government) environment where the entity 
operates. To understand the environment, you must have a firm grasp of the nature of the 
business, the competition, the market share, the financing structure, the vendors (suppliers), 
major customers, the methods of receipts (i.e., cash or on account) and disbursements, the 
procurement methods (i.e., whether goods and services are obtained through a bidding 
process or not), the general economic climate, and the personnel pool available to the entity. 
It is through the understanding of the entity as an operating enterprise that you can assess 
the risks associated with the particular operations. The risks and peculiarities of the entity 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.830   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
will help shape the nature of potential fraud schemes that can be perpetrated by the entity’s 
employees. 
 
The Accounting System 
Understanding the basic accounting system and its integration with the operations of the 
business is important. The basic accounting system, including the system of internal 
controls, is the key element in providing evidence of past, present, and future internal fraud. 
Internal fraud that is on-book will appear within the entity’s financial records. The audit trail 
might be obscure, but it will exist nonetheless. If the internal fraud is off-book, then other 
evidence might, with diligent fraud examination techniques, be uncovered. 
 
All internal fraud has an impact on the bottom line. However, fraud in small amounts will be 
harder to detect because of its immaterial amount relative to the financial statements as a 
whole. If an internal fraud scheme is large enough, it will have an effect on the entity’s 
financial statements.  
 
Various Detection Techniques 
Though there are many fraud detection methods, whatever method is employed will usually 
require the examination of source documents. Many times, these source documents provide 
the evidence necessary to prove fraud in a court of law. Additionally, in many cases, the 
source documents will help establish the intent of the fraud offenders. 
 
Individual or groups of documents can be examined in several ways to detect possible fraud. 
Because most internal fraud is continuous in nature, groups of documents can be analyzed 
for exceptions and trends. Many times a large population must be sampled to determine, 
with statistical validity, if documents have been altered. Statistical sampling quantifies the risk 
of arriving at an incorrect conclusion; it is generally necessary with large populations. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Fraud examiners want to examine sales invoices for proper approvals in a company with $2 
billion in annual sales. The average sales inv oice is $15,000. By selecting a valid statistical 
sample of sales, the examiners can project the effectiveness of internal controls regarding the 
approval of the sales invoices, assuming proper interpretation of test results. If deficiencies exist 
in the controls, then those results should become apparent in the test results. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.831 
Statistical Sampling 
If an anomaly is found in the financial statements and transactions and further investigation 
is desired, it might be appropriate to pull a statistical sample. By using statistical sampling, 
the examiner can look at fewer transactions rather than the entire population.  
 
There are two basic risks associated with statistical sampling: sampling risk and nonsampling 
risk. Sampling risk  is the probability that the sample is not representative of the population; 
nonsampling risk  is the possibility of making the wrong decision. Nonsampling risk cannot be 
quantified. However, fraud examiners can control it through adequate planning and 
supervision of audit engagements. 
 
When using statistical sampling, you must draw a random sample. That is, each member of 
the population must have an equal chance of being selected. There are two primary types of 
statistical sampling: attribute and discovery. 
 
SAMPLING FOR ATTRIBUTES 
Sampling for attributes is used by auditors or fraud examiners looking for a deviation 
occurrence rate (deviations, errors, and exceptions  are synonyms). When performing this type of 
sampling, you are looking for the presence or absence of a defined condition. 
 
EXAMPLE 
For each sales invoice in the sample, is there a corresponding shipping order? The answer to the 
question can only be “yes” or “no.” If the control condition is that each sales invoice is not 
recorded until there has been a shipping order attached, then any “no” response for a booked 
sale would represent an error. 
 
DISCOVERY SAMPLING 
This is the best type of sampling for auditing for fraud because it is sampling until one 
occurrence is found. Discovery sampling deals with the probability of discovering at least 
one error in a given sample size if the population error is a certain percentage. This type of 
sampling is directed toward a specific objective, such as: 
 
EXAMPLE 
“If I believe some kind of error or irregularity might exist in the records, what sample size will I have to 
audit to have assurance of finding at least one example?” 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.832   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Discovery sampling is best used when looking for things such as forged checks or 
intercompany sales that have been improperly classified as sales to outsiders. 
 
RANDOM SAMPLES 
When using the discovery-sampling technique, the selection of samples should be done 
randomly. For a sample to be random, every member of the population must have an equal 
opportunity of being selected.  
 
Items in the population can be numbered and selected by reference to a random number 
table. Or if the items in the population already have numbers (such as check numbers or 
invoice numbers) then a random sample can be selected by using a random number 
generator from a computer software program. To select a random sample, (1) identify a 
number for every item in the population, (2) correspond the random numbers with each 
item in the population, (3) select the route through the random number table, and (4) select 
the sample.  
 
Additionally, make sure that you consistently follow the pattern picked for corresponding 
random numbers to items in the population and that you document the random number 
selection process in the event the sample needs rechecking or additional sample items need 
to be selected for testing. If the sample is selected randomly and the sample is large enough, 
then the sample should represent the population.  
 
DOCUMENTS 
Fraud will often be concealed in questionable documents. Missing or altered documents are 
some of the principal indicators of fraud, and such occurrences should be thoroughly 
investigated. Certain documents are a natural part of the accounting system. However, when 
a pattern of these documents occurs, or an unusual quantity of these documents is noted, 
further examination might be warranted. 
 
The common-sense test should be applied to any document that appears to have 
questionable features under the circumstances, such as amounts too high or too low; odd 
names, times, and places; and identical names and addresses. Fraud can often involve 
questionable journal entries in the records, such as inappropriate charges to expense 
accounts or inventory. For example, large journal entries in the inventory accounts near the 
end of the year might point to a cover-up of inventory theft. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.833 
An overabundant number of voids might mean that a fraudster is voiding legitimate sales 
and pocketing the proceeds. Excessive credit memos might also signal the reversal of 
legitimate sales and the diversion of cash. Too many late charges might indicate that an 
account receivable is delinquent because it is a fictitious account and, therefore, will never be 
paid. Stale items on any reconciliation bear watching. For example, stale outstanding checks 
may indicate attempted concealment of embezzlement losses or diverted cash. Original 
documents, such as invoices, should be used to authorize transactions because photocopied 
or duplicate documents can be subject to manipulation and alteration. 
 
Net-Worth Methods 
Examining for fraud not only involves the examination of the entity’s books and records, it 
might also entail the estimation of the fraud suspect’s change in net worth or expenditures. 
If fraud is suspected, then using either of the net-worth methods might help in establishing 
evidence of a fraud. 
 
The net-worth method (or comparative net-worth analysis) is used to prove illicit income 
circumstantially, by showing that a person’s assets or expenditures for a given period exceed 
that which can be accounted for from known or admitted sources of income. The net-worth 
method is a reliable method for estimating a person’s ill-gotten gains. The method is used 
extensively by the Internal Revenue Service, especially in drug and money laundering cases. 
 
The net-worth method relies on the familiar balance sheet format readily recognizable in the 
business world and presents a complete financial picture of a subject. It is based on the 
theory that increases or decreases in a person’s net worth during a period, adjusted for living 
expenses, allow a determination of income. 
 
Net worth  can be defined as the difference between assets and liabilities at a particular point in 
time. By comparing the subject’s net worth at the beginning and end of a period, usually a 
calendar year, the economic crime investigator can determine the increase or decrease in net 
worth. Adjustments are then made for living expenses to arrive at income. Income includes 
receipts derived from all sources. Thus, by subtracting funds from known sources (salary, 
wages, interest, or dividends, for example), funds from unknown or illegal sources can  
be calculated. 
 
The courts approved using the net-worth method in the leading Supreme Court case of 
Holland v. United States, 348 U.S. 121 (1954), along with the three companion cases, Smith v. 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.834   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
United States, 348 U.S. 147 (1954); Friedberg v. United States, 348 142 (1954); and United States v. 
Calderon, 348 U.S. 160 (1954). These cases outlined broad principles to govern the trial and 
review of cases based on the net-worth method of proving income. 
 
The net-worth method is often used when several of the subject’s assets or liabilities have 
changed during the period under examination and when the target’s financial records are not 
available. 
 
An individual’s assets, liabilities, and living expenses can be determined from a variety of 
sources, such as: 
• The subject 
• Informants or sources 
• Real estate records 
• Judgment and lien records 
• Bankruptcy records 
• State motor vehicle records 
• Loan applications 
• Financial statements 
• Accountant’s work papers 
• Lawsuits and depositions 
• Surveillance 
• Credit card applications or statements 
• Tax returns 
• Insurance records 
• Child support and divorce records 
• Employment applications and salary checks 
• Companions or associates 
• Canceled checks and deposited items 
 
The question might arise regarding why items that do not change should be included in the 
net-worth statement, particularly since they have no bearing on the final result. The answer is 
that a net-worth statement gives a complete financial picture of the subject and therefore 
should be as complete as possible so that the target will not be able to contest it on the 
grounds that items were omitted. Additionally, the net-worth statement can be the 
foundation for examination of the subject, and a complete statement will prove extremely 
valuable at that time. 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.835 
There are two basic methods of net-worth computation: The asset method and the expenditures  
or sources and applications of funds method. They are discussed in detail herein. 
 
The asset method should be used when the subject has invested illegal funds to accumulate 
wealth and acquire assets, causing net worth (value of assets over liabilities) to increase from 
year to year. The expenditures method  is best used when the subject spends illicit income on 
consumables (such as travel and entertainment) that would not cause an increase in  
net worth. 
 
Each method has similar steps. Begin both methods by assembling the financial and 
behavioral profile. Identify all major assets and liabilities, sources of income, and major 
expenses during the relevant period. The increase, if any, in the subject’s net worth or the 
level of expenditures is then compared to the legitimate funds available. Unaccounted funds 
might be inferred to come from illicit or hidden sources. 
 
THE FINANCIAL PROFILE 
The first step is to prepare the financial profile  of the suspect. The financial profile is 
essentially a financial statement with certain modifications and additions that shows what the 
defendant owns, owes, earns, and spends at any given point or over a period of time. The 
profile might yield direct evidence of illegal income or hidden assets, or circumstantial 
evidence thereof, by showing that the suspect’s expenditures exceeded known sources of 
income. 
 
The financial profile will identify most illicit funds that are deposited to accounts or 
expended in significant amounts. It will not catch relatively small currency transactions, 
particularly if they were for concealed activities, consumables, or for unusual one-time 
expenses such as medical bills. 
 
Determine the target’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses from the following sources: 
• Interviews 
• The target 
• Associates 
• Documents from financial sources (e.g., accountant, banker) 
• Bank account records 
• Mortgage and loan files 
• Credit card records 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.836   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Tax returns 
• Public records 
• Business filings 
• Real estate filings 
• Court records 
 
To prepare the financial profile, follow the following six steps.  
 
STEP 1 
Identify all significant assets held by the suspect. An asset is cash (on hand) or anything else 
of value that can be converted into cash.  
 
Cash on hand is coin and currency (bills, coins, Federal Reserve notes) in the subject’s 
possession (on the subject’s person, in the subject ’s residence or other place in a nominee’s 
hands, or in a safe-deposit box). It does not include money in any account with a financial 
institution. When using the net-worth method, the item that may be the most difficult to 
verify is the amount of cash on hand, which is usually claimed by defendants to be sufficient 
to account for all or part of the unknown sources of income. To establish a firm starting net 
worth, it must be shown that the target had no large cash sums for which he was not given 
credit. This is usually done by offering evidence that negates the existence of a cash hoard. 
Such evidence might include: 
• Written or oral admissions of the subject concerning net worth (a signed net-worth 
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand) 
• Low earnings in pre-examination years, as shown by records of former employers 
and/or tax returns filed by subject 
• Net worth, as established by books and records of the subject 
• Financial statement presented for credit or other purposes at a time before or during the 
period under examination (banks, loan companies, and bonding companies are some of 
the better sources from which to obtain this type of document) 
• Bankruptcy before examination periods 
• Prior indebtedness, compromise of overdue debts, and avoidance of bankruptcy 
• Installment buying 
• History of low earnings and expenditures, and checks returned for insufficient funds (a 
financial history covering members of the subject’s family also might be helpful) 
• Loss of furniture and business because of financial reasons 
• Receipt of some type of public assistance 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.837 
STEP 2 
Identify all significant liabilities. A liability is an obligation (debt) arising from an oral or 
written promise to pay.  
 
STEP 3 
Identify all income sources during the relevant time period. Income includes money or other 
things of value received in exchange for services or goods. Income is never included as an 
asset. Loan proceeds are not included as income but are treated as an asset that is offset by a 
corresponding liability. 
 
STEP 4 
Identify all significant expenses incurred during the relevant period. An expense is any 
payment for consumables, for personal or business reasons, over the relevant time period. 
Expenses are not included as liabilities. 
 
STEP 5 
Analyze the information you have collected by using the following charts. 
 
The Financial Profile 
 
TYPICAL ASSETS For each significant asset determine : 
 
Residence 
Real estate 
Bank accounts 
Stocks and 
bonds 
Automobiles 
Insurance 
Cash on hand 
 
Jewelry 
Clothing 
Collectibles 
Pensions 
Home 
furnishings 
Boats 
 
—When was it acquired and from whom? 
—How much did it cost?  
—How was it paid for (currency, check, cashier’s 
check)? 
—What source of funds was used to acquire it? 
—What documentation exists for the purchase and 
where is it? 
 
 
 
TYPICAL LIABILITIES For each significant liability determine: 
 
Mortgage(s) 
Other loans 
Lines of credit 
Credit cards  
Installment purchases 
Accounts payable 
 
—What was the original amount of the liability? 
—What is the present balance due? 
—When was the liability incurred? 
—What was the purpose for the loan or debt? 
—How were the proceeds used and where were they 
deposited? 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.838   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Taxes and other bills 
Alimony and child support 
— What security (collateral), if any, was given for the 
debt? 
— What documentation exists for the transaction and 
where is it? 
— Was the debt written off as a bad loan for tax 
purposes? 
— Who was the creditor or lender? 
 
 
TYPICAL SOURCES OF FUNDS 
 
For each source of funds determine: 
 
Salary 
Gifts 
Rental income 
Dividends 
Interest 
Sale of assets 
 
Insurance 
proceeds 
Commissions 
and fees 
Awards 
Inheritances 
Disability 
payments 
 
— What was the total amount during a given period? 
— What was the source? 
— How was it paid for (currency, check, other means)? 
— When were the funds received? 
— Where was it deposited? 
— How was it spent? 
— What documentation exists (e.g., W-2 or 1099 
forms) and where is it? 
 
TYPICAL EXPENDITURES 
For each major expenditure item determine : 
 
Rent and 
mortgage 
Health costs 
Interest on 
loans 
Credit cards 
Car payments 
Travel 
 
Clothing 
Utilities 
Food 
Insurance  
 
 
— What was the total amount spent? 
— How was it paid for? 
— Where were the funds obtai ned to pay the expense? 
— What documentation exists and where is it? 
— When was the payment made? 
 
THE BEHAVIORAL PROFILE 
The financial profile might give inaccurate or false negative readings unless certain activities 
are identified, which is done through preparing the behavioral profile. The behavioral profile 
might also provide evidence of a possible motive of the crime, such as large debts, as well as 
additional evidence of illicit funds. For example, if the suspect spent significant amounts of 
cash, and had no corresponding cash withdrawals from his disclosed bank accounts, or no 
admitted sources of cash income, he must have  other undisclosed sources of income. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.839 
Using the financial/behavioral profile as a guide, request an interview with the suspect. Pin 
down the suspect’s income, assets, and accounts. Otherwise, the subject might invent 
excuses or prepare false testimony or documentation to account for the unexplained income. 
 
Net-Worth Analysis 
Any recipient of funds, whether honest or suspect, has only four ways of disposing of 
income: save it, buy assets, pay off debts, or spend it. 
 
Net-worth analysis begins with the completion of a suspect’s financial profile. Through 
identification of the suspect’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, a net-worth statement 
can be determined. Once a net-worth statement is completed through the identification of a 
suspect’s assets, liabilities, income, and expenses, changes in the suspect’s net worth can be 
compared to his known income, and differences can be inferred to be from unknown 
sources. 
 
COMPARATIVE NET WORTH: ASSET METHOD  
Again, the asset method is advisable when it is suspected that the subject has purchased 
assets or otherwise increased his net worth. It can be applied for any number of years, but, 
ideally, it is best to start with the year before the suspected fraudulent activity began. The 
formula is: 
 
 Assets 
– Liabilities 
= Net worth 
– Prior year’s net worth 
= Net worth increase 
+ Living expenses 
= Income (or expenditures) 
– Funds from known sources 
= Funds from unknown sources 
 
In computing the comparative net worth, these issues should be considered: 
• All assets should be valued at cost, not fair market value. Subsequent appreciation or 
depreciation of assets is ignored. 
• The amount of funds available to the subject from legitimate sources should be 
estimated or computed generously. The amount of the subject’s expenditures, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.840   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
particularly hard-to-document living costs, such as food and entertainment, should be 
estimated conservatively to give the subject the benefit of any doubt. In attempting to 
estimate personal living expenses, you should consult the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 
This agency publishes an annual table that details personal living expenses such as 
utilities, food, and gas. 
• Always attempt to interview the subject to identify all alleged sources of funds and to 
negate defenses that he might raise later. 
 
To compute the comparative net worth using the asset method, perform the following steps: 
• Establish the starting point, generally the year before the target’s illegal activities begin. 
This will be referred to as “year one” in the following computations. 
• Compute the target’s net worth at the end of year one. Identify all assets held by the 
subject, valued at cost, including assets acquired earlier, and the amount of current 
liabilities. 
 
The difference between the value of the assets and the liabilities is the target’s net worth at 
year one, or “opening net worth.” 
 
EXAMPLE 
Year One 
Assets at Cost               Liabilities 
Residence $100,000  Mort gage balance $ 90,000 
Stocks and bonds 30,000  Automobile loan  
Automobile 20,000  balance 10,000 
 TOTAL $150,000  TOTAL $100,000 
 
Assets $150,000
 Liabilities -100,000
 Net Worth $50,000
  
Compute the target’s net worth for year two, using the same method. 
 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.841 
EXAMPLE 
Year Two 
                     Assets at Cost                                          Liabilities 
Residence $100,000  Mortgage balance $50,000 
Stocks and bonds 30,000    
Automobile 20,000  Automobile loan  
CD 50,000  balance  0  
 TOTAL $200,000  TOTAL $50,000  
 
Assets $200,000
 Liabilities -50,000
 Net Worth $150,000
  
Note that in the example the target’s net wo rth increased by $100,000 during year two. 
To determine the source of such an increase, determine the target’s known income, 
during year two, and subtract known expenses for year two. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Year Two 
               Income                            Expenses 
Salary $30,000  Mortgage interest 
payments 
 
$20,000 
Commissions 20,000  Living expenses 10,000  
 TOTAL $50,000  TOTAL $30,000 
   
The difference between the target’s income and expenses equals the increase (or decrease) in 
net worth from year one to year two, which can be attributed to known sources. Here it is 
$20,000. Subtract the increase in net worth fr om known sources from the total increase in 
net worth to determine the amount from unknown sources. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 Total increase in net worth $100,000 
 Increase attributed to known sources <20,000>  
 Dollars from unknown sources $80,000 
 
Repeat the above steps for subsequent years as necessary.  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.842   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
EXPENDITURES METHOD 
The expenditures method (also known as the sources and application of funds method) 
compares the suspect’s known expenditures and known sources of funds during a given 
period of time. Any excess expenditures must be the result of income from unknown 
sources. It is closely related to the net-worth analysis, accounting variations of the same 
principle. 
 
The table below illustrates the formula used to compute net worth using the expenditures 
method. The steps are discussed in greater detail below  
 
Expenditures  (Application of Funds)  
– Known source of funds  
= Funds from unknown sources  
 
To compute the subject’s net worth using the expenditures method, follow three steps. First, 
establish the subject’s known expenditures for the relevant year. Expenditures include the 
use or application of funds for any purpose, including deposits to bank accounts, purchase 
of major assets, travel and entertainment expenses, and payment of loan and credit card 
debts. Second, identify all sources of funds available to the subject, including loans and gifts, 
as well as cash on hand from previous years. Third, compute the difference between the 
amount of the suspect’s expenditures and his known income to determine the amount 
attributed to unknown sources. 
  
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.843 
EXAMPLE 
Subject   Year One  Year Two  
Application of funds:  
 Increase in bank balance  $2,000 $10,000 
 Down payment on residence    ——  10,000  
 Purchase of automobile  10,000  ——— 
 Mortgage payments  8,000  20,000 
 Credit card payments  5,000  10,000 
 Other expenses  15,000  30,000 
 TOTAL  $40,000 $ 80,000 
Less: known sources of funds  
   Cash on hand 1,000  
   Salary 30,000 38,000 
   Interest earned on savings  
   Account 1,000 2,000 
   Loan proceeds 8,000  
 TOTAL $40,000 $ 40,000 
Funds from unk nown or illegal sources   0 $40,000 
 
The following example demonstrates how a net-worth analysis assisted prosecutors in their 
amended complaint against a fraud suspect. 
 
EXAMPLE 
R. Peery, age 40, the executive director of a five-state commission planning a low-level 
radioactive waste dump was charged with two ne w charges of felony theft. Peery was also 
charged with one federal count of wire fraud. 
 
Peery was accused of wiring $115,000 to a personal account in Georgia, and prosecutors 
said they suspected him of taking $600,000. He was also charged with  two counts of using 
commission funds in Nebraska to buy cars, a 1990 BMW valued  at $67,000 and a 
1991 BMW valued at $92,000. 
 
Peery was paid $52,000 annually. He lived in a house valued at $305,000 and at the 
time of his arrest had six luxury cars, including Jaguars, Mercedes-Benzes, and BMWs.  
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.844   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bank Deposit Analysis Method 
The bank deposit analysis method is another method to prove unknown sources of funds by 
indirect or circumstantial evidence. Like the other indirect methods of proof, the bank 
deposits method computes income by showing what happened to a subject’s funds. It is 
based on the theory that if a subject receives money, he can only do two things with it: he 
can deposit it or he can spend it.  
 
This method is applied when assets and liabilities are fairly constant from year to year and 
indications of extravagant expenditures are non-existent, but through investigation, the 
suspect’s known sources of income are being deposited into financial institutions. 
 
Under this method, income is proved through analyzing bank deposits, canceled checks, and 
the subject’s currency transactions. Adjustments for non-income items are made to arrive at 
income. A basic formula for the bank deposits method is: 
 
Total Deposits to All Accounts  
– Transfer and redeposits 
= Net deposits to all accounts 
+ Cash expenditures 
= Total receipts from all sources 
– Funds from known sources 
= Funds from unknown or illegal sources 
 
The bank deposits method is recommended as a primary method of proof when most of the 
subject’s income is deposited and the subject’s books and records are unavailable, withheld, 
incomplete, or maintained on a cash basis. Use of the bank deposits method is not limited to 
these circumstances, however. Even though the target’s books and records might appear to 
be complete and accurate, the method can still be used and there is no requirement to 
disprove the accuracy of the books and records. 
 
The basic sources of information for this analysis include  interviews, analyses of the books 
and records, and analyses of the bank accounts. A thorough interview will determine the 
subject’s expenditures by cash and checks, identi fy all bank accounts, and determine all loans 
and other receipts. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.845 
Total Deposits 
Total deposits consist not only of amounts deposited to all bank accounts maintained or 
controlled by the target but also deposits made to accounts in savings and loan companies, 
investment trusts, brokerage houses, and credit unions. Total deposits also include the 
accumulation (increase) of cash on hand. Because some subjects have bank accounts in 
fictitious names or under special titles, such as “Special Account No. 1,” “Trustee Account,” 
or “Trading Account,” the investigator should  look for this type of account during the 
investigation. If a subject lists checks on a deposit ticket and deducts an amount paid to him 
in cash (split deposit), only the net amount of the deposit should be used in computing  
total deposits. 
 
Additional items that must be included in deposits are property and notes that the subject 
received in payment for services. The accepted practice is to consider these items as 
depositories into which funds have been placed for future use. 
 
Net Deposits 
All transfers or exchanges between bank accounts as well as funds that are redeposited are 
non-income items and are subtracted from total deposits to yield net deposits. Failure to 
eliminate these items would result in an overstatement of income. 
 
Cash Expenditures 
Cash expenditures consist of the total outlay of funds less net bank disbursements. The total 
outlay of funds includes all payments made by cash or check. There is no need to determine 
which part was paid by cash and which part by check. Total outlays include but are not 
limited to: 
• Purchase of capital assets to investments (determined from settlement sheets, invoices, 
statements, and the like) 
• Loan repayments (determined from loan ledgers of banks or other creditors) 
• Living expenses (can be determined from the same sources presented in the net worth 
and expenditures sections) 
• Purchases, business expenses (less noncash items, such as depreciation), rental expenses, 
and the like 
 
  
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.846   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Net bank disbursements can be determined by the following formula: 
 
Net Deposits to All Accounts  
+ Beginning balances 
= Net bank funds available 
– Ending balances 
= Net banking disbursements 
 
Funds from known sources include, but are not limited to salaries, business profits, 
insurance proceeds, gifts received, loans, and inheritances. Funds from known sources are 
subtracted from total receipts (or income) to arrive at funds from unknown or  
illegal sources. 
 
Rebutting Defenses to Indirect Methods of Proof 
Circumstantial evidence of excess income is often met with the defense that the extra funds 
came from cash accumulated earlier or from other legitimate sources, such as loans from 
relatives. To rebut these defenses, the fraud examiner must pin down the amount of cash on 
hand at the beginning of the relevant period (through, for example, amounts listed on 
financial statements or claimed in interviews) and do the following: 
• Obtain a financial history of the target and spouse, through interviews and other means, 
showing dates and places of employment, salary and bonuses, and any other related 
income. 
• Determine whether the spouse had any separate source of funds that were used to 
purchase jointly held assets or deposited in joint accounts. If so, the spouse must be 
included in the financial profile calculations. 
• Claims of a prior substantial cash hoard might be rebutted by showing that the target 
lived penuriously, borrowed money, made installment purchases, incurred large debts, 
was delinquent on accounts, had a poor credit rating, or filed for bankruptcy. Claims that 
cash came from family or other private loans might be rebutted by showing that the 
alleged lender was incapable of generating the amounts supposedly lent, the absence of 
any documentation reflecting the source of the alleged loan (no bank account 
withdrawals), and the absence of other sources of funds available to the lender. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.847 
The net-worth analysis—if records can be obtai ned—is a significant tool in documenting ill-
 gotten gains. With this as a basis, the following section covers the major schemes used to 
commit fraud against companies and governmental agencies. 
 
 
Locating Hidden Assets 
 
Common Asset-Hiding Techniques 
There are many techniques a fraudster might use to hide ill-gotten gains. A target may 
attempt to preserve his assets by opening hidden bank accounts, purchasing real estate 
through a straw or front, or transferring his assets to other parties or to accounts that might 
escape detection. 
 
Transfer to Family Members or Parties Under Their Control 
The most common means of hiding assets, particularly real estate and business interests, is to 
transfer the asset into the hands of another party that will allow the target to maintain 
control. In many cases, the target will transfer the asset to a spouse (or another member of 
the spouse’s family), and a husband might make the transfer in his wife’s maiden name. 
 
Such transfers can be identified through a search of voter registrations, marriage records, and 
probate in the spouse’s maiden name. Transf ers to family members can be detected by 
comparing the target’s previous financial statem ent with the most recent one. Those assets 
appearing on the oldest statement but not appearing on the most recent statement should be 
examined closely to determine the nature of the transaction, the purchaser’s identity, and the 
consideration for the sale. 
 
Children’s or Family Trust 
A target might seek to protect assets by transferring them to a children’s or family trust from 
a personal estate. These assets would then be protected from judgment or bankruptcy 
proceedings in a court of law. If the transfer was made to defeat creditors, however, it can be 
set aside by the court.  
 
Home Mortgage Pay-Down 
In many cases, subjects seek to hide their assets from seizure by prepaying a significant 
portion of their home mortgage. By doing this, the hider may successfully shelter his assets 
in a homestead exemption (as allowed in Texas, Florida, and other states) that will survive 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
bankruptcy or other claims against them. By documenting the mortgage prepayment, the 
fraud examiner can often show undisclosed or hidden income from outside sources. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A cashier’s check for $96,000 was found to ha ve been used as a prepayment to a home 
mortgage. By obtaining the front and back of the cashier’s che ck, fraud examiners were able 
to locate another bank account belonging to the defendant.  
 
Insurance Policies 
Some targets may purchase insurance. Under the terms of a whole life or universal life 
insurance policy, the borrower may make additional payments on the policy. These payments 
accrue at a high interest rate and enhance the overall value of the insurance policy.  
 
A sophisticated subject might deposit substantial monies into an existing insurance policy 
thinking that the fraud examiner will not look beyond the face value of the policy into the 
equity built up by prepayments. The fraud examiner should, therefore, always examine the 
financial statement of a target to locate insurance policies and examine the equity in these 
policies as a potential asset. 
 
Prepaid Credit Cards 
Many credit accounts today permit the card holder to prepay their accounts. Many people 
attempting to hide assets have used the prepayment option to hide cash from creditors. 
Prepayment of credit card accounts can also be found in cash management accounts (CMAs) 
offered by stock brokerage firms. 
 
Savings Bond Purchases 
Drug dealers and tax evaders often use savings bond purchases as a means to conceal  
their ready cash. In several recent cases, defendants in financial crimes have purchased 
bonds in their individual names, their spouses’ names (in their maiden names), or their 
children’s names. 
 
Cashier’s Checks and Traveler’s Checks 
Many criminals purchase cashier’s checks and traveler’s checks to hide their financial 
dealings and reduce the amount of cash they have to carry. By purchasing cashier’s checks or 
traveler’s checks in denominations of less than  $10,000, which is the threshold for filing a 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.849 
Currency Transaction Report (CTR), the criminal can carry negotiable financial instruments 
that can be exchanged almost any place in the world.  
 
Computer Databases 
To begin a computer-based investigation, determine which records are available. Next, 
determine how much record checking is necessary, which records should be focused on, and 
the location of concentration. Areas of concentration might include voter registration 
records, court records, or real estate files.  
 
Locating Assets Through Subpoenas 
Although examiners investigating fraud do not have an absolute right to see non-public 
records, those who are involved in investigations involving civil or criminal proceedings 
might have subpoena power allowing them to obtain such records, including bank account 
and loan records, records from accountants and tax preparers (including income tax returns 
and related documents), mortgage company records, telephone records, credit card 
statements, credit reporting company records, hotel and travel records, telex records, 
overnight package envelopes, and passports. 
 
Locating Assets Offshore 
Some targets might try to hide their assets offshore, often in tax havens and secrecy 
jurisdictions. Historically, some of the most popular offshore jurisdictions have been 
Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, the Netherlands Antilles, and Panama. 
 
To locate offshore assets, fraud examiners should take all of the following steps: 
• Review domestic bank account records for wire transfers or other transactions involving 
offshore bank accounts. 
• Determine whether the subject personally traveled overseas. Overseas travel can often be 
documented from U.S. Customs records available through FinCEN. 
• Attempt to locate the subject’s travel agency. 
 
Attempt to identify means employed to move cash offshore by: 
• Use of multiple cashier’s checks 
• Overnight mail envelopes 
• Other methods 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After funds have been traced offshore, the examiner should look for transfers back to the 
United States. A sophisticated target might use a foreign attorney or bank officer as a trustee 
or front to purchase assets in the United States, or appoint the trustee as manager of a U.S. 
business. 
 
Subjects also might obtain access to their assets offshore by using foreign credit cards. Many 
international institutions now offer MasterCard or Visa accounts, and all account records are 
maintained in the foreign country.  
 
Sophisticated subjects might also obtain foreign passports (in a fictitious name, if requested). 
Some countries offer such passports to people who deposit $25,000 in the state-run financial 
institution. 
 
It may difficult to obtain information on foreign banks, but it is not impossible. D&B 
publishes several guides with information about businesses in Latin America, Europe, and 
other regions of the world. The U.S. Department of Commerce has foreign-country experts 
who can direct you to sources of business information on any country in the world. 
 
Also, with the expansion of the Internet as a means of global communication, information 
on foreign countries and businesses is available through the Internet or through a 
commercial database or online service. 
 
In his book Competitor Intelligence, Leonard Fuld provides a useful chapter on locating 
information on foreign businesses. He suggests the following resources as starting points: 
• Securities brokers with expertise in dealing with foreign businesses 
• The International Trade Commission 
• International trade shows 
• Foreign consulates 
• Foreign chambers of commerce 
• Foreign magazines and directories 
 
Fuld provides a list of consulates, chambers of commerce, magazines, and directories in his 
book. Fuld suggests checking Euromoney 500, which contains profiles of the world’s top 500 
banks, or the Europa World Year Book, which provides basic data on banks around the world. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.851 
The text of newspapers, such as the New York Times  or the Washington Post, may be searched 
for articles on the foreign bank or the foreign country involved. The texts of these and other 
large newspapers are available through online services such as LexisNexis. 
 
If the subject engages in a mail-order or retail business, a simple way to get information 
about his bank accounts is to send him a check. Ronald L. Mendell, in his book How to Do 
Financial Asset Investigations, suggests buying a small item from the subject by using a check. 
When the canceled check is returned, it will provide the name and possibly the account 
number of the subject’s bank. He suggests that if the subject does not engage in mail-order 
sales, the same goal may be accomplished by sending the subject a small “refund” check. 
 
Office of International Affairs 
The U.S. Department of Justice, Office of International Affairs (OIA), in certain 
circumstances, can offer assistance to U.S. fraud examiners seeking to recover  
offshore assets. 
 
OIA is responsible for: 
• Extradition requests 
• Requests for foreign documentary evidence, bank and business records, and other 
official documents 
• Interviews and depositions of foreign witnesses 
• Assistance to obtain appearance of foreign witnesses in U.S. courts 
• Foreign searches and seizures, compelled handwriting exemplars, and  
electronic surveillance 
 
The OIA uses a number of legal resources to  obtain information from foreign countries, 
such as letters rogatory and Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties  (MLATs). 
 
LETTERS ROGATORY 
Letters Rogatory are formal requests by the courts of one country to the courts of another 
country.  
 
The information needed for a Letter Rogatory request is as follows: 
• The facts of the case showing at least a reasonable suspicion that the offense under 
investigation might have been committed 
• The names and identifying information of people or entities involved in the matter 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.852   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• The names and identifying information of witnesses or entities whose names might be 
on bank records (if accounts are held in other names) 
• The names, addresses, and other information concerning banks, businesses, or bank 
account numbers 
• The offenses being investigated or prosecuted in the United States, to include penalties 
• The assistance requested of the foreign country, whether it is documents, testimony, 
freezing of assets, etc. (If you want a foreign magistrate to question a witness, write out 
the questions that you want the witness to be asked, even if you ask to be present during 
the questioning.) 
• The procedures to be followed (how to authenticate business documents and records for 
use in U.S. courts) 
 
The procedure for making formal requests by a Letter Rogatory is as follows: 
• Call the OIA team handling the relevant part of the world concerning the search for 
guidance and assistance. 
• Draft a Letter Rogatory following an exemplar  or other materials provided by the OIA. 
• Have the OIA representative review and approve the draft. 
• The prosecutor will then file a motion in federal court for issuance of a Letter Rogatory, 
together with a memorandum in support and proposed order (submit two copies, one 
for the clerk and one for the foreign court, to be signed by the judge). 
• The judge signs both Letters Rogatory. 
• File one signed Letter Rogatory with the court clerk. 
• Have the court clerk authenticate the second signed Letter Rogatory either via apostille 
or exemplification certificate. 
• Have the Letter Rogatory translated into the proper language. 
• Send the signed Letter Rogatory and translation to the OIA for transmission through 
diplomatic channels to the proper foreign government. 
• The Minister of Justice in the foreign country normally presents the Letter Rogatory to 
the appropriate court. 
• The foreign court determines whether to execute the Letter Rogatory. If the 
determination is favorable, the court then obtains the documents, testimony, and other 
information. 
• Evidence resulting from the execution of the Letter Rogatory is returned through 
diplomatic channels to the OIA. 
• The OIA will then forward the information to the prosecutor. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.853 
Letters Rogatory should be written in simple, non-technical English and should not include 
unnecessary information that may confuse courts in the receiving foreign state. Avoid use of 
the term discovery .” Similarly, to avoid the appearance of  a fishing expedition that may result 
in refusal of the foreign country to execute the request, try not to use phrases such as any and 
all documents. Requests for documents should be as specific as possible. If particular 
procedures to be followed by the foreign court are preferable, include the specifics in the 
Letter Rogatory (for example, verbatim transcript, place witness under oath, or permission 
for U.S. or foreign counsel to attend or participate in proceedings if possible).  
 
MUTUAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE TREATIES 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are treaties between the United States and 
foreign countries that provide for the exchange of information and documents relating to 
narcotics, money laundering, and other financial crimes.  
 
Requests for foreign assistance under Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) are usually 
quicker and more efficient than filing Letters Rogatory. The procedure for making formal 
requests by MLAT is as follows: 
• No U.S. court involvement is required. 
• The prosecutor calls the OIA for guidance and will send a draft request to the OIA for 
editing. 
• When the OIA director approves the request, the OIA transmits the request to the 
foreign central or competent authority. 
• If a translation is required, the requesting agency is responsible for obtaining it. 
• The OIA transmits the translation to the requested country. 
• The requested country’s proper authority determines whether the request meets treaty 
requirements and, if it does, transmits the request to the appropriate recorder agency  
 for execution. 
• The executing authority transmits the evidence through the proper authority to the OIA, 
which forwards it to the prosecutor. 
• The fraud examiner/prosecutor should inspect the evidence for responsiveness and 
completeness, as well as certificates of authenticity of business records (notify the OIA at 
once of any problems). 
 
The United States currently has bilateral MLATs in force with the following countries: 
Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, 
Belgium, Brazil, British Virgin Islands, Ca nada, the Cayman Islands, Colombia, Cyprus, 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.854   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Czech Republic, Dominica, Egypt, Estonia, European Union, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Grenada, Hong Kong SAR, Hungary, India,  Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, 
Korea, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Montserrat, Morocco, the 
Netherlands, Panama, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and 
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks and Caicos Islands, Turkey, United 
Kingdom, Uruguay, and Venezuela. 
 
Another method of obtaining foreign bank or business records is by obtaining a release and 
consent form from the defendant. Execution of such a waiver can be compelled by order of 
a U.S. court. This procedure is not universally accepted, particularly in Switzerland, the 
Channel Islands, the Turks and Caicos Islands, or the Cayman Islands. 
 
Public Records 
Of course, a great deal of information that is useful in tracing illicit transactions, particularly 
real and personal property filings, is a matter of public record. For more information, see the 
“Sources of Information” and “Accessing Information Online” chapters. 
 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.901 
REPORTING STANDARDS 
 
Documenting results is a particularly important function in fraud examinations. In many 
instances, the written report is the only evidence that the work was performed. Cases can be 
won or lost on the strength of the written report. It conveys to the litigator all the evidence 
and provides credence to the fraud examination and to the examiner’s work. It forces the 
examiner to consider his actions during an investigation by requiring that they will be 
documented. It omits irrelevant information, thereby allowing pertinent facts to stand out. A 
first-rate written report is based on a first-rate examination. 
 
 
Preparation 
The fraud examiner must adequately prepare prior to any interview or information-gathering 
process. Proper preparation entails analyzing what is to be expected as an end product. It 
should also involve having a good idea of what is to be learned from each witness. 
 
Active listening is an essential function of effective report writing. The fraud examiner must 
have good listening skills so that the information is properly assimilated, evaluated, and 
communicated to others. Listening skills are lear ned. Listening involves perceiving what the 
respondent is actually communicating. To do so properly, you must set aside any 
preconceived notions and listen objectively, not only to what is being said, but to how it is 
said and why. The fraud examiner should withhold judgment until the entire message has 
been heard. 
 
Active listening often involves participating with the respondent during the information-gathering 
process. Participation conveys interest in the subject and promotes rapport. 
Participation might require reacting openly to information by verbal and nonverbal 
responses. 
 
 
Accuracy of Reports 
Written reports must be accurate because an inaccurate report will affect the credibility of 
the report and the report’s author. Each contact an examiner makes during the course of a 
fraud examination should be recorded on a timely basis in a memorandum of interview (i.e., a 
written record used to document all interviews conducted during the investigation). 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.902   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Although there is no need to recapitulate testimony word for word, for accuracy’s sake the 
fraud examiner should include all facts of possible relevance. 
 
You should reconfirm dates and supporting information with the respondent. It is important 
to reconfirm the facts before  the report is written, not after. Attachments to the report, if any, 
should be completely described. Inaccuracies and careless errors are inexcusable and can 
render a report useless. 
 
 
Clarity 
Investigative reports on fraud examinations should convey pertinent information in the 
clearest possible language. If necessary, quote the respondent directly (provided the 
quotation does not distort the context). Only convey objective facts  (i.e., unbiased evidence that 
is not influenced by personal feelings, interpretations, or prejudice); do not editorialize or 
give judgments. Use complex or technical terms in their proper contexts, and, where 
necessary, explain their meaning. Do not use jargon since the report might be read by people 
who are not familiar with esoteric or technical terminology. 
 
 
Impartiality and Relevance 
Report all facts without bias, and everything relevant should be included regardless of which 
side it favors or what it proves or disproves. At the outset of a fraud examination, the 
examiner should carefully determine what information will be needed to prove the case and 
attempt to include only this information. A report should include only those matters that are 
relevant to the examination. However, almost every investigation yields much information of 
which the relevance is not immediately known. In such cases, it is best to opt for 
completeness. 
 
 
Timeliness 
Timeliness of reports is extremely important because it tends to enhance the accuracy of 
witness testimony. Another aim of timeliness is to preserve the examiner’s memory of the 
interview(s). All interviews should be transcribed as soon as possible after the questioning. 
Upon completing the examination, the examiner should prepare a final or interim report 
(whichever is appropriate) as soon as possible. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.903 
Common Reporting Mistakes 
 
Conclusions and Opinions 
In a report-writing context, conclusions and opinions are similar, but not identical. 
Conclusions  are based on observations of the evidence, whereas opinions  call for an 
interpretation of the facts.  
 
The fraud examiner must be very circumspect about drawing conclusions. In most 
situations, the conclusions from the examination should be self-evident and should not need 
to be pointed out in the report. If the conclusions are not obvious, the report might need to 
be clarified. 
 
The fraud examiner must also avoid stating opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any 
person or party. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics specifically 
prohibits statements of opinions regarding guilt or innocence, as this is the job of the judge 
or jury (see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Opinions regarding technical matters are permitted  if the fraud examiner is qualified as an 
expert in the matter being considered. For example, a permissible expert opinion might be in 
regard to the relative adequacy of an entity’s internal controls. Another opinion might 
discuss whether financial transactions conform to generally accepted accounting principles. 
 
Evidence 
Legal standards provide guidelines for handlin g evidence and maintaining its integrity. The 
fraud examiner can avoid problems of evidence maintenance by simply documenting—in 
memorandum form—the receipt or release of all evidence. 
 
Copy Documents 
Most evidence in fraud cases will be in document form. When operating under a lawful court 
order that compels a custodian to furnish original documents, the examiner should copy 
those documents (preferably in the presence of the custodian). Then the examiner should 
furnish the custodian with a receipt describing the documents copied or taken. A sample 
receipt can be found in the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section. 
 
Safeguarding and Maintaining Documents 
After obtaining documents, the examiner should secure them for evidence. Be sure that only 
those people with an absolute need for the documents can gain access to them. For practical 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.904   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
purposes, it is usually best to copy all documents (original documents are usually not 
included in reports). Mark all original documents in a unique manner, preferably by using 
initials and dates. To avoid defacing originals, use a small but distinctive tick mark or other 
form of identifier. 
 
When documents are voluntarily furnished, leave the originals in place and work with the 
copies. If originals are later lost, stolen, or misplaced, the copies can normally be introduced 
in court under the “best evidence”  rule (see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Don’t take shortcuts with evidence, and certainly  do not lose or misplace crucial documents. 
It is inexcusable for a fraud examiner to mishandle evidence; doing so will almost certainly 
compromise the case. 
 
 
Effective Note-Taking 
Note-taking is a demanding and necessary fraud examination skill; good reports are based on 
good notes. Once the notes have helped the examiner prepare a memorandum of interview, 
they have fulfilled their essential purpose. However, some jurisdictions require that notes 
pertaining to criminal matters be retained for evidence. 
 
The most common types of note taking include manual, stenographic, and electronic. 
Manual note-taking is the most usual method. Its main advantage is that no extra people 
need to be present during the interview. However, manual note-taking can be obtrusive and 
distracting during questioning. 
 
A stenographer might be present during the interview to take notes (rather than a verbatim 
transcript). This allows the interviewer to concentrate on the questioning. A potential 
disadvantage of this method is that the respondent might be inhibited by the presence of 
another individual. 
 
Electronic note-taking commonly entails tape recording an interview, then summarizing the 
recording to reflect the most pertinent information. Its main advantages are increased 
accuracy and information-gathering efficiency. It can be especially helpful in complicated 
interview situations, or in situations where terminology is defined or explained.  
 
Electronic note-taking has the disadvantage of requiring a duplication of effort. In some 
instances, an electronic recording device can be inhibiting. In a limited number of situations 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.905 
it might be illegal without the respondent’s consent. See the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual for more information. 
 
 
Organization of Information 
Because of the amount of information and the number of documents that might be collected 
during a fraud examination, the examiner should plan early and plan well. If circumstances 
permit, an information database should be established in the early phases of the case. Report 
information can be presented either in chronological order or by transaction. The options 
are discussed below.  
 
Chronological 
This method presents facts in the order in which they were uncovered. For example, if an 
anonymous tip predicated the fraud examination, the information received would be 
presented first in the report. Thereafter, the reader would follow the development of each 
step as the case progressed. 
 
Information from each witness should be presented in a chronological manner. If 
interviewing an associate of the target, for example, relay the information in a fashion that 
begins at the point the associate first met the target, then proceed through the course of 
pertinent events that lead to the present. 
 
By Transaction 
If a multitude of documents support several instances of fraud, this information should be 
presented by separating individual transactions. For example, in a case of internal fraud 
involving six different instances of embezzlement, the documents and the related interviews 
might best be understood if presented as a group. Thereafter, detail the remaining 
transactions chronologically. 
 
 
Analyzing the Reader 
Keep in mind that the fraud examination report will be read by the general public and the 
opposition. Under no circumstances should the examiner prepare a communicat ion with the idea that the 
information will not be disclo sed to adverse third parties. Write the report with this caveat in mind. A 
fraud examination should stand on its own. It should adequately answer the classic questions 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of who, what, why, where, when, and how. If the report is prepared properly, the reader 
should not have to refer to any other documents to understand the issues.  
 
Types of Readers 
Fraud examination reports will most likely be read by the following individuals. 
 
Company Insiders 
Managers and executives will probably review reports of cases involving internal fraud and 
misdeeds. Because these documents will likely be reviewed by people outside the company as 
well, they should not address internal control deficiencies, management issues, or other 
sensitive company considerations. Instead, these matters should be dealt with in a separate 
letter or other form of communication. 
 
Attorneys 
Reports will be read by attorneys from within the organization and without. In reports 
prepared at the request of counsel, mark each page “privileged and confidential.” This 
procedure will document any privilege claim (discussed below). Understand, however, that 
marking the report in such a manner will not necessarily ensure that the privilege will be 
sustained. 
 
Attorneys for the defendant(s) will likely gain access to a report during the discovery phase 
of civil litigation. These lawyers will scrutinize the report for errors, omissions, and/or 
misstatements. You should be certain that the report is accurate down to the most seemingly 
unimportant detail. Defense attorneys will cite the smallest error as evidence that the entire 
document is inaccurate. In criminal cases, prosecuting attorneys and law enforcement 
personnel will also review a report. These individuals will look primarily at evidence and 
witness statements that will best sustain a criminal prosecution. 
 
Defendants and Witnesses 
In either civil or criminal litigation, the defendants will eventually see most, if not all, of a 
report. If the case reaches court, the witnesses an examiner identified and interviewed will be 
provided with copies of their own statements, if not the entire report. 
 
Press 
In some instances, the press might gain access to a report. Report data might be obtained 
from information disclosed during litigation or, in some instances, from confidential sources. 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.907 
The press is particularly adept at uncovering mistakes and incorrect conclusions drawn by 
the fraud examiner. 
 
Juries 
When the case reaches trial, the jury will usually receive the entire report for review and 
analysis. Juries normally do not have a back ground in business and accounting matters, 
therefore, the report should be as simple and easy to understand as possible. Of all the important 
individuals who will review the report, the members of the jury will by far be the most 
important. 
 
Presenting the Case to Prosecutors 
If fraud is discovered, the examiner will also have to discuss with the relevant individuals and 
determine whether the case should be presented to criminal prosecutors.  
 
Of course, no matter what the results of a company’s fraud examination, the company does 
not prosecute — or decide to prosecute — an offending individual. Instead, prosecution — in 
the sense of charging and trying a person on criminal charges — is exclusively the right of the 
state, and attorneys for state or federal government have the discretion to decide whether to 
bring criminal charges against a person and with what crimes he will be charged.  
 
But even though these decisions belong to the government, there are several reasons an 
entity may wish to prosecute an offending employee. For example, prosecution punishes the 
employee and, hopefully, will deter other employees from engaging in similar offenses. In 
addition, criminal charges brought against an employee may help a company defray the 
losses suffered as a result of fraud. Similarly, prosecution may aid the victim company in 
pursuing civil remedies against an offending employee. 
 
Even if an entity establishes a solid case against an employee or contractor, the prosecutor 
might be reluctant to bring criminal charges in a fraud case because of the time and expense 
involved, lack of expertise, the high standard of proof required for conviction, and so on. 
 
Nevertheless, fraud examiners can do a number of things to help their chances of 
prosecution. For instance, before presenting a case to the police or prosecutor, it will benefit 
the fraud examiner to develop a relationship with either or both, or at least to know enough 
about both agencies to know whom to call so that any submission of a case is not lost in the 
administrative netherworld of bureaucracies. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.908   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
And generally, attorneys will take cases that enhance their reputations and statistics. 
Government lawyers have high conviction rate in the cases they prosecute, and this is due in 
part to their reluctance to take cases they might lose. Therefore, a prosecutor will be more 
likely to pursue the case if the evidence is strong or if the case involves significant losses, 
deals with notorious or important defendants (e.g., prior criminal records), and does not 
appear to be unduly complex. 
 
Furthermore, prosecutors, like all professionals, are very busy, handling enormous caseloads 
in clogged dockets around the country, and many prosecutors have a limited background in 
financial matters. Regardless, here are some basic rules for dealing with prosecutors.  
 
First, examiners should never show up at a prosecutor’s office with a pile of cancelled checks 
and innuendo about what they think happened in a case. In general, a prosecutor is legally 
and ethically bound to proceed only on what he can prove beyond a reasonable doubt in 
court through competent evidence. (Note that the laws of evidence are different from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction—you should have a fundamental familiarity with these laws prior 
to presentation of any case to the prosecutor.) 
 
Second, examiners should not approach the prosecutor unless their investigation is 
complete. Have all of the relevant documents been gathered? Has the examiner made all of 
his observations? Has the examiner interviewed all necessary witnesses? 
 
Third, to get the full attention of the prosecuting attorney, the examiner must have his case 
ready to present in an organized and clear package. A fraud examiner may have done a great 
job in developing evidence, but that information must be communicated effectively to the 
government, which must be convinced that the case is worth the time and effort necessary 
to pursue legal action against the wrongdoer. 
 
Moreover, examiners can enhance their chances of prosecution if: 
• They have obtained a legal and binding admission of guilt. 
• They obtain a commitment from the outset for the lawyer to “consider prosecution” 
based on the evidence obtained. 
• They avail themselves to the lawyer for aid in the prosecution. 
• They follow-up regularly with the lawyer to ensure their case does not fall through the 
cracks. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.909 
And if possible, present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who has: 
• A successful track record in white-collar cases 
• A reputation as a hard worker 
 
 
Outlining 
Outlines of reports and memoranda of interview can be helpful in long or complex fraud 
examinations. Report outlines can take many forms, depending on the type(s) of information 
one must relay. Although the following outlining technique is mechanical, it is easy to master 
and well suited to unraveling the complexities of large and difficult subjects. 
 
Step One 
Group naturally related items and write them down on note cards, and then determine 
whether they are exactly what is needed to meet the demands of the objective, the reader, 
and the scope of coverage. When they are grouped, arrange them in the proper order and 
label them with Roman numerals. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
 I. First-level head 
A. Second-level head 
1. Third-level head 
a. Fourth-level head 
(1) Fifth-level head 
 
Step Two 
Mark each of the note cards with the appropriate Roman numeral and capital letter. Sort the 
note cards by major and minor headings. Transfer the notes to paper, converting them to 
complete sentences. 
 
Step Three 
Polish the rough outline. Check to ensure that the subordination of minor headings to major 
headings is logical and sequential. Check for unity. Stay within the established scope of 
coverage. Resist the temptation to report irrelevant facts. Check the outline for 
completeness; scan it to see whether more information is needed. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.910   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Style 
Write each report in a style that is clear, concise, and to the point. Poorly constructed or 
grammatically incorrect sentences can ruin an otherwise flawless fraud examination. The 
purpose for writing a report is to convey information to a reader; therefore, it is the 
examiner’s responsibility to communicate effectively  and efficiently. The two cardinal sins of 
report writing are vagueness and wordiness. Common breaches of good basic writing include: 
• Improperly placed or ambiguous modifiers (changes sentence context) 
• Use of technical jargon, slang, and/or colloquialisms (places the burden to understand 
on the reader) 
• Use of unnecessary, high-flown verbiage (in an attempt to impress the reader) 
 
Voice 
In grammar, voice  indicates the relation of the subject to the action of the verb. When the 
verb is in the active voice, the subject acts; when it is in the passive voice, the subject is  
acted upon. 
 
EXAMPLE 
John Doe wrote  the report. (active) 
OR 
The report was written  by John Doe. (passive) 
 
Both of the sentences say the same thing, but each has a different emphasis. In the first 
sentence, emphasis is on the subject, John Doe, whereas in the second sentence, the focus is 
on the object, the report. Notice how much stronger and more forceful the active sentence is. 
Always use the active voice unless there is good reason to use the passive. Because they are 
wordy and indirect, passive sentences are harder for the reader to understand. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Instances of fraud are most likely to be reported  by coworkers. (passive) 
OR 
Coworkers report  most instances of fraud. (active) 
 
Person 
Person  indicates whether the written text refers to the writer (first person), to the reader or 
the person for whom the text was written (second person), or to an object or third party 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.911 
about whom the text was written (third person). Person is established through the use of 
personal pronouns. 
 
EXAMPLE 
First person:  “I  did not find a record of the deposit.” 
Second person:  “You did not find a record of the deposit.” 
Third person:  “He did not find a record of the deposit.” 
 
Point of View 
Point of view indicates the writer’s relation to the in formation presented, as reflected in the use 
of person. The writer usually expresses point of view in first-, second-, or third-person 
personal pronouns. The use of the first person indicates that the writer is a participant or 
observer (“This happened to me;” “I saw that ”). The second and third person indicate that 
the writer is writing about other people (“This happened to you, to her, to them”). When 
writing a report, one should never use the writer  to replace I or me in a mistaken attempt to 
sound formal or dignified.  
 
CHANGE:  The writer  believes that this examination will be completed by the end  
of June. 
 
  TO :  I  believe that this examination will be completed by the end of June. 
 
Constructing Clear Sentences 
Sentences that make up a report should be simple and clear. Whenever possible, use 
uncomplicated sentences to state complex ideas. If readers must cope with a complicated 
sentence in addition to a complex idea, they are likely to become confused. Common 
sentence structure mistakes to avoid are discussed below.  
 
Rambling Sentences 
Sentences that contain more information than the reader can comfortably absorb are known 
as rambling sentence s. The remedy for a rambling sentence is to divide it into two or more 
sentences. Put the main message of the rambling sentence into the first of the revised 
sentences. 
 
CHANGE:  The payment to which a subcontractor is entitled should be made 
promptly in order that in the event of a subsequent contractual dispute, 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.912   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the general contractors might not be held in default of contract by virtue 
of nonpayment. 
 
 TO : Pay subcontractors promptly. Then, if a contractual dispute should occur, 
the general contractor cannot be held in default for nonpayment. 
 
Run-On Sentences 
A run-on sentence  is two or more sentences without proper punctuation to separate them. Run-
 on sentences can be corrected by creating two sentences or by joining the two clauses with a 
semicolon (if they are closely related). 
 
 CHANGE: The new manager instituted several new procedures some were 
impractical. (run-on sentence) 
 
 TO : The new manager instituted several new procedures. Some were 
impractical. (period) 
OR 
 TO : The new manager instituted several new procedures; some were 
impractical. (semicolon) 
 
Omitted Verbs 
Do not omit a required verb. 
 
 CHANGE: I never and probably never will locate the missing file. 
 
 TO : I never located  and probably never will locate the missing file. 
 
Omitted Subjects 
Do not omit a subject. 
 
 CHANGE: He regarded price fixing as wrong, but until abolished by law, he engaged 
in it, as did everyone else. 
 
 TO : He regarded price fixing as wrong, but until it was  abolished by law, he 
engaged in it, as did everyone else. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.913 
Unnecessary Compound Sentences 
Avoid compound sentences containing clauses that have little or no logical relationship. 
 
 CHANGE: The ledger contains several exam ples of altered data entries, and it is 
usually stored in the company’s safe. 
 
 TO : The ledger contains several examples of altered data entries. It is usually 
stored in the company’s safe. 
 
Misplaced Modifiers 
A modifier (a word, a phrase, or a clause) is misplaced when it modifies, or appears to 
modify, the wrong word or phrase. 
 
CHANGE: I almost located all the missing files. 
 
TO :  I located almost all the missing files. 
 
Possible confusion in sentences of this type can be avoided by placing the modifier 
immediately before the word it is intended to modify. 
 
 CHANGE: All businessmen are not  talented in mathematics. (The implication is that 
no  businessman is talented in mathematics.) 
 
 TO : Not  all businessmen are talented in mathematics. 
 
Paragraph Structure 
State a paragraph’s main point in its first sentence. Subsequent sentences should support and 
clarify that main point. For the purposes of report writing, paragraphs should be short. 
Readers can be daunted by long, complicated paragraphs that contain multiple issues. (Note 
also that short paragraphs result in more white space on the page, making the document 
more readable.) 
 
 
Report Structure 
Reporting formats vary widely. Some organizations, especially governmental investigative 
bodies, use report forms so that case information is provided in a consistent manner. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.914   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Suggested Standard Format 
Fraud examination reports are not “one size fits  all” items. Obviously, no format can cover 
every specific case, company, or situation. However, a standard format is a good place to 
start. The ACFE recommends the following be included in most reports. A sample report is 
included in the Appendix to this section. 
 
Background 
The background section should generally be about two paragraphs. It should state very 
succinctly why the fraud examination was conducted (e.g., an anonymous tip was received, 
an anomaly was discovered during an audit, money or property was missing). 
 
You may also state who called for the examination and who assembled the examination 
team. 
 
Executive Summary 
For a simple fraud examination, the executive summary should be no more than four or five 
paragraphs. For a more complex case, the summary may reach a page or two in length. 
 
In this section, you should also summarize what actions you performed during the fraud 
examination, such as reviewing documents, interviewing witnesses, or conducting analyses or 
tests. It provides the reader with an overview of what you did during the examination 
process. 
 
At the end of this section, you should summarize the outcome of the examination. For 
example, “$50,000 in checks was deposited into an account owned by Bob Wilson. When 
confronted with this information, Wilson stated that he had only borrowed the money and 
meant to pay it back.” 
 
Scope 
This section should consist of only one paragraph explaining what the scope of the fraud 
examination was. For example, “Determine whether inventory was misappropriated from 
the warehouse,” or “Determine why money is missing from the bank account.”  
 
Approach 
This section gives a brief description of the following items: 
• Fraud examination team members 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.915 
• Procedures (generally, what documents were reviewed or what tests were conducted) 
• Individuals interviewed 
 
It provides a handy reference to who was involved in the fraud examination, what the team 
reviewed, what tests or analyses were conducted, and what individuals the team interviewed. 
 
Findings 
This section contains the details of the fraud examination. It will generally consist of several 
pages. In this section you should describe what tasks you performed and what you found. 
Provide enough detail so that the reader understands what occurred, but not so much detail 
that the reader begins to lose interest or becomes bogged down in the details. The reader 
wants to know how many invoices were forged, who was involved, how they did it, and what 
proof you have. 
 
If the findings section is long, you may wish to use subheadings for particular topics or 
individuals to make it easier for the reader to stay organized. 
 
The information can be presented either chronologically or by topic — whatever makes it 
easier for the reader to follow. 
 
Summary 
This section should be one or two paragraphs and should succinctly summarize the results 
of the fraud examination. It should be similar to the outcome stated at the end of the 
Executive Summary section. 
 
Impact 
Here you should describe how the fraud affected the victim organization. In this section you 
can provide an estimate of the dollar losses or any other time of tangible or intangible 
damage already suffered or that may occur in the future. 
 
Recommendations 
This section is optional. There may be instances in which you wish to discuss remedial 
measures or specific recommendations in a separate document. If you do wish to include 
this section, you should state what follow-up action is necessary or recommended, including 
remedial measures such as a review of internal controls, introduction of a hotline, or 
increased security.  
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.916   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting Documents 
The basic reporting documents are: 
• Memoranda 
• Exhibits, documents, or enclosures 
• Indexes 
• Cover page 
• Transmittal letter 
 
The long-form report will consist of copies of these documents. The Linda Reed Collins 
case study report, included in the Appendix to this section, illustrates this approach.  
 
The heart of the documentation is the memorandum of interview, and one memorandum 
should be prepared for each official contact. Once all the memoranda of interviews are 
completed, they are typically assembled in chronological order and indexed.  
 
Memoranda 
Use memoranda to document all interviews and other pertinent information discovered 
during the examination. Each memorandum should contain the following information where 
appropriate: 
• Heading 
• File number or control number 
• Name of person reporting 
• Case name or subject 
• Subject of memorandum 
• Date 
• Details of facts 
• Interview was voluntary 
• Indicate that one provided one’s identity 
• The witness was informed of the nature of the inquiry 
• Date of inquiry 
• How the interview was conducted (in person, by telephone, etc.) 
• If the interview was electronically recorded 
• Facts learned during inquiry 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.917 
Cover Page or Letter 
A cover page  summarizes the examination’s salient points. The cover page should be direct and 
succinct. If a report is submitted to an outside agency (such as law enforcement or outside 
counsel), a cover letter should accompany it. The cover letter should recapitulate 
information in the report and summarize the principal weaknesses. It is not necessary to list 
all witnesses, only those most valuable. 
 
Exhibits 
As a general rule, copies of exhibits should be included in the report and not attached 
separately. However, bulky files (including working papers and similar exhibits) might be 
attached separately and referred to in the body of the report. The chain of custody should be 
maintained over original documents. 
 
Forms 
A complete fraud examination report must document every step of the information-
 gathering process. Because the orderly and legal presentation of evidence requires the 
examiner to organize a great deal of information, the examiner should use the forms 
available to facilitate this task (see Appendix). As a general rule, these forms are kept in the 
file and not included in the report unless necessary. These forms include the following items. 
 
Consent to Search 
A consent to search  form documents the fact that a person has been informed of his 
constitutional rights, stating that: 
• The premises cannot be searched without a search warrant. 
• The person can refuse to consent to such a search. 
 
The signatures on the bottom of the form (subjects and witnesses) indicate that the person is 
voluntarily giving the examiner written permission to search the premises and to remove 
whatever papers, documents, or other property he might desire. 
 
Receipt for Property 
A receipt for property  form is a multipurpose document used to list items of evidence that have 
been received, returned, or released. This form includes the following information: 
• Date of transfer 
• Property owner’s name 
• Owner’s address 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.918   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Description of item(s) 
• Signature lines (“Received by” and “Received from”) 
 
Telephone Recording Consent 
A telephone recording consent  form stipulates where, when, and with whom telephone 
conversations can be recorded. This form states that the subject has granted permission 
without threats or promises of any kind, and it must be signed by the subject and witnesses. 
Be cautioned that the form alone does not make the conduct illegal or legal. See the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual for information on the interception of 
communications. 
 
Advice of Rights 
An Advice of Rights  form effectively “Mirandizes” an individual; that is, it informs a  
person that: 
• He may remain silent in the face of questioning. 
• Whatever the person says can be used against him in a court of law. 
• If he requests, an attorney will be appointed for him before questioning.  
• He may stop answering questions at any time, whether an attorney is present. 
 
If Mirandizing is applicable, this form should be signed and witnessed. 
 
Consent to Record 
A consent to record  form documents the fact that an individual has given the examiner 
permission to record specific conversations. This form must be signed and witnessed.  
It details: 
• The name of the individual 
• His address 
• The location of the conversation(s) 
• Who might record the conversation(s) 
• The name of the subject(s) with whom the individual might converse 
• The date(s) of the conversation(s) 
 
Customer Consent and Authorization for Access to Financial Records 
This form authorizes a financial institution to disclose the customer’s own records to the 
examiner or other specifically listed individuals. It must be signed by the account holder. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.919 
Evidence Control Log 
In the case of significant items of evidence, it might be advisable to prepare an evidence control 
log, a form that documents: 
• The evidence control center location 
• The bank safe-deposit box location 
• Other evidence location 
• The signature(s) of person(s) placing in or removing evidence from repository 
• The reasons why evidence was moved 
• The file case number 
• The time(s) and date(s) authorized individuals entered and departed evidence repository 
 
 
Signed Statements 
The verbal confession should be reduced to a short and concise written statement. The 
interviewer should prepare the statement and present it to the confessor for his signature. 
The statement should be prepared before the confessor leaves the interview. There should 
be no attempt to make the statement long, and it should rarely exceed two or three 
handwritten pages. The following points should be covered in every signed statement. 
 
Voluntariness of Confessions 
The general law of confessions requires that they be completely voluntary. This should be set 
forth specifically in the first paragraph with the date of the interview. 
 
Intent 
There is no such thing as an accidental fraud or crime. Both require as part of the elements 
of proof the fact that the confessor knew the conduct was wrong and intended to commit 
the act. This can best be accomplished by using precise language in the statement that clearly 
describes the act (e.g., “I wrongfully took assets from the company that weren’t mine” versus “I 
borrowed money from the company without telling anyone ”). 
 
As a general rule, strong emotive words, such as “lie” and “steal,” should be avoided, as the 
confessor might balk at signing the statement. Still, the wording must be precise. Following 
are suggested wordings: 
  
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.920   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of  Use  
 
Lie 
 
I knew the statement/action was untrue.  
 
Steal 
 
I wrongfully took the property of _____ for my 
own benefit. 
 
Embezzle 
 
I wrongfully took ____’s property, which had 
been entrusted to me, and used it for my own 
benefit.  
 
Fraud 
 
I knowingly told ____ an untrue statement 
and he/she/they relied on it. 
 
Approximate Dates of Offense 
Unless the exact dates of the offense are known, the word approximately  must precede any 
dates of the offense. If the confessor is unsure about the dates, language to that effect 
should be included. 
 
Approximate Amounts of Losses 
Include the approximate losses, making sure they are labeled as such. It is satisfactory to 
state a range (“probably not less than $____ or more than $____”). 
 
Approximate Number of Instances 
Ranges are also satisfactory for the number of instances. The number is important because it 
helps establish intent by showing a repeated pattern of activity. 
 
Willingness to Cooperate 
It makes it easier for the confessor when he perceives that the statement includes language 
portraying him in a more favorable light. The confessor can convert that natural tendency by 
emphasizing cooperation and willingness to make amends. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“I am willing to cooperate in hel ping undo what I have done. I promise that I will try to repay 
whatever damages I caused by my actions.” 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.921 
Excuse Clause 
The confessor’s moral excuse should be mentioned. The interviewer should ensure the 
excuse clause wording does not diminish legal responsibility. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG: 
“I didn’t mean to do this.” (This implies a lack of intent.) 
 
RIGHT: 
“I wouldn’t have done this if it had not been for pressing financial problems. I didn’t mean to 
hurt anyone.” 
 
Confessor Read the Statement 
The confessor must acknowledge that he read the statement and he should initial all the 
pages of the statement. It might be advisable to insert intentional errors in the statement so 
that the confessor will notice them. The errors are crossed out, the correct information is 
inserted, and the confessor is asked to initial the changes. Whether this step is advisable 
depends on the likelihood that the confessor will attempt to retract the statement or claim it 
was not read. 
 
Truthfulness of Statement 
The written statement should state specifically that it is true. This adds weight to it. 
However, the language should also allow for mistakes. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“This statement is true and complete to the best of my current recollection.” 
 
Key Points in Signed Statements 
There is no legal requirement that a statement must be in the handwriting or wording of the 
declarant. Because the examiner usually knows how to draft a valid statement, to let a 
confessor draft the statement is generally not a good idea. A statement’s wording should be 
precise. 
 
Declarants should read and sign the statement without undue delay. Do not ask the 
confessor to sign the statement; instead, say “Please sign here.” Although there is no legal 
requirement, it is a good idea to have two people witness the signing of a statement. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.922   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There should not be more than one written statement for each offense. If facts are inadvertently 
omitted, they can later be added to the original statement as an addendum. For legal 
purposes, prepare separate statements for unrelated offenses. This rule applies because the 
target might be tried more than once—once for each offense. Preserve all notes taken during 
an interview, especially those concerning a confession. Having access to pertinent notes can 
aid in a cross-examination regarding the validity of a signed statement. Stenographic notes, if 
any, also should be preserved. Once a conf ession is obtained, substantiate it through 
additional investigation, if necessary. 
 
 
Visual Aids 
Occasionally, the fraud examiner might include visual aids prepared either as part of the 
report or to be used as exhibits at trial. Visual aids should be kept simple. Several different 
types of visual aids are discussed below. 
 
Link-Network Diagrams 
Link networks show the relationships between people, organizations, and events. Different 
symbols are used to represent different entities: a square can symbolize an organization; a 
circle, a person; a triangle, an event; and so fo rth. It doesn’t matter which symbols you use as 
long as you use them consistently. Confirmed connections between entities can be 
represented by a solid line or enclosure within another symbol. Speculative or presumed 
relationships can be indicated by broken lines. To achieve its intended purpose, a graphic 
should always be clear. Don’t cross lines if possible.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Smith is vice-president of the ABC Corporat ion and president of the DEF Corporation, a 
subsidiary of ABC. Jones is general partner in  the First and Second Partnerships. Brown and 
Green are limited partners in the First Partne rship. Brown and Black are limited partners in 
the Second Partnership. Black is also a general partner in the Third Partnership. Smith also 
might have an interest in  the First Partnership. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.923 
LINK NETWORK DIAGRAM  
 
ABC Corporation
DEF Corporation
President
VP
Smith
First
Partnership  
Second 
Partnership
Third
Partnership  
Jones 
Gen. Partner 
Black 
Gen. Partner
Brown 
Ltd. Partner  
Green
Ltd. Partner 
Black 
Ltd. Partner  
Brown
Ltd. Partner  
 
Matrices 
A matrix is a grid that shows the relationship (or points of contacts) between a number of 
entities. Known contacts can be differentiated from presumed contacts by means of a bullet 
(l) or a circle (m). 
 
A matrix can be used to identify the direction and frequency of telephone traffic between 
suspect parties. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.924   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
 
This information can also be represented in chart form. 
 
  
450-1011 550-2022 650-3033 750-4044 850-5055 
T otal 
Out go in g 
Calls  
450-1011 X 1 3   4 
550-2022  X 2   2 
650-3033 8 7 X 8 9 32 
750-4044 1  1 X  2 
850-5055   8  X 8 
Tot al 
Incomin g 
Calls  
 
9 8 14 8 9 
 
 
 
Time-Flow Diagrams 
The following chart shows the relationship of significant events, in the order in which  
they occurred. 
 
450-1011 550-20221 
850-5055750-4044
 650-30331 
8 
3 7 2 
1 
9 
8 
8 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.925 
Summaries of Witnesses’ Statements 
Reduce voluminous testimony and witness statements to summary form in order to identify 
inconsistent statements and to permit quick review. To identify pertinent passages, indicate 
briefly the topic being covered at a given point, and provide a synopsis of the statement (see 
example below). 
 
Summary of Evidence 
Linda Reed Collins 
 
Page Topic Testimony 
   
    5 Collins hired 6/1/XX Personnel file 
     
    5 
Collins promoted to 
Purchaser 11/8/XX 
Personnel file 
      
    8 
Collins and Nagel friends De La Garza interview 
  15 Checks to Orion Robinson interview 
  30 Indebtedness of Collins Public records 
 
Keep the synopsis as succinct as possible. Too much detail will impair the summary’s utility. 
The examiner or someone familiar with the facts and issues in the case should prepare the 
summary, not an assistant who does not know what might or might not be relevant. The 
summary can also be useful as a basis for a chronology. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.926   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An example of a report of a fraud examination is included in the Appendix to “Report 
Writing.” The fraud examiner typically will also  prepare other written documents including, 
but not limited to, engagement contracts and opinion letters.  
 
 
Engagement Contracts 
Certified Fraud Examiners are sometimes hired for specific engagements. The examiner 
should always prepare an engagement letter so that he and the client have a clear 
understanding of the objectives of the assignment. If the terms of the engagement are 
defined in a contract, any later dispute becomes easier to resolve. 
 
According to the Code of Professional Ethics, a Certified Fraud Examiner: 
• Will only accept assignments for which there is a reasonable expectation that the work 
will be completed with professional competence. 
• Will obtain evidence or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any 
opinion rendered. 
• Will disclose all material matters discovered during the course of an examination that, if 
omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
The engagement letter should be written with these standards in mind. The first question 
one must answer in preparing a contract is: Who is one’s client? Has one been engaged by 
the plaintiff, the defendant, or their counsel?  Often the engagement letter will be addressed 
to attorneys. This can be either corporate or outside counsel.  
 
There are two primary forms of engagement letters: the long form and the short form. The 
long form spells out the details of what examination techniques you intend to follow, while 
the short form does not. See the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section for examples 
of each type of engagement contracts. 
 
Elements of the Engagement Contract 
Engagement letters have four basic parts: ope ning, body (long or short), terms, and close. 
In the opening paragraph state the purpose of the engagement. Be specific as to whether the 
letter is an engagement or a proposal letter. The body of the letter will follow either the long 
form or the short form. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.927 
The Long Form 
The long form is similar to an engagement letter prepared for specific-scope examinations 
performed by auditors. The examiner describes the procedures in detail and limits the scope 
of an examination to the procedures defined. It is not recommended for use in engagements 
requiring the investigation of fraud allegations and a concluding opinion on the existence  
of fraud. 
 
At the onset, the examiner might not know what procedures will be necessary to resolve the 
allegation. Consequently, it is difficult to describe, with any precision, the anticipated 
procedures before the examination begins. 
 
The Short Form 
The short-form engagement letter outlines the general scope of the engagement. For 
example, it might describe that the services will include an investigation of a fraud allegation 
received over the hotline, by an anonymous tip, or by an audit anomaly. 
 
The short form might also confirm if the examiner has access to any personnel or 
documentation deemed necessary to carry out the assignment. This type of engagement 
letter is best used for work that will ultimately require an opinion on a fraud allegation. 
Because the examiner will not know the nature of the alleged fraud at the onset, it is best to 
not limit the examination’s scope. 
 
Terms 
The terms paragraph includes the fee, either flat rate or hourly, and the method of payment. 
This is an excellent time to ask for a retainer and to describe the billing procedures. Also 
address the issue of out-of-pocket expenses. If travel is required, discuss the anticipated cost 
of travel and the number of trips. 
 
Close 
In the closing section, thank the addressee for the opportunity to work with him. Provide a 
phone number where you can be reached and any special instructions, such as cell phone 
and fax numbers. Ask the addressee to sign one copy, and return it in the envelope. Don’t 
forget to supply a signature plate for the returned letter and a self-addressed stamped 
envelope. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.928   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Opinions 
The Certified Fraud Examiner is often asked for an opinion about the existence of fraud. He 
might be engaged to perform fraud deterrence services or to resolve a fraud allegation.  
 
In the former instance, the opinion will address the strengths and weaknesses of the  
client’s current fraud deterrence system and include recommendations to strengthen that 
system. If specific instances of possible fraudulent conduct are uncovered, those should also 
be addressed. 
 
In the latter situation, the examiner must be attentive to the Certified Fraud Examiner’s 
Code of Professional Ethics, in that: 
 
“no opinion shall be expressed regarding the gu ilt or innocence of any person or party.” 
 
There are three possible outcomes of a fraud examination: evidence was obtained that 
supports the allegation of fraud; evidence was gathered that does not support such an 
allegation; and inconclusive evidence was ga thered. In the first outcome, the opinion will 
vary depending on whether the perpetrator confessed to the alleged crime. In the second 
outcome, the examiner can state that the evidence does not support the fraud charge. The 
examiner is not able to declare that there was no fraud. In the final outcome, the examiner 
can state that the evidence is inconclusive; it neither supports nor refutes the allegation. 
Examples of opinions appear in the Appendix. 
 
 
Fraud Examination Checklist 
It is often helpful to prepare to-do lists or checklists of the documents to be examined and 
the potential witnesses to be interviewed. For reference, a sample checklist is located in the 
Appendix. It is not intended to cover all aspects of the examination, but rather to provide 
the examination team with assistance in planning the investigation. 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1001 
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
 YES 
 
NO 
1. Fully debriefed all informants and witnesses? 
 
 
  
2. Documented the allegation in writing? 
 
 
  
3. Identified all possible schemes or indicators of fraud? 
 
 
  
4. Developed fraud theory? 
 
 
  
5. Notified legal counsel and discussed whether to proceed? 
 
 
  
6. Obtained, recorded, and filed all pertinent information and 
documents in the files? 
 
 
  
7. Determined the potential loss? 
 
 
  
8. Identified potential witnesses? 
 
 
  
9. Determined if an error or mistake was made? 
 
 
  
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
3.1002   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 YES 
 
NO 
10. Reviewed internal controls? 
 
 
  
11. Developed an investigative plan? 
 
 
  
12. Determined the type of evidence needed to pursue? 
 
 
  
13. Identified indicators showing intent? 
 
 
  
14. Reviewed payroll records and canceled checks? 
 
  
–  Identified all bank accounts? 
 
  
–  Identified number of exemptions? 
 
  
–  Identified who might be endorsing checks? 
 
  
15. Reviewed personal expense reports? 
 
  
–  Identified unusually high expenses? 
 
  
–  Identified credit card used? 
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1003 
 YES 
 
NO 
–  Identified where suspect entertains clients? 
 
  
–  Identified duplicate submissions? 
 
  
16. Performed background/asset check? 
 
  
–  Driver’s license violations? 
 
  
–  Motor vehicle registration records? 
 
  
–  Regulatory licenses? 
 
  
–  Vital statistics? 
 
  
–  Building permits? 
 
  
–  Business filings? 
 
  
? Fictitious names indices? 
 
  
? Business licenses? 
 
  
? Corporate records? 
 
  
? Limited partnerships? 
 
  
? SEC filings? 
 
  
 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
3.1004   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 YES 
 
NO 
–  County and state records? 
 
  
? Criminal? 
 
  
? Civil? 
 
  
? Domestic? 
 
  
? Probate? 
 
  
? Real estate? 
 
  
–  Federal court filings? 
 
  
? Criminal? 
 
  
? Civil? 
 
  
? Bankruptcy? 
 
  
–  Consumer credit records? 
 
  
–  Business reporting services? 
 
  
17. Determined who should be interviewed?   
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1005 
  YES 
 
NO 
18. Developed interview approach? 
 
 
  
19. Performed financial analysis? 
 
  
–  Vertical analysis? 
 
  
–  Horizontal analysis? 
 
  
–  Ratio analysis? 
 
  
–  Rationalizations? 
 
  
–  Industry analysis? 
 
  
–  Net-worth analysis? 
 
  
20. Will an undercover operation be used? 
 
  
–  Plan developed? 
 
  
–  Approval received? 
 
  
–  Operation completed? 
 
  
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
3.1006   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 YES 
 
NO 
21. Will surveillance be used? 
 
  
–  Plan developed? 
 
  
–  Personnel set up? 
 
  
–  Surveillance curtailed? 
 
  
22. Developed other informants? 
 
 
  
23. Use mail covers? 
 
 
  
24. Performed link analysis? 
 
 
  
25. Identified computers that might be linked to investigation? 
 
  
–  Identify expertise needed? 
 
  
–  Data downloaded? 
 
  
–  Data printed? 
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1007 
 YES 
 
NO 
26. Performed forensic analysis? 
 
  
–  Handwriting? 
 
  
–  Typewriter? 
 
  
–  Reviewed altered documents? 
 
  
–  Ink analysis? 
 
  
–  Document restoration? 
 
  
27. Interviews conducted? 
 
  
–  Interviews documented? 
 
  
–  Signed statements received? 
 
  
–  Identified other witnesses to interview? 
 
  
–  Interviewee knows how to get in touch with one? 
 
  
28. Completed documentation and report to management? 
 
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
3.1008   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 YES 
 
NO 
29. Notified management? 
 
 
  
30. Employee(s) terminated? 
 
  
–  Received identification badge or deleted from system? 
 
  
–  Notified security not to allow access to corporate 
premises? 
 
  
–  Personal belongings identified and arrangements made for 
employee to collect? 
 
  
31. Report written? 
 
  
–  Heading? 
 
  
–  Summary? 
 
  
–  Memorandum? 
 
  
–  Pertinent correspondence? 
 
  
–  Documentation of interviews? 
 
  
–  Pertinent evidence included? 
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1009 
 YES 
 
NO 
–  Index? 
 
  
–  Cover page? 
 
  
–  Report approved by supervisor? 
 
  
32. Appointment made with law enforcement agency? 
 
 
  
33. Follow-up contact made with investigators? 
 
 
  
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
Documents To Be Examined To Do Date Received  
 
 
3.1010   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ACCOUNTING RECORDS   
Balance sheet   
Income statement   
Statement of cash flows   
Bank statement   
Expense account   
Computer password   
Other:   
   
   
   
PERSONNEL RECORDS   
Date of employment   
Signed ethics agreement (conflict-of-interest statement)   
Current address   
Prior addresses   
Spouse’s name   
Maiden name   
Children’s names   
Prior employment   
Prior supervisor   
Insurance information (covered dependents)   
Employee evaluation (performance reviews)   
Garnishments   
Vacation schedule   
Other:   
 
 
 
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
Documents To Be Examined To Do Date Received  
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1011 
PERSONAL RECORDS   
Bank statements   
Tax returns   
Insurance policies   
Mortgage records   
Brokerage statements   
Credit card statements   
Telephone records   
Other business records   
Investments   
Vehicle information   
Diaries (calendars)   
   
PUBLIC RECORDS—PERSONAL   
Civil Filings    
State   
Federal   
   
Criminal Filings    
State   
Federal   
   
Property Tax Records    
By name   
By address   
Tax liens   
Financing   
Other:   
 
 
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
Documents To Be Examined  To Do Date Received  
 
 
3.1012   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Judgments    
Garnishments   
   
Domestic-Relations Records    
Divorce   
Property settlement   
Financial statements   
Tax returns   
Depositions   
   
Probate records   
   
U.S. Bankruptcy Filings    
Financial statements   
Bank statements   
Property ownership   
   
Education Verification    
University/college   
    
Professional licenses   
   
UCC filings   
   
Corporate Records    
• Company name   
• Individual (incorporators)   
   
Assumed name index   
   
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
Documents To Be Examined To Do Date Received  
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1013 
Vehicles Owned    
• Lienholder   
   
Boats Owned    
• Lienholder   
   
Aircraft Owned    
• Lienholder   
   
PUBLIC RECORDS—BUSINESS   
Utility records   
UCC filings   
Tax receipts   
• Tax liens   
• Who actually pays the taxes?   
Post office box application   
Civil filings   
• State   
• Federal   
Assumed-name index   
Corporate charter (bylaws)   
Business credit history   
• D&B   
• Better Business Bureau   
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
Documents To Be Examined To Do Date Received  
 
 
3.1014   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Other:   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1015 
 
Neutral Witnesses:   
 
Name 
 
Phone 
Date 
Contacted 
Interview 
Completed 
Report 
Date 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
3.1016   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
  
Adverse Witnesses:   
 
Name 
 
Phone 
Date 
Contacted 
Interview 
Completed 
Report 
Date 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1017 
 
Co-conspirators:  
 
Name 
 
Phone 
Date 
Contacted 
Interview 
Completed 
Report 
Date 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
  
APPENDIX A 
 
FRAUD EXAMINATION CHECKLIST 
 
Case Name: 
 
 
Case No.: 
 
 
3.1018   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
Suspects:   
 
Name 
 
Phone 
Date 
Contacted 
Interview 
Completed 
Report 
Date 
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1101

SAMPLE FRAUD EXAMINATION REPORTS 

Bailey Books, Incorporated
 
Following are two forms of fraud examination reports.  
 
One is a short-form report that summarizes the issues presented, the steps taken, and the 
information found.  
 
The second sample is a long-form report  that contains the substantive work produced during 
the fraud examination, including copies of relevant documents and memoranda of witness 
interviews. 
 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1102   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SAMPLE FRAUD EXAMINATION REPORT 
[SHORT FORM] 
 
 
TO: HAL B. MARLOW 
  CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER 
 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES 
  CERTIFIED FRAUD EXAMINER 
 
RE: EXAMINATION OF POTENTIAL ASSET MISAPPROPRIATION 
 
DATE: MAY 23, 2009 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
I.  Background 
 
On January 28, 2010, the fraud examination unit at Bailey Books received an anonymous 
telephone call on its fraud hotline from an unidentified man who claimed that he was a 
former supplier to Bailey. The caller alleged certain improprieties in the bidding and 
procurement process. 
 
Based upon this initial predication, a fraud examination was conducted, which included 
reviews of relevant records and interviews of appropriate personnel.  
 
II.  Executive Summary 
 
The fraud examination commenced when Loren D. Bridges, CFE, received a telephone call 
from an unidentified man who said that he had been a long-term supplier to Bailey for 
sundry office supplies and paper. The caller said that ever since Linda Reed Collins had 
taken over as Purchasing Manager, he had been gradually “squeezed out” from doing 
business with Bailey.  
 
Linda Reed Collins has been employed in the purchasing department of Bailey Books since 
June 1, 2005. She was promoted to Purchasing Manager effective November 8, 2007.  
 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1103 
The Fraud Examination Team reviewed selected purchases from 2007 to 2008 and 
conducted interviews of key participants and Bailey employees who we believed may have 
information regarding the misappropriation of assets. The Team reviewed purchasing 
guidelines, personnel files of interviewees, and various financial documents relating to both 
Bailey Books and Linda Reed Collins.  
 
After obtaining sufficient documentation, the Team interviewed Linda Reed Collins, who 
gave a full signed confession to her misdeeds.  
 
III.  Scope 
 
The objective of the Fraud Examination Team was as follows: 
• Determine the existence of a possible misappropriation of assets of Bailey Books, 
Incorporated. The examination is predicated upon an anonymous telephone call alleging 
improprieties on the part of Linda Reed  Collins, Bailey’s purchasing manager. 
 
IV.  Approach 
 
Fraud Examination  Team Members 
Loren D. Bridges, CFE, Bailey Books;  Tonya Vincent, CFE, Bailey Books 
 
Procedures 
As part of the examination of this matter, the Team took the following actions: 
• Obtained, reviewed, and analyzed memoranda pertaining to the anonymous call 
described previously. 
• Obtained, reviewed, and analyzed Bailey Books’ financial documentation, including 
purchase records, invoices, and canceled checks. 
• Obtained, reviewed, and analyzed records from the St. Augustine County Courthouse 
regarding civil actions in which Edward J. Collins and Linda Reed Collins were named; 
records from the Florida Secretary of State’s Office regarding Collins Marine 
Corporation; records of chattel mortgages held by Linda Reed Collins and Edward J. 
Collins; financial records from Dun & Bradstreet regarding Collins Marine Corporation; 
and public records regarding the financial condition of Linda Reed Collins and Edward J. 
Collins. 
• Conducted surveillance activity in order to determine whether the two key individuals in 
the matter were involved in an illicit relationship. 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1104   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Individuals Interviewed:  The following individuals were interviewed in person by members of 
the Fraud Examination Team: 
• Mark W. Steinberg, CPA (Chief Financial Officer, Bailey Books) 
• Roger Donald McGuire (Purchasing Agent, Bailey Books) 
• Mary Rodriguez De La Garza (Purchasing Agent, Bailey Books) 
• Sara Louise Dawson (Former Employee, Bailey Books) 
• Thomas C. Green (Attorney, Sharp, Green and Langfrom, P.A.) 
• Lincoln S. Wyzokowski (General Counsel, Bailey Books) 
• Becky Robinson (Accounts Payable Clerk, Bailey Books) 
• Ernie Quincy (Warehouse Manager, Bailey Books) 
• David Levey (Director of Sales, Jerrico International Paper Company) 
• James R. Nagel (Sales Representative, Orion Corporation) 
• Owen Stetford (Chief Financial Officer, Orion Corporation) 
• Linda Reed Collins (Purchasing Manager, Bailey Books) 
 
V.  Findings 
 
Based on the documents reviewed, information collected, and interviews conducted during 
the course of the fraud examination, the Team finds as follows: 
• Did the Fraud Examination Team determine the existence of a possible 
misappropriation of assets of Bailey Books Incorporated?  
 
Yes. The documents and information reviewed and interviews conducted by the Fraud 
Examination Team during the course of the examination indicate that Linda Reed Collins, 
together with James R. Nagel, did knowin gly embezzle approximately $197,773 from Bailey 
Books over four years. During the fraud examination, the Team analyzed financial 
documents and conducted interviews to corroborate the statements of an anonymous caller. 
The following is a summary of the evidence and information supporting the Fraud 
Examination Team’s findings: 
 
On January 28, 2010, an anonymous call was received by the fraud hotline at Bailey Books, 
Incorporated, from a former supplier to Bailey Books. The caller alleged that after Linda 
Reed Collins took over as Purchasing Manager in 2007, she eliminated him as a supplier. A 
subsequent review of purchases made by Bailey Books from 2007 to 2009 showed that a 
continuously increasing share of the company’s paper business was being given to Orion 
Corp., even though Orion submitted written bids in only 63 percent of the cases. 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1105 
On February 1, 2010, Mark W. Steinberg, CF O of Bailey Books, Inc., was interviewed. The 
purpose of the interview was to inform him of the proposed fraud examination, obtain his 
approval, and secure information from him regarding the purchasing process at Bailey 
Books. In addition to summarizing his responsibilities regarding purchasing at Bailey Books, 
Mr. Steinberg stated that in December 2007 he  sent a memo to all the division heads at 
Bailey Books informing them that all purchases over $50,000 would from then on require at 
least three written bids. 
 
We next examined the personnel records. A review of Linda Reed Collins’s file showed only 
that she had been consistently rated “exceptional” by her supervisors in annual reviews.  
 
On February 4, 2010, an interview was conducted with Roger Donald McGuire, Purchasing 
Agent at Bailey Books. After summarizing the purchasing process at Bailey Books, he stated 
that he had no knowledge of any improprieties committed by Ms. Collins. 
 
The next interview conducted was with Mary Rodriguez De La Garza, a coworker of Ms. 
Collins’s in the Purchasing Department at Ba iley Books. During the interview Ms. De La 
Garza stated that, regarding the purchasing process, it is sometimes not practical to obtain 
bids, such as in emergency situations or when they are short on time. She went on to reveal 
that she had suspected Ms. Collins was having an affair with James R. Nagel, the salesman 
for Orion Corp. In addition, Ms. De La Garz a said she believed that Ms. Collins and her 
husband were having marital and financial problems. She also mentioned that Sara Louise 
Dawson, a former employee under Ms. Collins, had left on bad terms. 
 
The next interview was with Sara Louise Daws on, who wanted to consult with her attorney 
before making an official statement. Ms. Dawson’s attorney, Thomas C. Green, later 
contacted the Fraud Examination Team to let them know that Ms. Dawson was interested in 
making a statement, but only in exchange for an indemnity against all claims arising out of 
her cooperation. After meeting with Mark Steinberg and Lincoln S. Wyzokowski, General 
Counsel at Bailey Books, Ms. Dawson’s and Mr. Green’s proposal was accepted. 
 
On March 3, 2010, Ms. Dawson made her statement, which included the following: 
• After Ms. Collins was promoted to Purchasing  Manager, she began favoring Orion Corp. 
for paper purchases. 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1106   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• On two occasions in 2009, Ms. Collins author ized prepayment on substantial purchases 
from Orion, even though Ms. Dawson had complained about Orion’s poor quality and 
service. Later Ms. Dawson found out that the orders were never received. 
• Other vendors had complained of being squeezed out of business with Bailey Books 
after Ms. Collins became manager. 
 
Ms. Dawson referred the Team to Becky Robinson in Accounts Payable for further 
information about the orders. Ms. Robinson was interviewed and provided copies of the two 
prepaid invoices to Orion Corp., the amounts of which were $102,136 and $95,637. In 
addition, Ms. Robinson said that Ernie Quincy in  Receiving would be able to verify if the 
two shipments had ever been received. 
 
On April 8, 2010, Ernie Quincy, the Warehouse  Manager at Bailey Books, was interviewed 
and verified that the two shipments in question were never received. The next day, copies of 
the two checks given to Ori on Corp. for payment of the goods that were never received 
were examined. 
 
An interview with David Levey from Jerrico International Paper Company yielded the 
following information: 
• At the time Levey began at Jerrico, Bailey Books was a major customer of theirs, but 
since then their sales to Bailey had dwindled. 
• Levey attempted to revive business with Bailey Books, but by then rumors were 
circulating about an inappropriate relationship between Mr. Nagel of Orion Corp. and 
Ms. Collins.  
• According to Levey, Mr. Nagel had a “bad reputation” in the industry.  
 
Ms. De La Garza phoned the Team on April 13, 2010, to let them know that Ms. Collins had 
plans to meet Mr. Nagel at the bar at the Ho tel Atlantic that afternoon. The Team set up 
surveillance of their meeting and reported that Ms. Collins and Mr. Nagel met at 5:55 p.m. 
and ordered drinks. They held hands under the table, kissed, and left the bar at 7:02 p.m. to 
go to room 652.  
 
A review of St. Augustine County records showed that Edward J. Collins (Ms. Collins’s 
husband) was a defendant in three civil actions. The circumstances of the actions indicated 
that the Collinses were having financial troubles. 
 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1107 
A review of the Florida Secretary of State’s records showed that the Collinses were the 
incorporators of Collins Marine Corporation. 
 
A review of UCC filings showed that the Collinses had three liens in their name. 
 
A net-worth analysis was performed on the Collinses based on information assembled from 
public records. It showed unexplained income of $31,632. 
 
In an April 19, 2010 interview, Mr. Nagel stated that his relationship with Ms. Collins was 
purely professional and denied any improprieties regarding Orion’s business with Bailey 
Books. Mr. Nagel also refused to provide any of  Orion’s financial information pertaining to 
the two invoices in question. 
 
On April 21, 2010, Owen Stetford, the CFO of  Orion Corp., was interviewed and stated he 
was unable to provide any copies of actual financial information, but that Orion had no 
record of any receipt of payment for the invoices in question, nor any record that such 
orders had been placed or shipped. In addition, Mr. Stetford said that Orion had no 
corporate accounts at Florida Marine National Bank, the bank at which the checks from 
Bailey Books were deposited. Mr. Stetford also stated that the correct corporate name is 
Orion Corporation, not Orion Paper Compan y, as the endorsements indicated.  
 
On May 1, 2010, Mr. Nagel was again interviewed. After being confronted with questions 
and evidence regarding the two payments and the bank account to which they were 
deposited, Mr. Nagel voluntarily gave a statement attesting to his involvement with Ms. 
Collins in the embezzlement of funds from Bailey Books. He attested to the following: 
• In 2009, Ms. Collins told Mr. Nagel that she would approve the payment of invoices 
to Orion Corp. for product that would not be delivered. Ms. Collins authorized the 
payment of two invoices in the amounts of $102,136 and $95,637, but no product 
was shipped on the invoices. Ms. Collins and Mr. Nagel established a bank account 
in the name of Orion Paper Company at Florida Marine National Bank and divided 
the proceeds of the invoices equally.  
 
On May 1, 2010, Ms. Collins voluntarily gave a statement, which included the following: 
• Ms. Collins stated that, starting in 2008, she accepted money from Mr. Nagel to 
ensure that Orion Corp. recei ved preferential treatment in supplying Bailey Books 
with stationery and paper products. On those occasions, she was aware that Bailey 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1108   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Books was not obtaining the best product at the lowest possible price from Orion; in 
other words, the price charged was substantially higher than market value. 
• Ms. Collins stated that on two occasions in 2009, she authorized the payment of 
invoices for $102,136 and $95,637 wi thout any receipt of merchandise. 
• Ms. Collins estimated that she had received in excess of $150,000 in connection with 
Mr. Nagel. 
 
VI.  Summary  
 
This report reflects that Linda Reed Collins, a purchasing agent for Bailey Books, Inc., 
furnished a signed statement on May 1, 2010, in dicating she had accepted at least $197,773 in 
commercial bribes and other illicit income in a conspiracy with James R. Nagel, an account 
representative for Orion Corporati on, St. Augustine, Florida.  
 
The statements made by Collins are corroborated by the documentary evidence and the 
interviews of other witnesses as described herein.  
 
VII.  Impact to Bailey Books 
 
Over the course of four years, Linda Reed Collins, in partnership with James R. Nagel, 
misappropriated an estimated $197,773 from Bailey Books, Incorporated.  
 
Additional amounts were lost due to Bailey’s overpaying for merchandise sold to it by Nagel. 
Those amounts have not been calculated.  
 
VIII.  Recommendations 
 
It is the policy of Bailey Books to report such matters to the appropriate authorities and to 
assist in criminal prosecution. A full review of internal controls should be conducted to 
determine how such incidents can be detected in the future. 
 
End of Report   
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1109 
SAMPLE FRAUD EXAMINATION REPORT 
[LONG FORM] 
 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
6200 Bayshore Drive 
St. Augustine, FL 32082 
 
 
Personal and Confidential 
 
May 23, 2010 
 
 
Lt. Jason Fishbeck 
St. Augustine Police Department 
382 Harbor View Circle 
St. Augustine, FL 32084 
 
Re: Linda Reed Collins (File 08-4422) 
 
Dear Lt. Fishbeck: 
 
Attached is my report of a fraud examination dated May 23, 2010, with respect to the above 
captioned matter. 
 
The report reflects that Collins, a purchasing agent for Bailey Books, Inc., furnished a signed 
statement on May 1, 2010, indicating she had accepted at least $197,773 in commercial 
bribes and other illicit income in a conspiracy with James R. Nagel, an account representative 
for Orion Corporation, St. Augustine. Orion is  a supplier of paper and related products to 
Bailey Books. 
 
If proved in judicial proceedings, Collins and Nagel could be in violation of Title 7, Section 
323A of the Florida Criminal Code (Commercial Bribery). 
 
It is the policy of Bailey Books to report such matters to the appropriate authorities, and to 
assist in criminal prosecution. Accordingly, we would be willing to supply assistance, 
documentation, and expertise to your department in the resolution of this case. 
 
If I might be of assistance, please do not hesitate to call. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Loren D. Bridges 
Certified Fraud Examiner 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1110   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
6200 Bayshore Drive 
St. Augustine, FL 32082 
 
 
Personal and Confidential 
 
May 23, 2010 
 
 
Mr. Hal B. Marlow 
Chief Executive Officer 
Bailey Books Incorporated 
6200 Bayshore Drive 
St. Augustine, FL 32082 
 
Re: Linda Reed Collins 
 
Dear Mr. Marlow: 
 
We have conducted a fraud examination concerning a possible misappropriation of assets of 
Bailey Books, Incorporated. This examination was predicated upon an anonymous telephone 
call alleging improprieties on the part of Lind a Reed Collins, Bailey’s purchasing manager. 
 
Our examination was conducted in accordance with lawful fraud examination techniques, 
which include—but are not limited to—exa mination of books and records, voluntary 
interviews with appropriate personnel, and other such evidence-gathering procedures as 
necessary under the circumstances. 
 
During the pendency of this examination, Ms. Collins and her confederate, James R. Nagel 
of Orion Corporation, voluntarily furnished signed statements indicating that they 
misappropriated at least $197,773 to their personal benefit.  
 
Based upon the results of our examination and the confessions of Ms. Collins and 
Mr. Nagel, these actions, if proved in a court of  law, could constitute a violation of criminal 
and/or civil law. 
 
Very truly yours, 
 
 
Loren D. Bridges 
Certified Fraud Examiner 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1111 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Linda Reed Collins has been employed in the purchasing department of Bailey Books since 
June 1, 2005. She was promoted to Purchasing Manager effective November 8, 2007.  
 
On January 28, 2010, the fraud examination unit at Bailey Books received an anonymous 
telephone call from an unidentified man who claimed that he was a former supplier to 
Bailey. The caller alleged certain improprieties in the bidding and procurement process. 
 
Based upon this initial predication, a fraud examination was conducted, which included 
reviews of relevant records and interviews of appropriate personnel. The fraud examination 
revealed multiple purchases by Bailey Books from Orion Corporation, the amount of which 
has increased significantly from 2007 to the present. 
 
Interviews of Bailey personnel indicated that Ms. Collins might have a personal relationship 
with Mr. Nagel, an account representative of Orion Corporation. On May 1, 2010, Nagel 
and Collins were interviewed. Both furnished voluntary signed statements indicating that 
they had appropriated at least $197,773 from Bailey by establishing a fictitious vendor to 
which Bailey’s checks were directed. The checks purported to be for supplies purchased by 
Bailey when in fact no supplies or other items were purchased for this amount. Nagel and 
Collins used the proceeds for their personal benefit. 
 
As reflected by the attached letter dated May 23, 2010, based on all the evidence, Collins and 
Nagel could be in violation of Florida criminal and/or civil laws. 
 
 
Loren D. Bridges 
Certified Fraud Examiner 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1112   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
INDEX TO REPORT 
 
ITEM                         PAGE 
Memorandum of Predication .....................................................................................................   1  
Review of Selected Purchases ....................................................................................................  2 
Interview of Mark W. Steinberg.................................................................................................   4 
Purchasing Guidelines .................................................................................................................  5 
Review of Personnel Files ...........................................................................................................   6 
Interview of Roger Donald McGuire  ......................................................................................  7 
Interview of Mary Rodriguez De La Garza  ........... .................................................................  8 
Interview of Sara Louise Dawson  ............................................................................................  10 
Conversation with Thomas C. Green, Attorney .....................................................................  11 
Meeting with Mark W. Steinberg ...............................................................................................  12 
Interview of Sara Louise Dawson  ............................................................................................  13 
Interview of Becky Robinson  ....................................................................................................  15 
Orion Invoice ................................................................................................................. ..............  16 
Orion Invoice ................................................................................................................. ..............  17 
Interview of Ernie Quincy ..................................................................................................... .....  18 
Review of Checks Payable to Orion ..........................................................................................  1 9 
David Levey Interview ......................................................................................................... .......  22 
Interview of Mary Rodriguez De La Garza  ........... .................................................................  23 
Surveillance Log .............................................................................................................. .............  24 
Interview of Confidential Source ...............................................................................................  25   
Review of County Records .........................................................................................................  26 
Review of State Records .............................................................................................................  27 
Review of Chattel Mortgages ................................................................................................... ..  28 
Review of Dun & Bradstreet Records ......................................................................................  29 
Review of Public Records ...........................................................................................................  30 
Interview of James R. Nagel ................................................................................................... ....  31 
Interview of Owen Stetford .................................................................................................... ...  32 
Interview of James R. Nagel ................................................................................................... ....  33 
Statement by James R. Nagel ................................................................................................... ..  34 
Interview of Linda Reed Collins ............................................................................................... .  35 
Statement by Linda Reed Collins ...............................................................................................   36 
 
 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1113 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMO OF PREDICATION 
 
TO:        FILE (08-4422) 
FROM:  LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT:  ANONYMOUS TELEPHONE CALL 
DATE:  JANUARY 28, 2010 
 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
 
On January 28, 2010, at approximately 10:12  a.m., I received a telephone call from an 
unidentified man who said that he had been a long-term supplier to Bailey for sundry office 
supplies and paper. 
 
The caller—who refused to reveal his identity—said that ever since Linda Reed Collins had 
taken over as Purchasing Manager, he had been gradually “squeezed out” from doing 
business with Bailey. The caller declined to furnish additional information. 
 
Based on the predication supplied above, a fraud examination is being commenced. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 1) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1114   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO:   FILE (08-4422) 
FROM:  LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT:  REVIEW OF SELECTED PURCHASES FROM 2007 to 2009 
DATE:  JANUARY 30, 2010 
______________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
Attached is a schedule of purchases prepared from individual vendor files. The purchases 
reflect that Orion Corp. has recei ved an increasing share of the paper business from Bailey 
over the last several years, but has submitted written bids in only 63 percent of the cases 
over that period. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 2)
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1115 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
 Selected Purchases 2007 – 2009 
 
 
 
(Page 3) 
 
 
   % Increase 
(Decrease) 
% Increase
 (Decrease)
 % Increase 
(Decrease) 
  
Items 
  
Date of 
Previous 
Yr. 
Previous 
Yr. 
Prev 2 Yrs. 
Vendor  Purchased  Purchaser  2007  2008  2009  Last Bid  2008 – 2009  2007 – 2008  2007 – 2009  
Armour Books MRD $683,409 $702,929 $ 810,100 12/01/08 15.2% 2.9% 18.5% 
Burdick Sundries LRC 62,443 70,959 76,722 N/A 8.1% 13.6% 22.9% 
Canon Magazines MRD 1,404,360 1,957,601 2 ,361,149 11/03/08 20.6% 39.4% 68.1% 
DeBois, Inc. Paper LRC 321,644 218,404 121,986 06/08/08 (44.1%) (32.1%) (62.1%) 
Elton Books Books RDM 874,893 781,602 649, 188 07/21/08 (16.9%) (10.7%) (25.8%) 
Fergeson Books RDM 921,666 1,021,440 1,567,811 09/08/08 53.5% 10.8% 70.1% 
Guyford Magazines MRD 2,377,821 2,868,98 8 3,262,490 10/08/08 13.7% 20.7% 37.2% 
Hyman, Inc. Supplies LRC 31,640 40,022 46,911 10/22/08 17.2% 26.5% 48.3% 
Intertec Books RDM 821,904 898,683 959,604 11/18/08 6.8% 9.3% 16.8% 
Jerrico Paper LRC 486,401 111,923 93,499 08/04/08 (16.5%) (77.0%) (80.8%) 
Julian-Borg Magazines MRD 431,470 589,182 371,920 02/07/08 (36.9%) 36.6% (13.8%) 
King 
Features 
Magazines MRD 436,820 492,687 504,360 11/18/08 2.4% 12.8% 15.5% 
Lycorp Sundries LRC 16,280 17, 404 21,410 N/A 23.0% 6.9% 31.5% 
Medallian Books RDM --- 61,227 410,163 12/15/08 569.9% --- --- 
Northwood Books RDM 861,382 992,12 1 --- 12/07/07 --- 15.2% (100.0%) 
Orion Corp. Paper LRC 86,904 416,777 803,493 11/02/07 92.8% 379.6% 824.6% 
Peterson Supplies LRC 114,623 --- --- N/A --- --- --- 
Quick Supplies LRC --- 96,732 110,441 11/03/08 14.2% --- --- 
Robertson Books RDM 2,361, 912 3,040,319 3,516,811 12/01/08 15.7% 28.7% 48.9% 
Steele Magazines MRD 621,490 823,707 482,082 11/03/08 (41.5%) 32.5% (22.4%) 
Telecom Sundries LRC 81,406 101,19 3 146,316 N/A 44.6% 24.3% 79.7% 
Union Bay Books RDM 4,322,639 4,971,682 5,368,114 12/03/08 8.0% 15.0% 24.2% 
Victory Magazines MRD 123,844 141,909 143,286 06/09/08 1.0% 14.6% 15.7% 
Williams Sundries LRC 31,629 35,111 42,686 N/A 21.6% 11.0% 35.0% 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1116   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO:   FILE (08-4422) 
FROM:  LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT:  INTERVIEW OF MARK W. STEINBERG, CPA 
    CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
DATE:  FEBRUARY 1, 2010 
______________________________________________________________________________  
 
Mark W. Steinberg, CPA, Chief Financial Offi cer of Bailey Books, was interviewed in his 
office, Room 836, 6200 Bayshore, St. Augustine, FL. The purpose of the meeting was to 
advise Mr. Steinberg of the proposed fraud ex amination, to obtain his approval of the 
proposed plan, and to secure basic information from him on the purchasing function. 
 
Mr. Steinberg was advised of the nature of the anonymous allegations and the result of our 
initial vendor review. He also was informed of our plan to review personnel files and other 
internal company documents and to discreetly interview selected company personnel. He 
agreed to the above, asking that we conduct our examination quickly and in the least 
disruptive manner possible. He agreed that Ms. Collins and the purchasing department 
would not be notified of the examination until decided otherwise. 
 
Mr. Steinberg has been with Bailey Books, In corporated since 1994. Previously, he was 
Assistant Vice President for Financial Affairs fr om 1994 to 2002. He reports directly to Mr. 
Hal B. Marlow, President and CEO of the company. 
 
As CFO, all operating divisions, including purchasing, report to him. It is his responsibility 
to establish and supervise the monitoring of internal controls within the operating divisions. 
In general, Bailey follows the policy of obtaining bids on as many purchases as possible. He 
pointed out that the competitive nature of the retail book industry requires constantly 
obtaining the maximum product for the minimum cost. He has reiterated to managers on 
many occasions the necessity of cutting costs. 
 
Guidelines for purchasing procedures are set forth in Mr. Steinberg’s memorandum to all 
division heads and supervisors dated December 12, 2007. The memo calls for purchasers to 
obtain bids on all purchases of more than $50,000. However, purchases of more than 
$10,000 generally are expected to be bid unless a justifiable reason not to exists. A copy of 
the memo was provided by Mr. Steinberg, and is attached. The copy provided has been 
initialed and dated and is maintained in the evidence file, Room 874, Bailey Books. 
 
(Page 4) 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1117 
Bailey Books, Incorporated  
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO:   LINDA REED COLLINS, PURCHASING MANAGER 
FROM:  MARK W. STEINBERG, CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER 
SUBJECT:  PURCHASING GUIDELINES 
DATE:  DECEMBER 12, 2007 
______________________________________________________________________________  
 
The purpose of this memo is to establish guidelines for major purchases. 
 
Effective at once, purchasing will obtain at least three written bids for items of more than 
$50,000, in all cases. Bids also should be obtained for purchase amounts starting at $10,000, 
where practical. 
 
These bids should be maintained in the file for documentation purposes. 
 
If the lowest bid is not selected, a memo of justification should be prepared and approved by 
me before any purchase is made. You are to be  especially concerned with miscellaneous and 
sundry items, because these items are not price competitive. 
 
Any deviations from the above-stated policy must be approved by me. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 5) 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1118   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: REVIEW OF PERSONNEL FILES 
DATE: FEBRUARY 4, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Francis Morris, Personnel Manager, provided the personnel files of Linda Reed Collins, 
Mary Rodriguez De La Garza, and Roger Mc Guire for review. Pertinent data included: 
 
Mary Rodriguez De La Garza:  
Sept. 15, 2005 Mary Rodriguez De La Garza hired as administrative assistant at annual 
salary of $20,000 
Sept. 14, 2006 Merit salary increase to $22,000 annual 
Sept. 17, 2007 Merit salary increase to $24,500 annual 
Aug. 2, 2008 Transferred and promoted to purchasing agent at salary of $27,000  
Aug. 4, 2009 Merit salary increase to $30,000 annual 
 
Roger McGuire:  
Feb. 20, 2006 Roger Donald McGuire hired as  purchasing agent at salary of $28,000  
Feb. 22, 2008 Merit salary increase to $31,000 annual 
 
Linda Reed Collins:  
June 1, 2005 Linda Reed Collins hired as purchasing agent at salary of $28,500  
June 3, 2006 Merit salary increase to $31,250 plus participation in incentive plan 
Nov. 8, 2007 Promoted to Purchasing Manage r, salary increase to $36,000 annual,  
 plus incentives 
Nov. 10, 2008 Merit salary to $39,500 annual plus incentives 
Nov. 11, 2009 Merit salary to $43,000 annual plus incentives 
 
The personnel file reflected that Ms. Collins was consistently rated as “exceptional” by her 
supervisors in annual reviews. She has executed annual Conflict of Interest Questionnaires 
for 2005 through 2009 indicating that she and her spouse, Edward Collins, had no outside 
employment, investments, or interests with companies doing business with Bailey Books. 
 
The file did contain a copy of IRS form 668-W, Notice of Levy on Wages, Salary, and Other 
Income, dated June 2, 2006, indicating that Ms. Collins and her spouse owed federal taxes of 
$53,219.09. An IRS Release of Levy, indicating that the amount due had been paid in full, 
was filed December 18, 2009. 
 
(Page 6) 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1119 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF ROGER DONALD MCGUIRE 
DATE: FEBRUARY 4, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Roger Donald McGuire, Purchasing Agent, Bailey Books, was interviewed at his office, 
Room 537, 6200 Bayshore, St. Augustine, Florida. After being advised of the identity of the 
interviewer and the nature of the inquiry, Mc Guire voluntarily provided the following 
information. 
 
He has been employed by Bailey Books since 2006. He is a purchasing agent whose function 
is to purchase the book inventory. Purchasing policy guidelines require him to obtain bids 
for all purchases over $50,000. He said that bids are submitted in substantially all of his 
purchases of books, and that he estimates somewhere between 80 and 90 percent of his 
purchases are preceded by bids. 
 
Whenever he deviates from selecting the low bidder for a product, he writes a memo of 
justification to the file with approval from his manager. This does not happen on many 
occasions. The reasons for not obtaining bids for products include (1) emergency purchases; 
(2) sole-source purchases; and (3) time pressures. McGuire is aware that the other purchases, 
made by Mary Rodriguez De La Garza and Linda Reed Collins, are made under the same 
guidelines. 
 
He is not aware of favoritism regarding vendors. McGuire has received pressure from 
various vendors from time to time. Examples include “the hard sell” that many vendors try 
with purchasing agents; and occasional efforts by the vendors to get paid early so they can 
earn and collect their commissions. Every now and then, a vendor will attempt to give him a 
gratuity, such as a free case of liquor or a small gift. However, McGuire says he avoids any 
ties to the vendor, as such are prohibited by Bailey’s employee guidelines. 
 
He is unaware of any other purchasing employees making any exceptions to purchasing 
policy. McGuire thinks a great deal of his coworkers Mary Rodriguez De La Garza and 
Linda Reed Collins. He does not know whether they have accepted gifts or gratuities from 
vendors. McGuire thinks it is somewhat unusual that Ms. Collins reserves purchasing 
functions for herself, since hers is primarily a management function. He cannot explain why 
she has reserved this duty. He once volunteered to take over her accounts, but she said she 
would prefer to handle some of the purchasing function herself, to “keep her hand in the 
business.” 
(Page 7)  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1120   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF MARY  RODRIGUEZ DE LA GARZA 
DATE: FEBRUARY 5, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Ms. De La Garza was interviewed at her office in Room, 436, Bailey Building, 6200 
Bayshore, St. Augustine, Florida. After being advised of the identity of the interviewer and 
the nature of the inquiry, Ms. De La Garza vo luntarily provided the following information. 
 
She has been employed at Bailey Books since 2005. In 2008, she was promoted and 
transferred to the purchasing department. Ms. De La Garza’s function is to oversee the 
purchase of magazines and periodicals. She reports directly to Linda Reed Collins, the 
purchasing manager. The other employee in the department is Roger Donald McGuire. 
 
Ms. De La Garza said that she is familiar with operating guidelines of the purchasing 
function. She is required to get bids for all purchases of more than $50,000, and, whenever 
possible, for purchases for less than that amount. As a rule, the purchases are bid for all 
items $10,000 and more. 
 
In some instances, it is not practical or possible to obtain bids; this is especially the case with 
sundry purchases. In addition, whenever shortages of merchandise occur and time is of the 
essence, bids are not sought. For approximately the last year, she has observed that Orion 
Corporation, a supplier of paper to Bailey Books, has received most, if not all, of the paper 
business. The salesman for Orion, Jim Nagel, seems to be very persuasive in dealing with 
Linda Reed Collins, Ms. De La Garza’s boss. 
 
When asked if there were any vendors who received preferential treatment, Ms. De La Garza 
hesitated. She finally said that something was bothering her, and she did not know how to 
discuss it. 
 
When asked to explain, Ms. De La Garza said that she was concerned that any information 
she would offer might get back to Ms. Collins, and that she did not want to bring up false 
accusations. She said that there were several things that do not seem right. 
 
(Page 8) 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1121 
First, she said that Ms. Collins and her husband, Edward, had not been getting along for the 
past year or two. Edward has a charter boat business that has experienced serious financial 
problems, and she knew that Ms. Collins and he had been arguing over money. 
 
She has seen Ms. Collins come to work several mornings in the last few months with red 
eyes, and it appeared that she had been crying. On one or two occasions, when Ms. Collins 
has arrived upset, she had telephoned Nagel, and Ms. De La Garza thinks Nagel comforted 
her. 
 
Ms. De La Garza isn’t sure about the relationship between Nagel and Ms. Collins, but she 
does know that they are good friends. She is fairly certain that they have had lunch together 
on numerous occasions. Their friendship has been the subject of gossip and speculation; the 
office thinks that they are having an affair. 
 
Ms. De La Garza knows that Nagel has recei ved favored treatment as a vendor. Several 
months ago (exact date not recalled), she heard Ms. Collins call accounts payable and chew 
someone out who did not want to hand-cut a check for Nagel. She does not remember the 
exact circumstances, but she said that during the time she has worked at Bailey, Ms. Collins 
has never hurried up a payment for a vendor, with the exception of Nagel. 
 
Ms. De La Garza does not believe Ms. Collins is doing anything illegal; she thinks, however, 
that Ms. Collins’ judgment might be clouded by  Mr. Nagel, whom she describes as a very 
good-looking and charming man. 
 
When asked if anyone else had any knowledge of the business or personal relationship 
between Ms. Collins and Mr. Nagel, Ms. De La Garza replied that Sara Louise Dawson had 
worked on the Orion account before she left Bailey Books, within the last several months. 
She believes Ms. Dawson had a falling out with Ms. Collins, which prompted her to quit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 9)  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1122   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF SARA LOUISE DAWSON 
DATE: FEBRUARY 5, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Sara Louise Dawson was interviewed at her residence, 2051 Wisconsin Ave., Apt. 16, St. 
Augustine, Florida, on a confidential basis. After being advised of the identity of the 
interviewer and the nature of the inquiry, she voluntarily provided the following information.  
 
Ms. Dawson advised that she did not wish to answer any questions. She said that her 
employment at Bailey Books was a “closed chapter” in her life, which she did not wish to 
reopen. She described her relationship with Linda Reed Collins as “strained.” She said that 
she wished she could be of assistance because “certain things at Bailey just weren’t right,” 
but she had “to get on with her life.” 
 
After further discussion with Ms. Dawson, in which the importance of her cooperation was 
emphasized, she agreed to speak to her brother-in-law, an attorney, about whether she 
should provide any information. She insisted that any communication with her, including 
this interview, be kept strictly confidential. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 10) 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1123 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH THOMAS C. GREEN, 
 ATTORNEY 
DATE: FEBRUARY 6, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Thomas C. Green, an attorney with the law firm of Sharp, Green and Langfrom, P.A., 6600 
Bayshore Parkway, St. Augustine, called me at my office at 10:00 a.m. on the above date. 
 
Mr. Green said he had been contacted by Sara Louise Dawson, who had been referred by 
another attorney, regarding our request for an interview. 
 
Mr. Green said he had interviewed Ms. Dawson and that her information would be “most 
helpful” to our inquiry. Mr. Green said he would not permit us to interview Ms. Dawson 
unless the company provided her with an indemnity against all claims arising out of her 
cooperation, and agreed to pay his attorney fees to attend the interviews. 
 
Mr. Green would not provide any details about the nature of Ms. Dawson’s information. He 
reiterated that we “would not be disappointed.” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 11) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1124   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: MEETING WITH MARK W. STEINBERG, CFO, AND 
 LINCOLN S. WYZOKOWSKI, GENERAL COUNSEL 
DATE: FEBRUARY 6, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
After discussing the facts, Mr. Steinberg and Mr. Wyzokowski agreed to provide an 
indemnity agreement to Sara Louise Dawson for her cooperation in the fraud examination 
regarding the purchasing function of Bailey Books, Incorporated. Wyzokowski agreed to 
prepare the indemnity agreement and to set up the interview of Ms. Dawson through her 
attorney. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 12) 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1125 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
 TONYA VINCENT, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF SARA L. DAWSON 
DATE: MARCH 3, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Sara Louise Dawson was interviewed at the office of her attorney, Thomas C. Green, at 
Suite 400, 6600 Bayshore Parkway, St. Augustine. Mr. Green was present for the entire 
interview. After preliminary discussions about the nature of the inquiry, Ms. Dawson 
voluntarily provided the following information. 
 
Ms. Dawson was employed at Bailey Books Inco rporated in the Purchasing Department 
from February 2006 through January 2010. Her duties included the purchase of magazines 
and periodicals as well as sundries and paper products. In that capacity she worked for Linda 
Reed Collins from November 2007 until Ms. Dawson left the company. 
 
After Ms. Collins’s promotion, she began to favor Orion in paper purchases. Orion’s prices 
were high and the quality of service was marginal. Deliveries often were late or incomplete, 
requiring Ms. Dawson to expend considerable  time and effort in follow-up calls and 
correspondence. 
 
On two occasions near the end of 2009, Ms. Collins directed her to make substantial 
purchases from Orion and to authorize prepayment. The orders were not bid, and prices 
quoted were higher than available from other, more reliable suppliers. Bailey Books also had 
a policy against prepayment of orders. 
 
Ms. Dawson complained to Ms. Collins about Orion’s past performance and suggested that 
other vendors be allowed to bid. Ms. Collins responded that the paper was needed now, that 
there was no time for bids, and that the price differential was insignificant. Ms. Collins also 
said that prepayment was necessary so that Orion could rush the order. 
 
Ms. Dawson said that, in fact, there was no urgent need for the paper, but that, based on 
past experience with Ms. Collins, she believed it was fruitless to resist, and she complied with 
her instructions. 
 
(Page 13) 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1126   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Shortly thereafter she checked with the receiving department and learned that the order had 
not been received. She advised Ms. Collins, who seemed unconcerned. Ms. Dawson then 
prepared a letter for Ms. Collins’s signature reque sting immediate shipment of the order. Ms. 
Collins declined to send the letter, saying it was not necessary, as Orion had assured her the 
shipment would be received shortly. 
 
A few weeks later, Ms. Collins stopped by Ms. Dawson’s office and closed the door. Ms. 
Collins told her that, because of Orion’s “excellent service” and “loyalty” to Bailey Books, 
she wanted future purchases from them to be on a no-bid basis. Ms. Collins also instructed 
Ms. Dawson to prepay another order, in excess of $100,000 from Orion. 
 
Ms. Dawson does not remember the exact dates or amounts, but suggested Becky Robinson 
in Accounts Payable might be able to provide more information. 
 
Ms. Dawson knew that the previous Orion order had not yet been shipped and informed 
Ms. Collins. Ms. Collins became “nervous and jittery” and insisted she was mistaken. She 
again instructed Ms. Dawson to place the order; Ms. Dawson said she would need approval 
from higher up and an argument ensued. She did not place the order or talk to Ms. Collins 
again. At that time Ms. Dawson said she decided to look for new employment because her 
job had become too stressful. 
 
Ms. Dawson also advised that other vendors, including Jerrico, had complained about being 
“squeezed” out by Bailey Books. Ms. Dawson thought that Jerrico’s prices and service were 
superior to Orion’s, but Ms. Collins would not take their product. Ms. Dawson, through Mr. 
Green, agreed to further interviews, as necessary. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 14)
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1127 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF BECKY ROBINSON 
DATE: APRIL 8, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Becky Robinson, Accounts Payable Clerk, Bailey Books, Incorporated, was interviewed at 
her office, Room 513, Bailey Building, 6200 Bayshore, St. Augustine, Florida. After being 
advised of the identity of the interviewer and the nature of the inquiry, she voluntarily 
provided the following information. 
 
She has been employed by Bailey Books, Incorporated, since January 2004, and has always 
worked in the Accounts Payable department. Her job is to review invoices for processing 
before payment. She checks the invoice mathematics and extensions, sees whether 
merchandise has been received, and verifies that the invoice has been approved for payment 
by the department head.  
 
Ms. Robinson maintains the invoices. Canceled checks are maintained by Treasury (she 
thinks in Ms. Deborah Roth’s office). She provided copies of two invoices paid to Orion 
Corporation. The documents provided by her were initialed, dated, and secured in the 
evidence file maintained in Room 874, Bailey Books Corporation. Copies of the above-
 referenced documents are attached hereto. 
 
A review of the invoices provided reflect a notation on invoices dated November 16, 2009 
and December 5, 2009—in the amounts of  $102,136, and $95,637, respectively—that 
payment was made before the merchandise was received. Ms. Robinson recalls that Ms. 
Collins called her on two occasions and said that Orion was experiencing cash flow 
problems, and to keep them as a vendor, it would be necessary to give them the money up 
front. 
 
When Ms. Robinson told Linda Reed Collins that she was not supposed to approve payment 
before the merchandise had been received, Ms. Collins got agitated and told Ms. Robinson, 
“I am the senior purchasing official, and I am telling you to do what I say.” Ms. Robinson 
did as she was instructed, but did not follow up to see if the paper had been received. Ms. 
Robinson did not report these incidents. 
 
Ms. Robinson said that Ernie Quincy in Receiving would be able to tell whether the two 
shipments above had been received. 
 
(Page 15) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1128   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
ORION  
 
Orion Corporation 
2600 Industrial Drive 
St. Augustine, Florida 32086 
 
 
 
 
 
November 16, 2009 
 
INVOICE 
 
 
 
 
Bailey Books Incorporated 
6200 Bayshore Drive 
St. Augustine, FL 32082 
 
 
 
  1,075 packages of 80 lb. standard 
  white paper @ 95/m……………    $102,136 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TERMS: NET 30 DAYS 
 
 
 
(Page 16) 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1129 
ORION  
 
 
Orion Corporation 
2600 Industrial Drive 
St. Augustine, Florida 32086 
 
 
 
 
 
December 5, 2009 
 
INVOICE 
 
 
 
 
Bailey Books Incorporated 
6200 Bayshore Drive 
St. Augustine, FL 32082 
 
 
 
  1006 packages of 80 lb. standard 
  white paper @ 95/m……………    $95,637 
 
 
 
 
 
TERMS: NET 30 DAYS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 17) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1130   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF ERNIE QUINCY 
DATE: APRIL 8, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Mr. Ernie Quincy, Warehouse Manager of Bailey Books, was interviewed at his office, Room 
114, Bailey Building, 6200 Bayshore, St. Augustine. After being advised of the identity of the 
interviewer and the nature of the inquiry, Mr. Quincy voluntarily furnished the following 
information. 
 
A review of his outstanding invoices shows that two Orion invoices — dated November 16 
and December 5, 2009 — have not been received in the warehouse. He remembers that 
shortly after receiving the invoices in 2009, he called Ms. Robinson, who referred him to 
Linda Reed Collins. Mr. Quincy then called Ms. Collins about not having received the paper, 
and she told him not to worry about it; that they had an understanding with the supplier that 
the paper would be delivered later. 
 
Mr. Quincy thought that this situation was unusual, since no other shipments had been paid 
for in advance. He has been Bailey Books’ Warehouse Manager for 12 years. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 18)  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1131 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: CHECKS PAYABLE TO ORION PAPER COMPANY 
DATE: APRIL 9, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Margaret O’Boyle, Treasurer’s Office, Bailey Books, Incorporated, provided copies of the 
checks described below. A review of Bailey Books, Incorporated, canceled checks, 
numbered 10106 and 10107, reflected the following: 
 
Check No. 10106 
Date: December 12, 2009 
Amount: $102,136 
Payment for: Orion invoice dated November 16, 2009 
Endorsement: For Deposit to the Account of Orion Paper Company, 
Account No. 025269999 (stamped) 
Bank to which deposited: Florida Marine National Bank, St. 
Augustine 
Date deposited: December 14, 2009 
 
Check No. 10107 
Date: December 12, 2009 
Amount: $95,637 
Payment for: Orion invoice dated December 5, 2009 
Endorsement: For Deposit to the Account of Orion Paper Company, 
Account No. 025269999 (stamped) 
Bank to which deposited: Florida Marine National Bank, St. 
Augustine 
  Date deposited: December 14, 2009  
 
 
Copies of the fronts and backs are attached, and they have been initialed and dated. 
 
(Page 19) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1132   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Book Corporation
 6200 Bayshore Drive
 St. Augustine, FL 32085
 10106
 Pay to the Order of
 Dollars
 First National Bank
 1001 Main Street
 St. Augustine, FL 32080
 F o r
 | : 00135 | :  11490272210106  8967|:
 $
 3 5-099
 48 9
 Orion 102, 136.00
 One hundred two thousand one hundred thirty six and no/1 0 0
 Margaret O’Boyle
 FOR DEPOSIT ONLY Orion Paper Company Acct. No. 025269999 FLORIDA MARINE NATION
 AL BANK
 ST. AUGUSTINE
 DEC 14 2009
 Orion Invoice, 11/16 / 0 9
 Dec 12 2 0  09
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 20) 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1133 
 
Bailey Book Corporation
 6200 Bayshore Drive
 St. Augustine, FL 32085
 1 0 1 0 7
 Pay to the Order of
 Dollars
 First National Bank
 1001 Main Street
 St. Augustine, FL 32080
 For
 | : 001355 | :  11490272210107  8967|:
 $
 3 5-099
 48 9
 Orion95, 637.00
 Ninety five thous ad six hundred thirty seven and no/100
 Margaret O’Boyle 
FOR DEPOSIT ONLY Orion Paper Company Acct. No. 025269999 FLORIDA MARINE NATIONAL BANK
 ST. AUGUSTINE DEC 14 2009
 Orion Invoice, 12/5/09
 Dec 12 2009
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (Page 21)  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1134   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF DAVID LEVEY, 
 JERRICO INTERNATIONAL PAPER COMPANY 
DATE: APRIL 9, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
David Levey, Director of Sales, Jerrico International Paper Company, 2901 Island Ave., 
Philadelphia, PA 19530 was interviewed by telephone at his office. After being advised of 
the identity of the interviewer, he provided the following information on a voluntary basis. 
 
Mr. Levey assumed his present position in 2003. At that time Bailey Books, Incorporated, 
was a major customer, with sales in excess of $500,000 annually. Since then the volume has 
consistently dwindled. 
 
In January 2009, Mr. Levey met with Carl Sa nderson, the owner of Jerrico, and discussed 
how to revive the Bailey Books account. Both Mr. Levey and Mr. Sanderson had heard 
“rumors” in the industry that Jim Nagel of  Orion Corporation was “taking care of” Linda 
Reed Collins, Bailey’s Purchasing Manager. Nagel has a very poor reputation in the industry 
and was caught “paying off” on another account several years ago. Mr. Levey declined to 
provide any further details or to identify the source of his information. 
 
As a result of their meeting, Mr. Sanderson and Mr. Levey “decided to test the waters” at 
Bailey Books by submitting a bid at cost for a substantial quantity of Deluxe Bond and 
Standard White to see “if we could open the doors.” The offer was made at the end of 
January 2009, and was not accepted. Since then Jerrico does not even bother to bid and 
expects no further significant sales to Bailey Books. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 22)  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1135 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF MARY  RODRIGUEZ DE LA GARZA 
DATE: APRIL 13, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Ms. Mary Rodriguez De La Garza phoned and said that she had overheard a telephone 
conversation between Ms. Collins and Mr. Nage l. She heard Ms. Collins arrange to meet Mr. 
Nagel for drinks this afternoon after work. Collins is supposed to meet Nagel at the bar at 
the Hotel Atlantic in St. Augustine. Accordingly, a physical surveillance was established, as 
set forth in the following log. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 23) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1136   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: SURVEILLANCE LOG  
DATE: APRIL 13, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
On April 13, 2010, commencing at 4:50 p.m., surveillance was established at the Hotel 
Atlantic, 6583 Bayshore, St. Augustine, Florida. The results of the surveillance are as follows. 
 
Time Event 
  
4:50 p.m. Established surveillance in lounge.
 5:55 p.m. Linda Reed Collins and white male arrive at lounge and order drinks. 
Collins and unidentified male hold hands at table. 
6:20 p.m. Collins and unidentified male order another drink.
 6:27 p.m. Unidentified male and Collins kiss at the table.
 6:40 p.m. Break — surveillance terminated.
 6:44 p.m. Surveillance reinstituted. Twosome still at bar.
 7:02 p.m. Observed white male paying for drinks in cash. Twosome leaves, 
holding hands, and proceeds to Room 652 at Hotel Atlantic. Both 
enter. 
9:32 p.m. Collins and male leave Room 652. Male gets into a late model 
Chevrolet, silver in color, Florida license MNX-782, and departs. 
Collins gets into a Nissan Z, license NRC-130, and departs. 
9:35 p.m. Surveillance terminated.
  
(Page 24) 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1137 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: ANONYMOUS TELEPHONE CALL 
DATE: APRIL 16, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
A telephone call was received advising that Edward J. Collins and his wife, Linda Reed 
Collins, had the following debts with the below- establishments as of March 14, 2010. 
 
Account Total Balance Monthly Payments
 St. Augustine Bank $46,482 $2,361 
Sears $2,378 $281 
Marine Savings $110,232 $1,377 
Bailey Credit Union $14,826 $787 
MasterCard $10,041 $397 
American Express $5,990 Balance 
Norwood Corporation $3,892 $461 
Bally Fashions $1,436   $124  
   
 Total Fixed Payments $5,788 
 
The caller advised that Edward J. and Linda Reed Collins had held a joint checking account 
since 2000 at Sunshine Federal Bank. The account had an average balance of less than 
$1,000, and was frequently overdraw n. No other accounts were located. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 25) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1138   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: REVIEW OF RECORDS 
  ST. AUGUSTINE COUNTY COURTHOUSE 
DATE: APRIL 17, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Records of the St. Augustine County Courthouse reflected the following information 
regarding Edward J. Collins and Linda Reed Collins as of April 11, 2010. 
 
1. Edward J. Collins is a defendant in three civil actions as follows: 
 
a. Bertram Yachts, Incorporated vs. Edward J. Collins and Collins Marine Corporation, Case 
Number 00-4435. Bertram sued Collins individually and the corporation for 
nonpayment of $13,874 plus interest and attorney fees. The suit was filed April 
23, 2008, and alleges that Collins took delivery of a marine winch on March 4, 
2007, and that the amount is unpaid. The suit is still pending. Attorney for the 
plaintiff is Sherry T. Marshall, Cummins and Marshall, Vero Beach, Florida. 
 
b. Bradford L. Jenkins vs. Edward J. Collins et al, Case Number 01-0964. This suit 
alleges that on June 27, 2009, Jenkins paid a deposit for Collins’s charter boat, 
the Mistress, and canceled within the period provided by the contract. Collins’s 
check refunding the $3,500 was returned for insufficient funds. Collins did not 
make the check good. 
 
c. Bayview Bank vs. Edward J. Collins and Collins Marine Corporation, Case Number 01-
 5412. Collins was sued on April 21, 2009, for nonpayment of a working capital 
note with a current balance off $31,423. The note is unpaid. 
 
 
 
(Page 26)  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1139 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: REVIEW OF RECORDS 
  SECRETARY OF STATE 
DATE: APRIL 17, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
The Secretary of State’s Office, Tallahassee,  Florida, records reflects the following 
information about Collins Marine Corporation. 
 
The Corporation was formed on July 23, 2000. Lis ted as incorporators are Edward J. Collins, 
James B. Vickers, and Linda Reed Collins. Offi cers are the same. Registered Agent is Frank 
R. Bledsoe, Attorney at Law, 764 Fr ont Street, St. Augustine, Florida. 
 
The Corporation’s charter was suspended on February 15, 2008 for failure to pay $324 in 
franchise taxes to the state. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 27) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1140   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: REVIEW OF RECORDS 
  CHATTEL MORTGAGES 
DATE: APRIL 17, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
A review of Chattel Mortgages in St. Augustine County, Florida, reflects the following 
records concerning Linda Reed Collins and Edward Collins as of December 31, 2009: 
 
 Ori ginal
 Date Filed Lien  Holder Property Amount of Lien
     
3/12/07 St. Augustine Bank 2006 Mercedes 350SL  $65,000 
    
6/12/08 Bailey Credit Union 2007 Nissan Z  $21,505 
    
7/17/09 Norwood Corporation Stereo Equipment  $8,500 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 28) 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1141 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: REVIEW OF RECORDS 
 DUN & BRADSTREET 
DATE: APRIL 17, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Records of Dun & Bradstreet reflect the following information about Collins Marine 
Corporation as of December 31, 2008: 
 
 
 2006 2007 2008 
 
 
Sales 302,000 257,000 193,000 
 
Total assets 157,000 146,000 118,000 
 
Total liabilities 104,000 161,000 183,000 
 
Net income    41,000      -13,000     -63,000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 29) 
  
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1142   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
SUBJECT: REVIEW OF FINANCIAL CONDITION OF LINDA REED 
  COLLINS AND EDWARD J. COLLINS FROM PUBLIC  
 RECORDS 
DATE: APRIL 18, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
A review of the financial condition of Linda Reed Collins and Edward Collins, assembled 
from public records, reflects the following for the year of 2008: 
 
Income (net): 
 
Linda Reed Collins                                                $35,400 
Edward J. Collins  ______ 
 
 Total income:   $35,400 
 
Expenses: 
 
House payments  16,524 
Automobile payments 
 ’06 Mercedes  28,332 
 ’07 Nissan  9,444  
Stereo equipment  5,532 
Food (estimated)  4,800 
Utilities (estimated)  2,400 
 
 Total expenses:    67,032  
 
       
 Unexplained income:                                 $31,632  
 
 
 
 
(Page 30)  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1143 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
 TONYA VINCENT, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF JAMES R. NAGEL 
DATE: APRIL 19, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
James R. Nagel, Sales Representative, Ori on Corporation, was interviewed at his office, 
Room 5214, 2600 Industrial Drive, St. Augustine, Florida. After being advised of the identity 
of the interviewers and of the nature of the inquiry, Mr. Nagel voluntarily provided the 
following information. 
 
He has been a salesman for Orion since October 1999. He sells stationery and paper stock 
to a variety of business enterprises, including Bailey Books, Incorporated. Bailey is not his 
largest account. 
 
Mr. Nagel acknowledges that he knows Linda Reed Collins. He says their relationship is 
purely professional, and he has never socialized with her. He emphatically denies any 
improprieties of any kind, and says he has never offered any gratuities or kickbacks to 
Collins. 
 
Mr. Nagel claims the prices he charges Bailey are competitive, and that if Bailey is paying 
higher prices, it is because they are getting better products. He was presented with two 
invoices, dated 11/16/08 and 12/5/08, which reflect the payments for products that were 
not received. Nagel claims he does not know anything about any missing products, and that 
Bailey’s records were in error. He denies asking for payment in advance to help the cash flow 
of Orion Corporation. 
 
Mr. Nagel denied our request to review Orion’s books and records pertaining to the 
11/16/08 and 12/5/08 invoices, saying the information was “none of your business” and 
“proprietary.” He refused to answer any further questions without his attorney being 
present. 
 
 
 
(Page 31) 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1144   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
 TONYA VINCENT, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF OWEN STETFORD 
DATE: APRIL 21, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Owen Stetford, Chief Financial Officer, Orion Corporation, was interviewed in his office at 
2600 Industrial Drive, St. Augustine, Florida. Clifford Karchmer, Orion’s General Counsel, 
also attended the meeting. 
 
We advised Mr. Stetford and Mr. Karchmer of the nature of our inquiry and requested their 
cooperation. We had earlier asked Mr. Stetford to produce copies of Orion’s records 
pertaining to sales to Bailey Books when we telephoned to set up the interview. 
 
Mr. Stetford said that Orion Corporation was formed in 1971 by his grandfather and that the 
company is closely held. Mr. Stetford further stated that Orion is committed to the highest 
level of business integrity, that Bailey Books is a valued customer, and that he is anxious to 
cooperate as far as permitted by company counsel. 
 
Regarding our request to review Orion’s records pertaining to sales to Bailey Books, and in 
particular the invoices dated November 16 and December 5, 2009, Mr. Stetford said that he 
would be unable to provide us with access to the original records on the advice of counsel. 
However, he said he personally reviewed the records and told us that Orion had no record 
of any receipt of payment for the above invoices, nor any record that such an order had 
been placed or shipped. 
 
Mr. Stetford further advised, after reviewing our copies of the canceled Bailey Books checks 
payable to Orion for the above invoices, that Orion does not maintain any corporate 
accounts at Florida Marine National Bank. Furthermore, the correct corporate name is 
Orion Corporation, not Orion Paper Company, as the endorsements indicate. 
 
Mr. Stetford emphatically stated that neither he  nor any other corporate officer was aware of 
or condoned any improper activities regarding their sales. He said that he would direct Mr. 
Nagel to answer any questions regarding sales to Bailey Books Incorporated. 
 
In this regard, we again asked for permission to examine Orion’s records, particularly the 
account receivable records for the period November 2007 through March 2010. Mr. 
Karchmer said that he would take our request under advisement. 
 
(Page 32) 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1145 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
 TONYA VINCENT, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF JAMES R. NAGEL 
DATE: MAY 1, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
James R. Nagel was interviewed at the office of his attorney, Conrad Vance, of the law firm 
Vance, Selig and Reisman, Suite 1000, 1601 Harbor Drive, St. Augustine. Mr. Nagel was 
presented with copies of the checks endorsed “Orion Paper Company,” and asked about the 
bank account to which they were deposited. After hesitating for several moments, he quietly 
admitted to conspiring with Linda Reed Collins to have Bailey Books pay the fake invoices. 
At the conclusion of the interview Mr. Nagel voluntarily executed the attached statement. 
The original of this statement has been witnessed by Bridges and Vincent, and is maintained 
in the evidence file, Room 874, Bailey Books Corporation, 6200 Bayshore, St. Augustine, 
Florida 32082. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 33)
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1146   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
St. Augustine, Florida 
May 1, 2010 
 
I, James R. Nagel, furnish the following free and voluntary statement to Loren D. Bridges and Tonya 
Vincent of Bailey Books, Incorporated. No threats or  promises of any kind have been used to induce 
this statement. 
 
Since 1999, I have been a sales representative employed by Ori on Corporation. Since 2002, I have 
been responsible for paper sales to Bailey Books, Incorporated. 
 
In about January 2008, Linda Reed Collins, Manager of Purchasing, to ld me that she would require a 
“commission” on all sales to Bailey Books by Orion.  I advised my boss, Donald L. Marsh, Sales 
Manager, of Ms. Collins’s demand. Mr. Marsh and I reluctantly agreed to make the payments because 
we believed that it would otherwise be impossible to make any sales to Bailey Books. No other 
person at Orion was informed of Ms. Collins’s demand. 
 
The payments to Ms. Collins bega n about February 2008. Ms. Collins to ld me that she would inflate 
the prices paid to Orion in order to cover the kickbacks. Thereafter, approximately $51,000 was paid 
to Ms. Collins by Orion Corporation checks, payable to Market Research, Inc. Ms. Collins told me 
that Market Research, Inc., was a company she had established. The checks were recorded on 
Orion’s books as consulting fees, and were approved by Mr. Marsh and me. 
 
In about October 2009, Ms. Collins told me that she would approve the payment of invoices to 
Orion for product that would not have to be de livered. Ms. Collins thereafter authorized the 
payment of two invoices in the amounts of $102, 136 and $95,637, which were paid by Bailey Books, 
Incorporated, in December 2009. No product was shipped on these invoices. Ms. Collins and I 
established a bank account in the name of Orion Paper Company at Florida Marine National Bank 
and equally divided the proceeds of the above-mentioned invoices. Ms. Collins prepared my checks, 
which were then deposited to my personal checking account at Flagler National Bank in St. 
Augustine. I spent the proceeds on bills. Neither Mr. Marsh nor any other person at Orion was aware 
of the above activity. 
 
I make this statement in order to express my regret for having engaged in the aforementioned 
conduct, and promise to make restitution to the extent possible. I knew my conduct was wrong, but I 
felt it was justifiable at the time. I will try to pay any losses that have occurred as a result of my 
activities. 
 
I have read this statement, consisting of this page. I now sign my name below in the presence of the 
undersigned witnesses because the statement is true and correct to the best of my knowledge.  
 
Witnesses: 
_Loren D. Bridges _____ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ _ James R. Nagel _ _ _ __ _ __ _ __ _ _ __ _ _ 
 Signature                           
Tonya Vincent ______ _ __ __ _ _ __ _ __ _ ___ _ _ _   
                                                                      (Page 34) 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Fraud Examination Reports 
 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3. 1147 
Bailey Books, Incorporated 
 
 
MEMORANDUM 
 
TO: FILE (08-4422) 
FROM: LOREN D. BRIDGES, CFE 
 TONYA VINCENT, CFE 
SUBJECT: INTERVIEW OF LINDA REED COLLINS 
DATE: MAY 1, 2010 
________________________________________________________________________ 
 
Ms. Linda Reed Collins was interviewed on May 1, 2010, by Loren D. Bridges and Tonya 
Vincent. She voluntarily provided the attached signed statement. The original of this 
statement has been witnessed by Bridges and Vinc ent, and is maintained in the evidence file, 
Room 874, Bailey Books Corporation, 6200 Bayshore, St. Augustine, Florida 32082. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Page 35) 
Sample Fraud Examination Reports Investigation Appendix 
3.1148   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
St. Augustine, Florida 
May 1, 2010 
 
I, Linda Reed Collins, furnish the following free and voluntary statement to Loren D. Bridges and 
Tonya Vincent of Bailey Books, Incorporated. No threats or promises of any kind have been used to 
induce this statement. 
 
I am Senior Purchasing Agent for Bailey Books, Incorporated, and have been employed by Bailey 
Books since 2005. My job is to oversee the purchase of merchandise and other supplies for Bailey 
Books, Incorporated. As part of my job, I am to ensure that Bailey Books, Incorporated, receives the 
highest quality products at the lowest possible cost. 
 
Commencing in approximately February 2008, and continuing through the current time, I have 
accepted money from James Nagel, Sales Representative for Orion Corporation, St. Augustine, 
Florida. Nagel offered me money to ensure that his company received preferential treatment in 
supplying Bailey Books with stationery and paper products. 
 
On those occasions that I accepted money, I was aware that Bailey Books, Incorporated, was not 
obtaining the best product at the lowest possible price. The price charged for products delivered 
during the time I accepted money was substantially higher than market value. 
 
In November and December 2009, I authorized the payment of invoices of $102,136 and $95,637, 
respectively. These invoices were paid without the receipt of any merchandise. Nagel and I 
subsequently split the proceeds of these invoices equally between us. 
 
I estimate that I have received in excess of $150,000 in  connection with Mr. Nagel. I am not sure that 
anyone at Orion Corporation knew of our arrangement. No one at Bailey Books had knowledge of, 
or participated in, my scheme. 
 
I am aware that my conduct is illegal, and violated Bailey Books’ policies. I participated in this 
scheme because my husband and I were having severe financial problems due to his business. We 
used the proceeds of my conduct to pay off several personal and business-related debts that were 
past due. I am truly sorry for my conduct, and I promise to repay any resulting damages. 
 
I have read this statement consisting of this page. I now sign my name below because this statement 
is true and correct to the best of my knowledge. 
 
Witnesses: 
_Loren D. Bridges _____ ___ _ _ __ _ __ _ _ Linda Reed Collins _ _ _ _ _ ___ _ _ __ _ 
 Signature                           
Tonya Vincent ______ _ __ __ _ _ __ _ __ _ _  
 (Page 36)
  
 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Forms 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1201
SAMPLE FORMS 
Consent to Search
 
 
                          
                   (Date) 
 
                          
                   (Location) 
 
 I,     , having been informed of my Constitutional right not to have a 
search made of the premises hereinafter mentioned without a search warrant and of my right to 
refuse to consent to such a search, hereby authorize                           
and                              to conduct a complete search of my 
premises located at           . The above mentioned individuals are 
authorized by me to take from my premises any letters, papers, materials, or other property that they 
might desire. 
 
 This written permission is being given by me voluntarily and without threats or promises of any 
kind. 
 
                          
                   (Signed) 
 
WITNESSES: 
            
 
            
 
 This is to certify that on          at          , 
the individuals described above, conducted a search of           . 
I certify that nothing was removed from my custody. 
 
                          
                  (Signed) 
 
    Witnessed: 
                          
 
                          
 
 
 
Sample Forms  Investigation Appendix 
3.1202   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 CONSENT TO SEARCH 
 
 
On (date)            item(s) listed below were: 
               Received from 
               Returned to 
               Released to 
 
Name                        
Street Address                      
City                         
 
Description of 
Item (s):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Received by:                      
 
Received from:                      
 
Investigation Appendix  Sample Forms 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1203 
Telephone Recording Consent
 
 
                         
                  (Date) 
  
                         
                          (Location)  
 
 I,                           , 
          (Name) 
                                                                                                                            , hereby 
          (Address) 
authorize                      and 
 
                 , employees of 
 
________________________________________, to install a recording device on a telephone 
                           (Company Name) 
 
located at                         
            (Location) 
 
for the purpose of recording any conversation I might have on that telephone with  
 
             on or around         . 
                  (Name of Subjects)              (Date) 
 
 I have given this written permission without threats or promises of any kind. 
 
                         
                    (Signature) 
 
Witnesses: 
 
            
 
            
Sample Forms  Investigation Appendix 
3.1204   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Consent to Record
 
 
                         
                  (Date) 
   
                         
                          (Location)  
 
 I,                     , 
            (Name) 
                      , hereby authorize 
        (Address) 
          and            , 
  
representatives of ________________________________,  to place a Body Recorder on 
                       (Company Name) 
 
my person for the purpose of recording any conversation with          
 
            that I might have on or around      .      
          (Name of Subjects)              (Date) 
 
 I have given this written permission voluntarily and without threats or promises of any 
kind. 
 
                          
                 (Signature) 
Witnesses: 
 
           
 
           
 
 
 
 
 
  
Investigation Appendix  Sample Forms 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1205 
Customer Consent and Authorization for Access to Financial Records
 
 
I,         ,  (Name of Customer) attached to this form, hereby  
 
 
authorize the               
            (Name and Address of Financial Institution) 
 
                         
 
to disclose these financial records:  
 
to                          
         (Name of Persons) 
for the following purpose(s): 
                         
 
                        . 
 
 I understand that this authorization can be revoked by me in writing at any time before my 
records, as described above, are disclosed, and that this authorization is valid for no more than three 
months from the date of my signature. 
 
                         
   (Date)                (Signature of Customer) 
 
                         
                         
                     (Address of Customer) 
           
   (Witness) 
 
[ Note :  If a government authority is requesting the financial records, the Right to Financial Privacy Act may apply and 
additional notices and disclosures may be required.]  
Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters Investigation Appendix 
3.1206   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
BAILEY BOOKS, INCORPORATED 
 
Evidence Control Log
 
 
Bank Safe Deposit Box: __________________ 
           (Name of Bank) 
 
Evidence Control Center       
Location:_____________________   
 
REPOSITORY 
Office Safe/Vault       
 
Location:____________________________ 
 
Other:______________________________ Location:_____________________                              
(File Cabinet, etc.) 
    
 
 
(1) 
Signature of person(s) placing evidence in or 
removing from repository. If entry to facility 
for other reasons, briefly state in column 2. 
(2)
  
 
Reasons 
(3)
  
 
File Case No. 
 
ENTERED 
 
 Time       Date 
DEPARTED 
 
Time      Date 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Investigation Appendix  Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1301 
ENGAGEMENT CONTRACTS OPINION LETTERS 
Fraud Policy Review Proposal
 
[Date] 
 
 
 
Mr./Ms. [                    ] 
[Department] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Detection and Deterrence Review] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                  ]: 
 
Pursuant to our discussion, XYZ & Associates (X YZ) is pleased to present this proposal to 
the ABC Company (the Company) to perform a review of the Company’s policies and 
procedures to detect and deter fraud. 
 
This review is designed to assist in determining the Company’s procedures concerning 
adequate fraud detection and deterrence methods. This review cannot be relied upon to 
provide assurances that fraud does not or will not exist within the company. Rather, it is 
designed to highlight weaknesses, if any, in the existing system. A potential review by XYZ 
would also provide management with recommendations for a proactive fraud deterrence 
program. 
 
The fee for these services will be $______ plus ex penses, which include, but are not limited 
to, travel, telephone, photocopying, and facsimile charges. One half of the fee is due upon 
signing this letter and the other half upon delivery of the report. All expenses will be billed at 
the conclusion of each month and are due upon receipt. Any invoice remaining outstanding 
for more than 30 days will be subject to a rebilling charge. 
 
Please review this proposal. If this proposal  meets with your approval, please sign and return 
one copy along with your check for $ ______ in the enclosed envelope. If you have any 
questions, please do not hesitate to call. Thank you. 
 
Sincerely yours,  
 
Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters Investigation Appendix 
3.1302   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Fraud Examination Proposal 
 
 
[Date] 
 
 
[                    ], Esq. 
[Legal Department] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Examination] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                   ]: 
 
Pursuant to our discussion, XYZ & Associates (XYZ) presents this proposal to the ABC 
Company (the Company) to perform a fraud examination as a result of certain allegations 
that have come to the attention of the Company. 
 
Our examination will be conducted in accordance with lawful fraud examination techniques, 
which include, but are not limited to, examination of books and records, voluntary 
interviews of appropriate personnel, and other such evidence-gathering procedures as 
necessary under the circumstances. We cannot provide assurances that fraud, if it exists, will 
be uncovered as a result of our examination. 
 
The fee for this examination will be $ ______ per hour plus expenses, which include, but are 
not limited to, travel, telephone, photocopying, and facsimile charges. A retainer of  
$ ______ is due upon signing this letter. All expenses will be billed at the conclusion of each 
month and are due upon receipt. Any invoice remaining outstanding for more than 30 days 
will be subject to a rebilling charge. The hourly rate will be applied against the retainer. Once 
the retainer reaches a fully applied status, an additional retainer of $ _____ will be required. 
We estimate the entire engagement will not be more than $ _____, excluding any testimonial 
requirements. Any depositions or court appearances will be billed at the rate of $ _____ per 
hour. All outstanding invoices must be paid before any testimonial appearances. 
 
Please review this proposal. If it meets with your approval, please sign and return one copy 
along with your check for $ _____ in the enclosed envelope. If you have any questions, 
please do not hesitate to call. Thank you. 
 
Sincerely yours,  
Investigation Appendix  Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1303 
Fraud Policy Review Opinion 
 
 
[Date] 
 
 
Mr./Ms. [                    ] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Detection and Deterrence Review] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                   ]: 
 
Pursuant to your request, XYZ & Associates (XYZ) has performed a review of the policies 
and procedures of the ABC Company (the Company) for the purpose of reviewing their 
adequacy to detect and deter fraud. 
 
This review does not provide assurance that fraud does not or will not exist. Having 
completed the following steps, we have determined that in order to strengthen its fraud 
detection potential, the Company’s procedures need improvement in the areas outlined 
herein. 
 
Part of the purpose of an internal control system is to assure that the assets of the Company 
are properly safeguarded from employee or outsider misapplication. In addition, an adequate 
system of internal control contains detection methods so that if misappropriation takes 
place, the irregularity will come to the attention of those who can remedy the situation and 
take suitable action against it. An adequate system of internal control is not designed to 
prevent or detect a collusive fraud scheme among employees and/or management. Our 
review included some the following procedures: 
 
[In this section, brie fly describe the main procedures follo wed. For example]: 
 
a. We read the Company’s policy and procedural manual. 
b. Through interviews with personnel key to the operations at the Company, we 
determined if the existing policies and procedures were being followed. 
c. We charted the current flow of business transactions as they are being recorded at the 
Company. 
d. We compared the flow of transaction approval and recording with the policies and 
procedural manuals. 
Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters Investigation Appendix 
3.1304   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Page 2 
 
The following discrepancies were noted in ABC’s system of internal control: 
 
[In this section, explain briefly the differences between the established internal 
controls and those procedures followed by the company’s personnel.] 
 
Based on our review, we recommend the following changes be instituted in the Company’s 
internal accounting controls system: 
 
[In this section, make your recommendations.] 
 
In addition to the above recommendations, we suggest the Company consider the following 
proactive approach to fraud deterrence: 
 
[In this section suggest proactive steps such as: ] 
 
 An internal audit structure reporting to the board of directors 
 Active inquiry of fraudulent transactions 
 Hotlines 
 Annual conflict of interest statements  
 Annual review of employee expense accounts, etc. 
 
This report is not intended for general circulation or publication, nor is it to be reproduced 
for any purpose other than that outlined above. XYZ does not assume any responsibility or 
liability for losses occasioned to one or others as a result of the circulation, publication, 
reproduction, or use of our report contrary to the conditions of this paragraph. The validity 
of our report is predicated on the extent to which full, honest, and complete disclosure was 
made by all parties. 
 
We will be in contact soon to discuss the details of this report. In the meantime, please feel 
free to call with questions. 
 
Sincerely yours,  
Investigation Appendix  Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1305 
Evidence Does Not Support Allegation 
 
 
 
 
[Date] 
 
 
 
[                    ], Esq. 
[Law Department] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Examination] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                    ]: 
 
We have conducted a fraud examination concerning a possible [misappropriation of assets] 
of [Company Name]. This examination was predicated upon [information resulting from a 
routine audit of the company’s books by  the company’s internal auditors]. 
 
Our fraud examination was conducted in accordance with lawful fraud examination 
techniques, which included [an examination of  books and records; voluntary interviews of 
appropriate personnel; and other such evidence-gathering procedures as necessary under the 
circumstances]. 
 
Because of the nature of fraud, no assurances can be given that fraud does not exist. 
However, based on the results of our examination, we have found no evidence to support 
the conclusion that [the assets in question were misappropriated].  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters Investigation Appendix 
3.1306   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Evidence Supports Allegation 
 
 
 
[Date] 
 
 
 
[                    ], Esq. 
[Law Department] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Examination] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                    ]: 
 
We have conducted a fraud examination concerning a possible [misappropriation of assets] 
of [Company Name]. This examination was predicated upon [information resulting from a 
routine audit of the company’s books by  the company’s internal auditors]. 
 
Our fraud examination was conducted in accordance with lawful fraud examination 
techniques, which included [an examination of  books and records, voluntary interviews of 
appropriate witnesses/personnel, and other such evidence-gathering procedures as necessary 
under the circumstances]. 
 
Based on the results of our fraud examination, we find that there is sufficient evidence to 
support the conclusion that [assets in the am ount of $ _____ were misappropriated from the 
company’s bank account and that Mr./Ms. ______ appropriated these assets for his/her 
personal benefit].  
 
Please call me to set up a meeting at your earliest convenience so we can present you with 
the details of the evidence we gathered during our fraud examination. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Investigation Appendix  Engagement Contracts/Opinion Letters 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1307 
Inconclusive Evidence 
 
 
 
[Date] 
 
 
 
[                    ], Esq. 
[Law Department] 
[Company Name] 
[Address] 
[City, State, Zip Code] 
 
RE: [Fraud Examination] 
 
Dear Mr./Ms. [                    ]: 
 
We have conducted a fraud examination concerning a possible [misappropriation of assets] 
of [Company Name]. This examination was predicated upon [information resulting from a 
routine audit of the company’s books by  the company’s internal auditors]. 
 
Our examination was conducted in accordance with lawful fraud examination techniques, 
which included [an examination of books and records; voluntary interviews of appropriate 
personnel; and other such evidence-gathering procedures as necessary under the 
circumstances]. 
 
The results of our examination are inconclusive. Because of the nature of fraud, no 
assurances can be given that fraud does not exist. However, based on our examination, there 
is currently insufficient evidence to support the conclusion that [the assets in question were 
misappropriated]. 
  
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.101  




:


investig
analyz document
the fraud examin will usual obtain a great deal of documentari evid it is critic that
the examin understand the relev of thi evid and how it should be preserv and
present alwai keep in mind that document can either help or hurt a case depend on
which on ar present and how thei ar present the goal is to make certain that all
relev document ar includ and all irrelev document ar elimin mani
examin pai too much attent to document it is easi to get bog down in detail
when examin record and to lose sight of a simpl fact document do not make case
wit make case the document make or break the wit socal paper case often
confus and bore a juri
basic procedur in handl evid ar requir for it to be accept by the court
proof must be provid that the evid is relev and materi evid submit
must be properli identifi and it must be establish that the proper chain of custodi
wa maintain
the relev of document cannot be easili determin earli in a case for that reason all
possibl relev document should be obtain if thei ar not need thei can alwai be
return here ar a few gener rule regard the collect of document
obtain origin document where feasibl make work copi for review and keep the
origin segreg
do not touch origin ani more than necessari thei might later have to undergo
forens analysi
maintain a good file system for the document thi is especi critic when larg
number of document ar obtain lose a kei document is an unpardon sin and
can mortal damag the case document can be stamp sequenti for easi
refer
obtain documentari evid
documentari evid mai be obtain in a number of wai if both parti agre it is
possibl to obtain evid by consent thi is the prefer method consent can be oral or
written when inform is obtain from possibl advers wit or the target of the
examin it is recommend that the consent be in write sampl form ar contain
analyz document investig
3102 2011 fraud examin manual
in the appendix to the report write chapter in mani case howev the investig
will not wish to alert the suspect to hi intent and other rout must be taken
if the evid is own by and in the control of the parti that request the inform
eg in an employe desk drawer at the offic then the investig is usual abl to
obtain the document as requir
if howev evid is held by other parti or in uncontrol locat specif legal
action is requir most often the legal process us take the form of a subpoena or other
court order to produc the document and record includ electron record other
form of court order can be us to obtain wit evid and statement
under no circumst should the investig attempt to obtain document by other
mean as thi can lead to charg of theft trespass and other sanction further detail ar
provid in the law section of the fraud examin manual
type of evid
there ar two basic type of admiss evid direct or circumstanti direct evid
show prima faci the fact at issu it prove the fact directli what constitut direct
evid depend on the factor involv for exampl in the linda reed collin case
involv possibl kickback which is includ in the appendix to thi section direct
evid might be a check from the vendor to her
circumstanti evid is that which indirectli show culpabl in the case of a kickback
alleg against collin cash deposit of unknown origin deposit to her account around
the time of the suspect transact could be consid circumstanti evid
organ of evid
keep track of the amount of paper gener is on of the biggest problem in fraud
case it is essenti that document obtain be properli organ earli on in an
examin and that thei be continu reorgan as the case progress rememb it
is usual difficult to ascertain the relev of the evid earli in the case good
organ in complex case includ the follow
segreg document by either wit or transact in the first method the
examin take the list of name whether employe associ or wit and begin
assembl collect document by wit altern the fraud examin might find
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3103
it easier to organ the inform by group evid of the same or similar
transact togeth chronolog organ howev is the least prefer
method
make a kei document file a separ file that contain copi of certain import piec
of inform for quick access for easi access to the most relev document
period review the kei document move the less import document to backup
file and keep onli the most relev document in the main file
establish a databas earli if there is a larg amount of inform to process thi
databas can be manual or computer and access by keyword or bate stamp
number the databas should includ at a minimum the date of the document the
individu from whom the document wa obtain the date obtain a brief
descript and the subject to whom the document pertain
chronolog
a chronolog of event should be commenc earli in the case the purpos of maintain
a chronolog is to establish the chain of event lead to the proof the chronolog might
or might not be made a part of the formal report at a minimum it can be us for analysi
of the case and place in a work paper binder keep the chronolog brief and includ
onli inform necessari to prove the case by make the chronolog too detail you
defeat it purpos the chronolog should be revis as necessari ad new inform
and delet
the irrelev
todo list
anoth indispens aid is the todo list the list which must be updat frequent
should be kept in a stenograph pad or other perman ring binder to allow a cumul
record in a veri complex case the list can be broken into long and shortterm object
that which must be done eventu eg prove element of a particular count and that
which should be done tomorrow eg conduct an interview or draft a subpoena howev
organ some sort of list must be kept otherwis import point will be forgotten in the
lengthi case a sampl checklist is includ in the report write chapter
examin fraudul document
forg alter fabric and other suspici document ar regularli encount in
fraud case most busi legal issu or financi transact will produc a substanti
analyz document investig
3104 2011 fraud examin manual
amount of paper includ contract agreement will order form invoic and
statement these document can be evid in establish that a fraud wa commit in
determin the natur and scope of the fraud and in identifi the parti respons
the fraud examin is not expect to be a document expert he should howev be awar
of wai to spot phoni document and have knowledg of the capabl and limit of
forens examin in addit if the fraud examin suspect that signific document
ar phoni he should consid consult with an expert expert forens examin
conduct as a part of a fraud investig can contribut to it success in sever wai
expert examin result can assist in develop and prove the fraud theori who
did what and when thei did it
expert examin result can corrobor or refut statement by wit or fraud
suspect
have the result of expert examin befor interview can provid signific
leverag for the examin dure hi interview with fraud suspect even result in
admiss of guilt from suspect who ar confront with the factual evid
forens handwrit examin and comparison can result in the posit
identif of the writer or signer of a document sinc write is a consciou act the
identif might serv to prove that a particular act is intent or will proof of
intent is usual necessari to prosecut a wrongdoer successfulli
earli consult with an expert can prove valuabl
an expert assist can be of valu earli in an investig not just in prepar for a
trial fraud examin should consid consult with expert earli in their investig or
inquiri if thei suspect that signific document ar phoni or have been forg alter or
otherwis manipul mani time the scope of an investig can be narrow or
direct by elimin multipl suspect through handwrit examin the expert
find might solidifi the fraud examin theori of how the fraud wa commit or
thei can prevent wast effort by prove theori incorrect at an earlier stage see the end
of thi section for more inform about find help in document examin
type of forens document examin
there ar mani differ type of forens document examin howev most
examin more than 95 percent of all us feder bureau of investig laboratori
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3105
document examin for exampl concern signatur handwrit hand print or
document creat by a typewrit or word processor addition issu concern
photocopi and determin when a document wa prepar frequent aris fraud
examin should be awar that mani differ type of forens examin ar possibl
but that the follow forens examin could be of particular valu when a fraud
involv document
detect of forg signatur
identif of the writer of signatur handwrit and hand print
detect alter document
detect and restor erasur and erad
determin when a document wa or wa not prepar
detect counterfeit document and examin print document
detect and restor faint indent write
comparison of paper and ink
determin whether two sheet of paper came from the same tablet or pad of paper
examin of paper fold and sequenc of fold
comparison of torn or cut paper edg
restor of char and partial burn document
identifi the machin that made a photocopi and whether two copi were made on
the same machin
examin of facsimil fax copi
identifi the sourc of or alter to notari seal wax seal and cachet
detect the open and reseal of seal document and examin adhes
detect insert text in typewritten print or handwritten document
determin the sequenc of handwritten text signatur and typewrit
identifi rubber stamp impress
identifi mechan checkwrit and numberingdevic impress
handl document as physic evid
a document can be a piec of physic evid and not just a sourc of inform as a
piec of evid it should be handl carefulli and store properli in a seal initi and
date paper folder or envelop to avoid damag or contamin if necessari make a
work copi and preserv the origin document for submiss to a forens document
examin most forens examin will requir the origin document not a copi of it
analyz document investig
3106 2011 fraud examin manual
sinc most photocopi do not reproduc origin write typewrit or other featur
with suffici clariti or detail to allow adequ examin
when initi a document for futur identif do it in a noncrit area and us a
differ type of write instrument than wa us for the question write on the
document the examin should never write or make mark on the origin document
other than hi unobtrus initi for identif do not add new fold stapl it place
paper clip on it crumpl it or do anyth els that would affect or chang it origin
condit if store in an envelop be care not to write on the envelop and caus
indent on the origin document insid photocopi and laserprint document
should alwai be store in paper folder or envelop not transpar plastic envelop
which can result in the copi stick to the plastic and destroi some featur of the
document
chain of custodi
from the moment evid is receiv it chain of custodi must be maintain for it to be
accept by the court thi mean that a record must be made when the item is receiv or
when it leav the care custodi or control of the fraud examin thi is best handl by a
memorandum of interview with the custodian of the record when the evid is receiv
the memorandum should state
what item were receiv
when thei were receiv
from whom thei were receiv
where thei ar maintain
if the item is later turn over to someon els a record of thi should be madeprefer
in memorandum form all evid receiv should be uniqu mark so that it can be
identifi later the prefer wai is to initi and date the item howev thi can pose
problem in the case of origin busi record furnish voluntarili for them a small tick
mark or other nondescript identifi can be us if it is not practic to mark the origin
document it should be place in a seal envelop which should then be initi and date
preserv for fingerprint examin
if fingerprint examin ar anticip us glove to handl the document be care if
tweezer ar us becaus thei can leav indent that might obscur faint indent
write or the identifi indent that ar sometim left by photocopi and fax
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3107
machin if you or other known peopl have inadvert handl the document with
bare hand your name should be provid to the fingerprint specialist it might be
necessari to provid the expert with set of ink fingerprint of these peopl for
elimin purpos see the fingerprint section for addit inform
char or partial burn document
these document might contain valuabl evid if restor by expert but thei ar veri
fragil and should be handl with extrem care for proper preserv and storag
train expert might us special polyest film sheet and envelop which ar not readili
avail to the fraud examin the examin can best preserv such evid for
submiss to the forens expert by us a sturdi crushproof contain into which he
place layer of cotton avail in roll at fabric and sew materi shop carefulli slide
a sheet of paper or thin cardboard under the burn fragment lift them and place them on
the layer of cotton then remov the paper us for lift gentli place addit layer of
cotton over the fragment until the contain is fill do not compress the cotton seal the
contain initi and date it add an identifi content label or exhibit number and clearli
write or stamp fragil on the contain
recogn phoni document
forens document examin appli scientif method and us a varieti of technic
instrument in conduct examin and comparison of document individu minut
characterist in handwrit and typewrit ar examin and compar with genuin
comparison standard detail analys ar made of document featur for proof of
chang or modif instrument us includ sensit measur devic lowpow
magnifi glass sever type of microscop ultraviolet and infrar light optic
filter micro and macro photographi computer imageenhanc system sensit
instrument to detect faint indent write and numer other variou chemic
analys ar also conduct
although not expect to be a document expert an observ fraud examin might be
abl to recogn some featur of document that could alert him to their fraudul natur
signatur forgeri might be recogn by irregular notic in the written letter
andor by their differ in size from a genuin signatur a sidebysid comparison
with a genuin signatur might reveal the differ howev rememb that advanc
ag poor health temporari injuri and the us of drug and alcohol can result in similar
discrep and might mislead the examin genuin comparison sampl should be
analyz document investig
3108 2011 fraud examin manual
obtain and a forens document examin consult to make an expert determin
see the how to obtain handwrit sampl section
substitut page in multiplepag document such as contract and will can often be
spot by hold each page in front of a bright light differ in the white
densiti thick opac and paperfib pattern of the substitut sheet might be
appar
some ink differ alter erasur and obliter ar also reveal by hold the
paper in front of a bright light or hold a light over the write at differ angl and
observ differ in the color and reflect of the ink or disturb to the paper
surfac
counterfeit print document such as check stock and bond certif busi form
and stationeri birth certif driver licens and other identif document ar
sometim readili disclos by sidebysid comparison with correspond genuin
document be alert for the us of incorrect or differ version or form revis of
the document for forens examin it will be necessari to obtain and furnish
genuin comparison sampl of the print document to the document examin see
the counterfeit print document section
suspici indent write might be reveal by reduc the light in the room and hold
a bright beam of light a narrowbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp will do the
job low and parallel to the page surfac see the indent write section
identifi write
the develop of a person handwrit usual begin at an earli ag as part of hi
formal educ socal copybook style ar taught and the student ar instruct
through exercis to emul as nearli as possibl those letter format howev from
the veri begin the student write skill vari consider due to their differ
physic and mental capabl these differ between individu increas with ag
physic develop and the acquisit of skill differ aesthet valu differ in
educ and differ in the person and profession usag of write as a result each
person write contain a uniqu and identifi combin of acquir individu
person characterist and share class characterist forens document examin ar
train and experienc in examin and compar write and assess thi combin
of individu and class characterist in make expert determin of ident or
nonident
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3109
class characterist
fraud examin should not be misl in develop suspect by mistak similar class
characterist in differ write sampl sampl that seem to look alik ar not necessarili
from the same individu the write of some peopl might share superfici similar in
appear and style and look the same to the layman when in fact thei ar veri differ
forens document examin can correct thi mistak
copybook style
some of a writer letter shape handwrit tyle and other characterist might be share
by other writer becaus thei were taught the same origin copybook system in the unit
state differ state and differ school district within the state teach sever differ
copybook system internation differ system ar also taught writer might retain
remnant of the system thei learn as children as an exampl secondlanguag write of
peopl taught in a cyril russian alphabet style will be influenc by cyril letter style
and might contain some similar as anoth exampl the hand print and numer
style taught to draftsmen architect and engin might result in appar similar in
the hand print of peopl train in those profess
copycat style
some writer especi adolesc the young and the easili influenc might adopt the
gener handwrit style or some individu letter design of a respect teacher or parent
or on share by their peer an exampl is the exagger round letter form and
circular i dot and period that form the socal bubbl write of some adolesc
femal thi style is usual abandon as the person matur
natur variat disguis distort and forgeri
variat
no on sign hi signatur or write exactli the same wai twice becaus write is a human
act of coordin mental and muscular activ not the precis repetit action of a
machin howev each writer ha hi own fairli specif rang of natur variat sever
exampl of write ar necessari for a forens document examin to establish if a
question write is or is not within the rang of natur variat of a particular writer if
fraud examin find two signatur that ar exactli alik then at least on is a forgeri
probabl a trace
analyz document investig
3110 2011 fraud examin manual
disguis
disguis is the consciou intent effort by a person to chang or conceal hi normal
write disguis is attempt in an effort to prepar write that can later be disclaim or
that the writer hope will be anonym and cannot be trace to the sourc the success of
an attempt to disguis write depend on the writer skill and knowledg of write most
attempt at disguis involv on or more of the follow chang in slant chang in size
chang in shape of capit uppercas letter chang in the shape and size of loop in
letter that contain them us of bizarr letter design or block squar hand print onli
rare is the opposit nonwrit hand us fraud examin should be awar that it is
possibl to successfulli disguis write to the point that thei cannot be posit
identifi even by expert thi is especi true when onli limit amount of write
ar involv
distort
distort ar unintent chang to a person write that ar beyond hi rang of
natur variat distort can be caus by temporari impair due to ill injuri to
the write hand or arm substanc abus extrem physic weak unusu write
environ irregular or unusu write surfac or unfamiliar write materi or might
be perman due to extrem ag and feebl fraud examin should be awar that
distort in write can on occas be so sever that posit identif of a
person write might not be possibl even by expert
forgeri
a forgeri is defin as ani write prepar with the intent to deceiv or defraud most
forgeri ar signatur forgeri can be done by simul by trace or by freehand prepar
simul and trace forgeri
a simul or trace forgeri is a write usual a signatur prepar by carefulli copi
or trace a model exampl of anoth person write although identifi as a forgeri a
simul or trace signatur forgeri often doe not contain enough normal handwrit
characterist of the forger to permit expert identif
rememb no on write hi signatur exactli the same wai twice if two signatur look
exactli alik try superimpos the signatur area of the two document by hold them in
front of a bright light if thei precis match then on or both ar trace forgeri be
awar that in some instanc it might be possibl to locat the origin document bear the
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3111
genuin signatur that wa trace thi regularli occur in employe fraud and
embezzl case in bank and other financi institut where the account holder
signatur card on file serv as the sourc for the trace if the forg signatur precis
superimpos over the genuin signatur then it is also like that faint indent might
be present in the signatur area of the origin genuin document also ink trace from the
genuin signatur might be transfer to the revers side of the trace signatur latent
fingerprint treatment of the origin sourc document might reveal the fingerprint of
the suspect
freehand forgeri
a freehand forgeri occur when a writer sign the name of anoth person without know
what the real person signatur look like the writer of freehand forgeri can usual be
identifi by expert
autoforgeri
the truenam signatur of a person prepar by him in a distort or disguis fashion in
order to later deni it and disclaim it as genuin thi attempt at fraud ha occur in fals
report travel check theft case in case involv disput home mortgag and other
loan document credit card fraud and other
the document expert find
a forens document examin cannot determin with accuraci the writer ag sex race
which hand wa us physic or mental condit person or charact from
handwrit examin there ar three basic outcom of forens handwrit
comparison
nonidentif
the suspect person did not write the signatur or other write on the question
document
identif
the suspect person did write the signatur or other write on the question document
analyz document investig
3112 2011 fraud examin manual
inconclus
no definit determin were possibl as to whether the suspect person did or did not
write the signatur or other write on the question document thi outcom is often the
result of insuffici or inadequ handwrit sampl of the suspect or when a photocopi
rather that the origin document is submit to the expert for examin
though inconclus some write might contain suffici characterist in common to
indic possibl ident or suffici differ to indic that the suspect person
might not have prepar the write the expert might suggest addit lead for the
fraud examin that could resolv the inconclus result of the comparison
how to obtain handwrit sampl
posit result from forens handwrit examin and comparison often depend on
how well the fraud examin ha assembl adequ handwrit and signatur sampl of
the suspect for submiss to the forens expert the sampl must be compar to the
write on the evid document hand print cannot be compar with handwrit
capit letter cannot be compar with small letter the sampl must contain the same
letter and combin of letter whether undict or dictat for exampl john
cannot be compar with susan hot with c old black with white or juli with
septemb
undict write sampl
try to obtain sampl of a suspect or victim signatur or other write that were not
prepar by him specif for comparison purpos but that can be authent court
will accept as authent comparison document ani write that were wit by other
also accept ar document that were creat in the normal cours of busi such as
cancel check sign or written document in employe personnel record applic
for employ licens or home util instal and mani other the fraud
examin should us person experi and knowledg of the suspect routin activ
in locat sourc for these type of sampl
when the evid document includ suspect forg signatur sever genuin sampl
of the forgeri victim signatur should be obtai ned for submiss to the expert if possibl
includ ani document bear genuin signatur of the victim that the suspect might
have had access to and that might have serv as a model for trace or simul
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3113
undict write sampl should
be as contemporan as possibl to the date of the evid document if the
question write were prepar in the 1970 write recent prepar by a suspect
might not be adequ for comparison howev except for infirm or extrem ag
the write of most adult usual do not chang much except over long period of time
consist of the same signatur or word contain mani of the same letter and
combin of letter as the question write on the evid document
consist of the same type of write as on the evid document such as hand print
or handwritten capit letter or small letter or a combin of both
consist if possibl of the same kind of write a person inform write such as
hastili prepar signatur on credit card receipt might be veri differ from more
formal write such as a signatur on a contract or other legal document
dictat write sampl
try to obtain dictat sampl of a suspect or victim signatur or write specif for
comparison purpos either voluntarili or by obtain a legal order
obtain dictat handwrit sampl by court order
when obtain a legal order for sampl the investig andor attornei should ensur
that the order specifi that the sampl should be provid in the writer normal
handwrit and in suffici quantiti text and form at the interview discret to
permit a determin of ident or nonident a court order with these specif
will permit an infer of guilt or might allow pursuit of contempt of court charg if the
suspect refus to compli or attempt to prevent identif by intention disguis hi
write limit the amount of write or fail to follow the interview instruct
and dictat
prepar for take dictat handwrit sampl
sinc expert handwrit identif can truli prove the case adequ preinterview
prepar by the fraud examin is essenti at the time of the interview session to obtain
dictat write sampl the investig should have all of the proper write materi and
should have the origin or copi of the evid document to serv as a guid for
dictat the sampl text do not rush through the interview take as much time as
necessari take short comfort break if the suspect tire do not allow the suspect to see the
evid document befor or dure the take of the sampl
analyz document investig
3114 2011 fraud examin manual
direct for obtain dictat handwrit sampl
dictat write sampl should be obtain by us the same type of materi as the
evid document write instrument ballpoint pen fountain pen pencil etc paper
line unlin size of sheet and form check form busi form etc for purpos of
the sampl an investig can us a genuin form of the same or similar kind make mani
photocopi of it and have the sampl prepar on the blank copi
to help the suspect relax begin by have him write miscellan innocu text such as
hi name the date and a statement as to the voluntari natur of the sampl be prepar
thi statement will also assist later in get the sampl admit in court
patient dictat to the suspect the same text or text contain the same letter and
combin of letter of the same type hand print handwritten capit or small letter
as the question write on the evid document do not assist the suspect in the
spell of word punctuat or grammar
obtain on sampl at a time on separ sheet or form onc a sampl is complet
remov it from the suspect sight befor the next sampl is prepar to ensur that the
suspect rang of normal variat is displai sever sampl of each text should
be obtain
be alert for ani attempt to disguis normal write such as exagger slant veri rapid
write veri slow and awkward write unusu larg or small write or bizarr letter
format see the natur variat disguis distort and forgeri section
typewrit and comput printer
typewrit prepar on tradit typebarsegmentshift typewrit both manual and
electr can often be posit identifi by expert from mechan defect uniqu to each
machin typewritten text prepar on latermodel typewrit equip with
interchang daisi wheel ball or baskettyp element ar difficult if not imposs to
identifi computer dot matrix ink jet thermal transfer or laser electrostat printer
ar rare identifi usual the onli expert determin concern these typewrit
and printer ar that the same typefac design and size font letter space and print
process were us
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3115
typewrit ribbon could be evid
oldstyl fabric typewrit ribbon ar rare of ani valu in determin whether a particular
typewrit wa us to prepar a question document fortun for investig most
modern manual and electr typewrit regardless of whether typebar or singl element ar
equip with singleus ribbon if it is suspect that an evid document wa recent
prepar on such a machin remov and examin of the ribbon might reveal the text of
the document expert examin of the ribbon might posit prove that the typewrit
and ribbon were us to produc the document
avoid take unnecessari sampl
fraud examin do not have to be expert to make preliminari elimin of some
suspect typewrit and narrow down the number of typewrit thei might have to take
sampl from although there ar hundr of differ font in us on comput printer
tradit manual and some electron typewrit might be elimin by differ in
their typefac design
although font might appear to be veri similar the observ fraud examin can
differenti between them by concentr on those letter and numer that most often
differ note first whether the letter style on the evid document and the typewrit ar
serif the letter have small horizont bar at the top and bottom of the letter like littl feet
or san serif no small bar if thei differ then the typewrit is not the on us next look
at the shape of the letter and numer pai particular attent to the small letter f g r t
and w and the numer 2 3 4 and 5 if ani of those differ in shape then the typewrit is
not the on us
take typewrit sampl
alwai remov retain and preserv the origin ribbon first befor take ani sampl
place it in a seal envelop and initi it for later identif after remov and
preserv the origin ribbon replac it with a new on and type the sampl in the same
text as the question document repeat portion of the question text sever time after
take sampl with a ribbon shift the ribbon adjust to the stencil posit
insert a sheet of carbon paper on top of a sheet of paper and type directli onto the carbon
paper us it as a ribbon to make type text on the sheet of paper again type the
question text sever time as each specimen is made record the brand name model and
serial number of the typewrit us and initi and date each sheet place the ribbon and
analyz document investig
3116 2011 fraud examin manual
specimen in a plastic or heavi envelop and submit them to the expert along with the
question evid document in separ envelop
photocopi
increasingli photocopi ar retain as origin record of document particularli in
outgo correspond file and can becom the onli evid of a document becaus
the origin document cannot be locat or in some case cannot be releas such as in the
case of offici public record
fraud examin and other investig sometim submit a copi of a document for
examin becaus thei do not wish to part with the origin as a result the document
examin will probabl not be abl to determin featur and reach conclus that could
have been made from the origin document when at all possibl the fraud examin
should obtain the origin document for the document examin and should not submit
a copi
identifi the sourc of a photocopi
photocopi can be the actual origin evid in the case of
anonym letter
unauthor leak of inform in the fo rm of copi of letter memoranda file
and other record
copi made to conceal forgeri or to insert or manipul text
spuriou disinform dissemin of phoni offici document
locat the sourc of a copi can be crucial in some investig it is sometim possibl
to determin what kind of copier wa us to produc the copi in question some type of
machin leav minut mark indent and other featur on the copi that will assist
the expert in determin the brand and model of the machin us it is also possibl to
identifi the particular machin us by examin the pattern of uniqu and identifi
trash mark speck spot streak edg mark etc it leav on copi and compar
them with copi from a known machin the fraud examin should be awar howev
that some of these mark have perman while other ar transient and temporari
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3117
perman trash mark
these uniqu identifi mark on copi ar usual caus by accident deep
scratch and imperfect in the copier glass surfac or document cover in the print
element surfac or other perman machin part that ar not readili replac or chang
dure servic of the machin these mark can be reproduc on copi for year until
the machin is repair or the part replac
transient trash mark
trash mark ar uniqu identifi mark on copi thei ar usual caus by dirt
smudg or small bit of foreign matter on or in machin surfac that will appear until the
machin is clean or servic these mark prove not onli that a particular machin wa
us to produc the copi but that document that share the same transient trash mark
might have been produc at approxim the same time thi is on of sever wai to
determin when a document wa prepar
take photocopi sampl
first without place ani document in the machin make six blank copi as the
machin produc each copi remov it turn it over and on the revers side initi and
number each copi in the same sequenc thei were produc by the machin these copi will
reproduc all trash mark made by the machin includ the entir document cover glass
surfac and intern print element surfac six sampl copi ar need sinc differ
model of machin have vari print element surfac size usual rang in size from
on to three sheet impress befor repeat on the same area of the surfac
second place a ruler or other calibr measur devic on the glass document surfac
close the cover and make six copi these copi will permit a determin of the
standard amount of reduct or enlarg the machin make when in the actual size
or onetoon mode if the machin requir document to be fed into it rather than have
a glass document surfac us ani sampl document avail as an origin and includ
that sampl document along with the copi of it on the revers of each copi initi and
number the copi in the same sequenc thei were produc by the machin as outlin in
the first step
third place a sampl document contain both typewritten and handwritten text on the
glass document surfac in the standard posit close the document cover and again print
analyz document investig
3118 2011 fraud examin manual
six copi initi and number as previous direct also includ the sampl
document with the copi sampl
place all of the sampl copi and sampl document into a larg sturdi paper or cardboard
envelop or folder do not us a plastic envelop on which you have previous note the
make model and locat of the machin initi date and seal the envelop and submit it
to the document examin along with the question evid document
date a document
is the document genuin or a backdat fabric thi question sometim aris dure
fraud inquiri and the answer can be determin through scientif examin of the
document by forens expert the fraud examin should be alert for thi type of fraud and
have some knowledg of what can be done as well as an awar of the limit
the alibi document
these document suddenli appear from out of nowher and often late in the cours of
an investig inquiri or trial thei ar alwai favor to the suspect and refut
previous develop inform or evid that is damag to the suspect mani prove
to be fabric
the long lost will
the sudden appear of a new will that postdat and supersed all other will is all too
common amazingli it often leav larg portion of the estat to the person who found it
and onli a photocopi can be locat mani prove to have been fabric us the cutandpast
method although not involv photocopi the much public fabric and
forg mormon will of howard hugh in the mid1970 is a prime exampl
valuabl histor and collect document
the product of phoni histor and collect document artwork and antiqu ha
been a lucr field for fraud artist for hundr of year and continu to the present
recent major fraud involv loss of million of dollar have involv such divers phoni
document as the fake hitler diari counterfeit rare basebal card forg autograph
of histor figur and celebr fake old treati with nativ american tribe newli
discov handwritten rough draft of the us declar of independ lincoln
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3119
gettysburg address and other famou histor document sever counterfeit and
forg mormon document counterfeit first edit book and mani other
anachron in documentari materi
exposur of fraudul histor document often reli upon the combin skill of
investig histor expert scientif laboratori and forens document examin
accur handwrit comparison ar rare possibl in the absenc of adequ
contemporan genuin write of the purport author instead examin ar made
of the materi us to produc the document such as paper ink print adhes and
seal bind and cover detect of backdat contemporari document usual reli
upon dilig investig and the techniqu of the forens document examin
when adequ handwrit or signatur sampl ar avail expert comparison can
expos the forgeri otherwis in order to disprov the purport date of the document
analys of the materi might prove that thei did not exist at the time the document wa
supposedli prepar expert examin of contemporari documentari materi includ
ink analys and comparison with a librari of ink standard maintain by the us
secret servic laboratori in washington dc to determin the kind of ink and when it
wa first manufactur
examin of typewrit and comparison with collect of typewrit refer
standard maintain by forens laboratori to determin the kind of typewrit that
wa us and when the typewrit wa first manufactur
examin of paper especi watermark paper and search of refer
materi to determin who manufactur the paper and when it wa first produc
examin of photocopi and fax copi and comparison with refer standard
to determin what kind of machin wa us and when those machin were first
produc
comparison of question photocopi with photocopi known to have been
produc on a particular machin on a particular date can prove or disprov the date of
the question copi
fraud examin should note that there ar current no method for accur determin
how long ink typewrit or photocopierprint toner have been on paper
analyz document investig
3120 2011 fraud examin manual
indent write
fraud examin should be alert for the presenc of incrimin indent write or the
absenc of logic indent both of which can be valuabl in prove fraud in some
situat document ar routin kept in multiplepag set such as in legal form
multiplecopi invoic notebook tablet pad clipboard and so on in these situat
the write on on sheet should correspond to indent on the follow sheet the
absenc of correspond indent write on the follow sheet or the presenc of
indent write on on sheet that do not correspond with the text of the write on the
preced sheet could provid proof that page have been remov and substitut
develop indent write
never attempt to develop indent write by shade or scratch on the surfac of a
sheet of paper with a pencil thi will reveal deep indent but it will not reveal the faint
on and will perman prevent expert examin from develop them other type
of technic examin might also be prevent by thi defac of the document
some indent write can be visual by take the document to an area with subdu
overhead light place the document on a flat surfac and shine a bright beam of light
from a smallbeam flashlight or small highintens lamp across the paper surfac at a low
obliqu angl or parallel to the surfac sinc shadow in the indent will onli show at
right angl to the beam of light it will be necessari to move the light around in sever
posit and note the chang shadow as thei form the text of the indent
document expert us special light and photograph techniqu and sensit
instrument such as the electrostat detect apparatu esda to detect and perman
record extrem faint indent write that cannot be visual by the obliquelight
method
counterfeit print document
most document that have monetari valu such as currenc bank check travel check
monei order bearer bond postag stamp gift certif or lotteri ticket have all been
counterfeit at on time or anoth ident document ar also often counterfeit for
exampl passport birth certif driver licens and govern and commerci
employe ident card other counterfeit document includ commerci product label
busi stationeri and form busi logo motor vehicl titl and registr form
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3121
and safeti inspect sticker despit most prevent measur if a document ha ani
valu it can be and probabl ha been counterfeit counterfeit ha becom big
busi especi in some thirdworld countri where the latest develop in print
technolog ar be us to produc larg quantiti of highqual counterfeit document
and knockoff phoni product in violat of intern copyright and trademark law
counterfeit method
the dai of oldstyl counterfeit who were skill artisan who carefulli etch
counterfeit print plate ar over todai most counterfeit document ar prepar by
variou photoreproduct process such as the photooffset print process
lithographi and flexographi which us rubber print plate these process
begin with the photograph reproduct of a genuin document the photograph
neg ar then carefulli retouch to remov the filledin text serial number and other
distinguish featur that appear on the genuin document print plate ar then
made from the retouch neg and counterfeit copi ar print from the plate
rapidli advanc technolog now allow larcen novic with no commerci print
experi to us sophist computer scanner comput graphic softwar
multicolor comput printer and fullcolor photocopi machin to produc rel highqual
counterfeit document
detect counterfeit
mani counterfeit can be detect by make a sidebysid comparison with a
correspond genuin document be alert for differ version or form revis look for
subtl differ in ink color and brillianc differ type of paper substrat the us of
differ typestyl and type size font and evid of the retouch the text on the
genuin document us in the reproduct the retouch will be most evid in area
where text serial number and the like ar superimpos on a background design especi
if thei ar print in black ink
when furnish with genuin document for comparison with suspect counterfeit
forens document examin can also make expert differenti between the print
process ink formul and paper substrat us in some instanc it ha been
possibl for the expert to reconstruct portion of the filledin text or serial number that
appear on the genuin document but were remov in the retouch process in thi
fashion the specif origin document us by the counterfeit can sometim be
analyz document investig
3122 2011 fraud examin manual
determin by trace the histori of the document ownership the counterfeit can be
locat and identifi treatment of the origin genuin document for latent
fingerprint might posit identifi the counterfeit and other peopl who handl the
genuin document
fingerprint
latent nonvis print ar left on surfac by the bodi oil salt and amino acid
cling to or exud by friction ridg in the skin on finger palm of the hand and sole
of the feet and ar uniqu person identifi latent print might also be deposit on
surfac by hand finger and bare feet through the transfer of oil and greas patent
visibl print ar sometim deposit on surfac by hand finger and bare feet through
the transfer of materi such as blood paint soot and soil
latent print absorb into protect porou sur face such as paper in file or page in
book have been known to surviv for decad and still be identifi after chemic
develop howev latent fingerprint on hard nonpor surfac can be destroi or
deterior rapidli if handl not protect fr om the environ or expos to high
temperatur humid or water
fraud examin should wear protect glove or carefulli us tweezer when handl
latent fingerprint evid to avoid smudg and contamin tweezer should not be
us on document if indent write or photocopi examin ar plan
fingerprint on paper or other absorb porou surfac
fraud examin should never try to develop latent fingerprint that have been absorb into
paper or other porou materi by dust with fingerprint powder or ani other mean
such effort will not onli be unsuccess but will prevent addit examin preserv
the evid by place the item into a plastic bag or cellophan protector label the
contain with the examin initi the date and an identifi exhibit number expert
will us variou method on these materi includ iodin fume and brush or
sprai silver nitrat solut or ninhydrin sprai which react with the bodi chemic and
other substanc in the latent print that have soak into the absorb surfac some of
these method will perman discolor a document
investig analyz document
2011 fraud examin manual 3123
fingerprint on hard nonpor surfac
item with hard nonpor surfac such as plastic metal and glass can be dust for the
presenc of latent fingerprint left on their surfac special fingerprint dust powder and
lift materi ar avail from law enforc supplier the dry powder toner us
in some photocopi machin ha also been us successfulli for fingerprint dust
after dust the surfac and locat a suspect print or partial print blow or gentli brush
off the excess powder remov the develop print with adhes lift tape and place the
tape on an index card that contrast in color with the dust powder us mark the card
with initi the date an identifi exhibit number and where the print wa found
some latent print on nonpor surfac might not be develop by the dust method
if possibl rather than dust the item the fraud examin should retain it place it in a
protect contain initi date and label the contain with an identifi exhibit number
and submit it to a fingerprint expert for process rather than dust fingerprint expert
might us cyanoacryl superglu fume or a laser to successfulli develop and
photograph the latent print on some materi such as black plastic bag
fingerprint comparison standard
the fingerprint of million of peopl ar on record in repositori of fingerprint card
maintain by law enforc agenc throughout the world these card contain the
ink fingerprint of peopl who have been arrest serv in the militari appli for
employ at variou level of govern and volunt their fingerprint to assist in
person identif in the event of their death mani of these fingerprint databas have
been computer and ar link by network howev million of peopl do not fit in
ani of these categori and have never been fingerprint
if a suspect ha never been fingerprint or refus to voluntarili furnish ink print
sampl it might be necessari for the fraud examin to obtain a legal court order direct
the suspect to furnish ink print for identif purpos even though the evid
item might have been handl by sever peopl thei might still bear latent print of the
guilti parti if the item have been inadvert handl by other known peopl includ
the fraud examin then ink print of all of those peopl should also be obtain and
submit to the fingerprint expert along with the evid item and the ink print
of suspect
analyz document investig
3124 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc for expert document examin
law enforc laboratori
in case where crimin prosecut ar like there ar excel forens laboratori
avail through law enforc agenc at the local state and nation level of the
crimin justic system
forens document expert in privat practic
when an expert servic ar need a fraud examin can identifi and locat fulli
qualifi courtcertifi expert forens document examin avail in a particular
geograph area by contact the follow organ
american board of forens document examin
7887 san felip suit 122
houston texa 77063
713 7849537
wwwabfdeorg
american academi of forens scienc
410 north 21st street
colorado spring colorado 809042798
719 6361100
wwwaafsorg
graphologist graphoanalyst
grapholog graphoanalysi ha been describ as a pseudosci whose practition
have the purport abil to determin a person charact moral trait person and
mental state base upon an analysi of that person handwrit grapholog is often
erron confus with forens document examin especi by the media fraud
examin should be awar that some peopl who practic grapholog analys might have
littl academ and scientif train thei might be selftaught or graduat of a
correspond cours sinc a conclus accuraci level ha not been establish for those
examin expert testimoni by graphologist is often reject by the court fraud
examin should be cautiou in reli on handwrit identif made by some of
these handwrit expert
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3201
interview theori and applic
an interview is a questionandansw session design to elicit inform it differ from an
ordinari convers in that the interview is structur not freeform and is design for a
purpos an interview might consist of onli on question or a seri of question
prepar
befor embark on an interview the examin should review the case file to ensur that it
doe not contain import inform that ha been overlook in addit the examin
should review the case file to learn what inform is known to the wit the
hypothesi should be review to make sure it reflect the obtain document
the examin should consid what type of inform can be suppli by each of the
potenti wit gener the most vulner wit should be interview after the
more reluct wit thi will provid the examin with a broader base of inform
that can be us to formul later question howev the time of interview is at the
discret of the examin team
characterist of a good interview
good interview share common characterist the interview should be of suffici length
and depth to uncov relev fact most interview tend to get too littl rather than too
much inform
a good interview includ all pertin inform and exclud irrelev inform
from the outset it should be determin what inform is relev and that inform
should be sought extran or useless fact tend to unnecessarili complic the gather
and analysi of the inform
the interview should be conduct as close as possibl to the event in question with the
passag of time the memori of potenti wit and respond becom faulti and
critic detail can be lost or forgotten a good interview is object in scope it should be
aim at gather inform in a fair and imparti manner
interview theori and applic investig
3202 2011 fraud examin manual
characterist of a good interview
all good interview share certain characterist abov all thei ar peopl person and
ar talent at human interact success interview ar the type of peopl with whom
other ar will to share inform the good interview doe not interrupt the
respond with unnecessari question dure the interview much pertin inform
result from volunt inform as oppos to respons to a specif question the
good interview displai interest in hi subject and in what is be said
the respond must understand that the interview is attempt to obtain onli the
relev fact and is not out to get someon thi can best be done by phrase question
in a nonaccusatori manner littl is accomplish when the interview is formal
ostentati or attempt to impress the respond with hi author inform
gather is best accomplish by approach the interview in an inform and low
kei fashion
if the respond perceiv that the interview is bias or is attempt to confirm
foregon conclus the respond will be less like to cooper accordingli the
interview should make everi effort to demonstr a lack of bia
profession in the interview often involv a state of mind and a commit to
excel the interview should be on time be profession attir and be fair in all
deal with the respond it is absolut vital that the interview not appear to be a
threat if peopl perceiv that thei ar the target of an inquiri thei will be less like
to cooper
question typolog
when conduct an interview there ar five gener type of question an interview can
ask introductori inform assess close and admissionseek
becaus fraud examin move in a linear order start with the gener and work to
the specif the first interview should be with those that ar least like to be involv
work toward those that ar more like to be involv the first interview ar
conduct for the purpos of gather inform and therefor thei should be nonconfront
nonthreaten and should encourag open commun in these
routin interview situat onli three of the five type of question will normal be ask
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3203
introductori inform and close question if the interview ha reason caus to
believ the respond is not be truth assess question can be ask final if
the interview decid with reason caus that the respond is respons for
misde admissionseek question can be pose
introductori question
introductori question ar design to meet the four object below to provid an
introduct establish rapport to get the respond to verbal agre to cooper in the
interview ie establish the interview theme and to observ the respond reaction to
question
inform question
onc the proper format for the interview is set the interview then turn to the factgath
portion typic the interview will ask three type of question dure thi
stage open close and lead these question type ar discuss in more detail below
each type is us in a logic sequenc to maxim the develop of inform if the
interview ha reason to believ that the respond is be untruth then assess
question can be pose otherwis the interview is brought to a logic close
close question
close question seek to close the interview posit in routin interview close
question serv the follow purpos reconfirm fact gather addit fact and
conclud to interview and maintain goodwil
assess question
if the interview ha reason to believ the respond is be decept he should begin
ask assess question these ar question specif design to establish the
respond credibl when assess credibl the interview must observ the
subject verbal and nonverb respons by observ the verbal and nonverb respons
of the respond to these question the interview can assess the respond credibl
with some degre of accuraci that assess will form the basi of the interview
decis about whether to pose admissionseek question to obtain a legal admiss
of wrongdo
interview theori and applic investig
3204 2011 fraud examin manual
admissionseek question
the choic of when to conduct an admissionseek interview of a suspect is critic
admissionseek interview ar reserv specif for individu whose culpabl is
reason certain all other reason investig step have been complet and as much
inform as possibl ha been develop from other sourc and the interview can
reason control the place time and subject matter of the interview
admissionseek question serv at least two purpos 1 to clear an innoc person or
2 to encourag the culpabl person to confess howev the interview must be care to
pose these question in a wai that doe not violat the right and privileg of the person
be interview
legal consider when conduct an interview
interview and especi admissionseek interview mai expos the compani and the
fraud examin to certain legal risk thu befor engag in an interview fraud examin
must understand the ramif of their action thi requir an understand of certain
legal issu and how thei limit or affect the wai in which an interview mai be conduct
howev becaus employe right vari from case to case fraud examin should alwai
consult with an attornei regard the specif law and regul for their state or local
legal author to conduct interview
in most instanc legal author is not requir to interview peopl or to inquir into
matter the feder constitut give ani citizen the author to inquir into virtual ani
subject area as long as the right of individu ar not transgress in the process
gener no licens is requir to conduct interview howev if the interview
repres himself as an investig some state requir a licens
fals imprison
fals imprison is the restraint by on person of the physic liberti of anoth without
consent or legal justif in the context of employe interview a claim of fals
imprison mai be made if the interview lock the interview room stand in front of
the exit or refus to let the suspect leav
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3205
us of decept in interview
surprisingli the us of decept to gain inform can sometim be emploi legal
the theori is that inform can be obtain by nearli ani mean with the except of
forc or threat the interview howev might not emploi ani decept like to caus
an innoc person to confess the us of decept is not justifi regard promis of
lenienc promis of confidenti or to obtain a monetari or busi advantag
frazier v cupp
in frazier v cupp 394 us 731 1961 the us suprem court indirectli recogn the
necess of us decept dure interview in thi case the suspect confess to a
homicid after the interrog fals told him that hi alleg accomplic had confess to
the crime on appeal the suprem court rule that the decept alon wa insuffici to
invalid the confess
record interview
in some circumst record an interview might be illeg both state and feder law
limit an employ right to record employe interview dure an investig in fact in
some state audio record an interview is permit onli with the consent of all parti to
the commun thu fraud examin should alwai consult with an attornei when
decid whether to record an interview
if record an interview without the respond consent is legal consid tape record
the interview covertli covertli record offer an advantag in that it provid an accur
record without disturb the flow of the interview if there is to be a covert tape record
and the subject ask if the interview is be record do not lie explain that it is in the
subject best interest that an accur record be made and that he can have a copi when
complet
element of convers
sinc an interview is essenti a structur convers it is help to understand the
basic element of commun whenev two or more human be ar convers
sever type of commun occur either on at a time or in combin
interview theori and applic investig
3206 2011 fraud examin manual
express
a common function of convers is selfexpress on or more of the
conversationalist might need to express idea feel attitud or mood the illus of
an audienc is central to a person express the urg for spontan express can be
a vital asset in interview and it should be encourag in the respond it can be
direct by the interview toward informationgath object but the interview
should not give wai to the urg for person selfexpress
on of the most common error made by novic interview is to yield to the temptat to
impress the respond with their knowledg of the subject of the interview in do so
interview run the risk of make the respond feel threaten with the result
tendenc for respond to guard respons rather than express their feel frankli
experienc interview will have the disciplin to control their own respons
persuas
the concept of persuas and express differ in that persuas is essenti aim at
convinc the other person there ar time when persuas can be us effect in the
interview thi is mostli through convinc the person of the legitimaci of the interview
therapi
make peopl feel good about themselv is often a function of convers in an
ordinari convers with a friend a person often express idea and feel to remov
emot tension thi releas is call catharsi and is encourag for exampl in
psychiatr interview there ar mani time when the inform sought in an interview is
close relat to the respond inner conflict and tension for exampl in the area of
fraud a person embezzl monei from the compani will typic feel guilti a skill
interview will know the therapeut implic of such a feel when attempt to
develop inform
ritual
some aspect of convers ar ritualist that is thei ar mere a form of verbal behavior
that ha no real signific other than to provid secur in interperson relat
exampl includ good morn and how ar you todai in interview we must
learn to detect ritualist answer by the respond and avoid give them ourselv the
interview must be awar of the danger of engag in ritualist convers and then
confus the result with valid inform
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3207
inform exchang
inform exchang is the central purpos of the interview the word exchang remind us
that the flow of inform in an interview goe both wai too frequent interview
becom so concern with the inform thei wish to obtain that thei do not properli
exchang inform with the respond although detail of what the interview sai
should be carefulli measur dont be cagei thi tactic rare work two basic problem
occur in the exchang of inform first the inform sought by the interview is not
of equal import to the respond second there is often a commun barrier
between peopl of divers background these barrier ar common between peopl who
dont know on anoth
inhibitor of commun
to be an effect interview on must understand that certain matter inhibit
commun while other facilit it it is the interview task to minim inhibitor
and maxim facilit an inhibitor is ani socialpsycholog barrier that imped the
flow of relev inform by make the respond unabl or unwil to provid the
inform to the interview eight inhibitor to commun ar list below the first
four tend to make the respond unwil the last four make the respond unabl to
give the inform even though will
compet demand for time
the respond might hesit to begin an interview becaus of other time demand the
subject doe not necessarili place a neg valu on be interview but weigh the valu
of be interview against do someth els the success interview must convinc
the respond that the interview is a good us of time
ego threat
the respond in some case might withhold inform becaus of a perceiv threat to
hi selfesteem there ar three broad categori of ego threat repress disapprov and
loss of statu
repress
the strongest ego threat is repress respond might not onli refus to admit
inform to the interview thei might also refus to admit the inform inwardli
thei ar be honest when answer that thei do not know or that thei have forgotten
interview theori and applic investig
3208 2011 fraud examin manual
embezzl for exampl might repress memori of the act becaus it doe not conform to
their moral code
disapprov
a less intens but more common effect of ego threat is found when respond possess
inform but ar hesit to admit it becaus thei anticip disapprov from the
interview if respond ar made to feel that the interview will not condemn them
thei might welcom the opportun to divulg inform a gener accept and
sympathet attitud toward the respond goe far toward elicit candid respons
loss of statu
sometim respond fear lose statu if the inform provid becom public thi
can sometim be overcom by the interview assur that the inform will be
handl confidenti
etiquett
the etiquett barrier oper when an answer to the interview question contain
inform perceiv by the respond as inappropri answer candidli would be
consid in poor tast or evid of a lack of proper etiquett for exampl there ar
certain thing that men do not discuss in front of women and vice versa thing that student
do not tell teacher and thing that doctor do not tell patient the desir to avoid
embarrass shock or threaten answer is distinct from the fear of expos oneself
often the neg effect of the etiquett barrier might be forestal by select the
appropri interview and set for the interview
trauma
trauma denot an acut unpleas feel associ with crisi experi the
unpleas feel is often brought to the surfac when the respond is report the
experi trauma is common when talk to victim and can usual be overcom by
sensit handl of the issu
forget
a frequent inhibitor to commun is the respond inabl to recal certain type of
inform thi is not a problem if the object of the interview deal onli with current
attitud belief or expect the natur fade of the memori over time make it
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3209
easier for the egodefens system to reconstruct on own imag of the past by omiss
addit or distort
the memori problem is a much more frequent obstacl than is gener expect by
interview even some of the most simpl and obviou fact cannot be elicit becaus of
the respond memori problem there ar three factor that contribut to recollect of
an event
first the vivid of the person recal is relat to the event origin emot impact
it meaning at the time and the degre to which the person ego is involv a
second factor is the amount of time that ha elaps sinc the event third is the natur of
the interview situat includ the interview techniqu and tactic
knowledg of these factor will help the inter viewer anticip problem that might occur
and there ar certain techniqu discuss later that will help the interview overcom
mani of these memori problem
chronolog confus
chronolog confus is commonli encount in interview seek case histori
inform thi term refer to the respond tendenc to confus the order of
experi and can occur in two wai two or more event might be correctli recal but
the respond is unsur of the sequenc or onli on event might be recal and it is
incorrectli assum to have been true at an earlier point
inferenti confus
inferenti confus denot confus and inaccuraci result from error of infer
these error gener fall into two categori induct or deduct induct occur when
the respond is ask to convert concret experi into a higher level of gener
deduct occur when the respond is ask to give concret exampl of certain
categori of experi
unconsci behavior
often the interview process reveal inform about a person unconsci behavior
there ar three type of unconsci behavior custom or habit circular reaction and
reaction to acut emot crise a custom or habit is a settl tendenc or usual pattern of
behavior it is the behavior that an individu engag in regularli a circular reaction is the
interview theori and applic investig
3210 2011 fraud examin manual
immedi unwit respons of on person to the sublimin nonverb clue of anoth
a respons to an acut emot crisi doe not follow a habitu pattern or result from a
reaction to other it aris onli in special circumst when the interviewe is
experienc an emot dilemma
facilit of commun
facilit of commun ar those socialpsycholog forc that make convers
includ interview easier to accomplish these facilit requir a basic understand of
what motiv peopl
fulfil expect
on of the import forc in social interact is the tendenc of on person to
commun verbal or nonverb hi expect to the other person the second
person then tend to respond conscious or unconsci to those expect thi
might be view as on manifest of the more gener human tendenc to conform to
the group and to the anticip of higherstatu peopl it is in thi conform to group
norm that secur is sought
in the interview set the interview commun expect to the respond the
interview should be abl to transmit both a gener expect of cooper and a more
specif expect that the respond will answer the question truthfulli the interview
must clearli distinguish between ask for inform and expect it the former is
mainli achiev with verbal commun while the latter is accomplish through
nonverb behavior the interview who expect the respond to cooper will like be
more success than on who onli ask question
recognit
all human be need the recognit and the esteem of other social interact often
depend on an exchang of social good peopl will perform in exchang for recognit
and other social reward the need for recognit can be fulfil by attent from peopl
outsid the individu social circl the skill and insight interview take advantag of
everi opportun to give the respond sincer recognit
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3211
altruist appeal
there seem to be a need for human to identifi with some higher valu or caus beyond
immedi selfinterest thi might sometim take the form of identif with the
object of a larger group altruist deed usual increas selfesteem whether or not the
deed have been made public thi distinguish altruism from public altruism is of
major import in motiv mani respond interview who understand the
respond valu system can us strategi and techniqu that appeal to altruism
sympathet understand
human be need the sympathet respons of other thei like to share their joi fear
success and failur thi need for understand differ from the need for recognit
that requir success and increas statu interview who reflect a sympathet attitud
and who know how to direct that attitud toward the object of the interview will find
their percentag of success much higher than those who do not
new experi
peopl welcom new experi although varieti might not be the onli spice of life
escap from the dreari routin is sought by everyon sometim the respond is
motiv by curios regard the interview interview should consid thi when
decid what to sai about themselv on must not assum that just becaus an interview
is a new experi it will satisfi the respond need aspect of the respond
percept of the new experi can be ego threaten the respond might be anxiou
about the impress left with the interview thi apprehens can often be detect
by the interview at the begin of the contact onc these fear ar dispel the
respond frequent find the interview a new and interest experi
catharsi
catharsi is the process by which a person obtain a releas from unpleas emot
tension by talk about the sourc of these tension we often feel better by talk about
someth that upset us although we ar all familiar with the frequent necess for
catharsi in ourselv we do not alwai perceiv the same need in other the need for
sympathet understand and the need for catharsi ar relat but thei ar not the same
thing the interview who doe not have time to listen to what he consid inconsequenti
or egocentr talk will often find the respond unwil to share import consequ
interview theori and applic investig
3212 2011 fraud examin manual
need for mean
anoth gener trait common to peopl is the need for mean everi societi ha a set of
assumpt valu explan and myth lend order to the societi the concept of
need for mean is relat to cognit disson psycholog tension is creat when an
individu becom awar of incongru of fact assumpt and interpret thi
tension is pain and it reduct is reward to the individu in case where the
interview topic deal directli with the sourc disturb a person system of mean there
is a strong motiv for the respond to talk it through if he is convinc of the
interview interest
extrins reward
extrins reward ar reward the interviewe receiv that ar not directli relat to the
interview experi and thei caus the respond to see the interview as a mean to an
end extrins reward for interviewe can includ monei job advanc and retent
of privileg what is irrelev to the interview might not be to the respond a
sensit interview will be abl to recogn what extrins reward the respond receiv
if ani from be interview
interview mechan
as with all other phase of a fraud examin an interview will be most success if the
investig is thoroughli prepar which requir that the interview understand the
mechan of interview
notetak
the interview will frequent need to take note dure the interview start each interview
on a separ sheet of paper thi procedur can be especi help should document
from a particular interview be subpoena do not try to write down all the inform you
ar given dure an interview onli the pertin fact take too mani note will make the
interview process cumbersom and might inhibit the respond if a quot is particularli
relev try to write it down verbatim enclos all direct quot in quotat mark
do not slow down the interview process for note take instead jot down kei word or
phrase and then go back over the detail at the end of the interview in gener it is better
to err on the side of take too few note rather than too mani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3213
maintain ey contact
the interview should maintain ey contact with the respond as much as possibl dure
note take just as ey contact person all human commun it creat a more
comfort environ and facilit the flow of inform dure the interview
process
opinion
avoid make note regard your overal opinion or impress of a wit such note
can caus you problem with your credibl if thei ar later produc in court be care
not to show excit when take note dure interview of target and advers
wit take note in a manner that doe not indic the signific of the inform
that is never allow note take to telegraph your emot
write down question
whenev possibl do not write down a list of interview question let the interview flow
freeli inadvert allow the respond to read a written list of question can provid
an opportun to fabric an answer howev write down kei point the interview
want to discuss might be appropri
document result
expound the note from the result of question as soon as possibl after conclud the
interview prefer immedi afterward if thi procedur is follow the examin will
not have to take copiou note dure the interview law enforc offici ar gener
requir to maintain note in the privat sector the note can usual be destroi onc a
memorandum ha been prepar summar the interview see the law section of the
fraud examin manual for more inform
introductori question
on of the most difficult aspect of an inter view is get start inde the introduct
might be the hardest part the interview and the respond in mani instanc have not
met befor the interview ha a tall order meet the person state a reason for the
interview establish necessari rapport and get the inform the introduct is
accomplish through question as oppos to statement the question allow the
interview to assess feedback from the respond thi is an import aspect of the
interview theori and applic investig
3214 2011 fraud examin manual
introduct if the respond is reluct to be interview that fact will come out
through the introductori question
four object
introductori question ar design to meet the four object below
provid the introduct
obvious the interview must introduc himself befor the interview commenc the
interview should gener indic hi name and compani avoid titl thi is not
alwai the case but the more inform the interview gener the more relax
the respond
establish rapport
webster defin rapport as a relat mark by harmoni conform accord or affin
in other word there must be some common ground establish befor question begin
thi is usual accomplish by the interview spend a few minut with the respond
in small talk thi aspect howev should not be overdon most peopl ar awar that
the interview is there for a meaning purpos and not to chitchat
establish the interview theme
the interview must state the purpos of the interview in some wai prior to the
commenc of seriou question otherwis the respond might be confus
threaten or overli cautiou state the purpos of the interview is known as establish
the interview theme
addition the purpos of the interview should be gener and not specif the specif
interview purpos will be convei to the respond later the state purpos of the
interview should be on that is logic for the respond to accept and easi for the
interview to explain but it might be relat onli indirectli to the actual purpos of the
interview normal the more gener the theme is the better
exampl
interview
i am work on a matter and i need your help
or
i am do a review of procedur here at the compani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3215
or
i am develop some inform on our purchas procedur
the goal of the theme is to get the respond to make a commit for assist failur
to get a commit to assist from the respond is on of the common mistak made
even by experienc interview thi is a critic step in set the tone for the interview
a commit of assist requir posit action on the part of the person be
interview remain silent or simpli nod the head is gener not suffici
the interview should ask for the commit befor the interview commenc and
should encourag the respond to voic that ye aloud if the interview encount
silenc the first time the question should be repeat in a slightli differ wai until the
respond verbal commit in the linda reed collin case includ in the
appendix to thi section bridg the certifi fraud examin introduc himself to mari
rodriguez de la garza who work in the purchas depart of bailei book
incorpor
exampl
interview
ms de la garza im loren bridg im do a review of our purchas function do
you have a few minut
respond
ye
interview
i am gather some inform on certain compani procedur mayb you can help me
respond
no respons
interview
could i get you to help me if you can
respond
ye what thi about
interview theori and applic investig
3216 2011 fraud examin manual
gener the most effect interview theme is that help is be sought nearli all human
be get satisfact from help other thu in most interview the interview should
approach the respond so that person is made to feel import in help out
dure thi phase of the interview the respond must not feel threaten in ani wai an
effect approach is the columbo style although perhap not in such a rumpl wai in
which at least two thought go through the mind of columbo subject 1 he is no threat
to me and 2 he realli need my help
in the follow exampl the interview is introduc himself to a fellow employe
exampl
wrong
interview
ms de la garza i am loren bridg a certifi fraud examin with bailei book
fraud examin unit i am investig a case of suspect fraud and you might know
someth about it how long have you work here at the compani
right
interview
ms de la garza i am loren bridg i work here at the compani have we met befor
respond
i dont think so
interview
i am work on an assign and i need your help do you have a few minut i can spend
with you
observ reaction
the interview must be skill in interpret the respond reaction to question social
scientist sai that more than half of the commun between individu is nonspoken
the interview must therefor observ systemat though in a nondescript manner the
variou respons the respond give dure the cours of the convers
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3217
to observ the respond reaction move from nonsensit to sensit question that
is the interview process should begin by pose nonsensit question while establish
rapport ask nonsensit question will help the interview find some common ground
on which to connect with the respond
sensit question should be scrupul avoid until well into the interview and then
such question should be ask onli after care deliber and plan moreov all
question should be nonaccusatori noth close up the line of commun in an
interview like an accusatori question if the respond start to becom uncomfort with
the question the interview should move into a differ area and approach the sensit
question later from a differ vantag point
likewis interview ar encourag to formul their question in a wai that will not
bring about a strong emot reaction from the respond and emot word of all type
should be avoid dure the introductori phase such word put peopl on the defens
and thei ar more reluct to answer and to cooper
exampl
instead of us
investig inquiri
audit review
interview ask a few question
embezzlestealtheft shortag or paperwork
problem
furthermor some peopl will not volunt inform thei must be ask the
interview must not be reluct to ask sensit question after the proper basi ha been
establish if the interview pose the question with confid and with the attitud that
an answer is expect the respond will be much more like to furnish the request
inform if the interview is apologet or lack confid in the question the
respond is much less like to answer
after the interview establish rapport through normal convers the respond
reaction ar observ thi will serv as a baselin for observ behavior when question
that ar more sensit ar ask if the respond verbal and nonverb behavior ar
interview theori and applic investig
3218 2011 fraud examin manual
inconsist from on type of question to anoth the interview will attempt to determin
why
to determin why the respond behavior ar inconsist the interview must be
knowledg about nonverb clue of behavior which gener fall within on of the
follow categori proxem chr onem kinet or paralinguist
proxem
proxem commun is the us of interperson space to convei mean the relationship
between the interview and respond is both a caus and effect of proxem behavior if
the distanc between the interview and the respond is greater there is more of a
tendenc for them to watch each other ey for clue to mean
it is import to posit the respond chair and the interview chair at an accept
distanc the correct convers distanc vari from on cultur to anoth in the
middl east the distanc is quit short in latin america equal of the same sex carri on a
convers at a much closer distanc than in north america often as the subject matter
of the interview chang the interview can note the chang in the proxem behavior of
the respond if the person is free to back awai he might do so when the topic becom
unpleas or sensit
chronem
chronem commun refer to the us of time in interperson relationship to convei
mean attitud and desir if the respond is late in keep an appoint for
exampl thi might convei a lack of interest in or an avoid of the interview
the most import chronem techniqu us by interview is in the time of question
the interview can control the length of paus and the rate of hi speech thi is call
pace the interview can also control the length of time after the respond ha finish a
sentenc befor anoth question is pose thi is call the silent probe
pace is on of the princip nonverb method of set an appropri mood the tens
interview often commun anxieti by a rapidfir rate of speech which in turn might
increas anxieti in the respond to establish the more thought delib mood
usual need to stimul free associ the interview must take the initi in set
a more relax deliber pace
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3219
kinet
kinet commun involv the us of bodi movement to convei mean even though
postur hand and feet all commun interview tend to focu attent on the face
and ar more accur in their judgment of other if thei can see facial movement and
express when the interview concentr on facial express the primari interest is
ey contact ey contact primarili commun the desir to make or avoid
commun a person who feel shame normal will drop the ey to avoid the glanc
of anoth thi is not onli to avoid see disapprov but to conceal person shame
and confus
paralinguist
paralinguist commun involv the us of volum pitch and voic qualiti to convei
mean on of the basic differ between written and verbal commun is that
oral speech give the full rang of nonverb accompani for exampl a ye respons
might not mean complet agreement it depend on the wai in which the ye is said
the interview must learn to listen and observ chang in the nonverb accompani
and whether the verbal and nonverb ar harmoni reinforc or tend to give
conflict signal as in case where the respond is try to deceiv the interview ten
emot have been studi by social scientist anger fear happi jealousi love
nervous pride sad satisfact and sympathi some emot like anger and
nervous can be more reliabl identifi than the other
methodolog
respond must perceiv that thei have someth in common with the interview and
should feel good about the situat thi is best accomplish when respond perceiv
the interview as be open and friendli the follow techniqu promot thi
percept
physic contact
make physic contact with the person be interview by shake hand make
physic contact help break down psycholog barrier to commun the interview
should not invad the respond person space howev as thi might make the
person uncomfort
interview theori and applic investig
3220 2011 fraud examin manual
the interview us bodi languag to creat the impress of trust dure the interview by
gestur openli with the arm clasp hand togeth and lean forward in a manner to
indic interest rapport can be establish through verbal techniqu such as us soft
word agre with the respond and avoid neg term
when contact a respond for the first time the interview must identifi himself thi
is best accomplish by state your name unless a specif reason exist the interview
should gener omit a titl the less formal in gener the better in some instanc
state a titl cannot be avoid in those case the titl us should not conjur up emot
or possibl fear in the mind of the respond
dont interview more than on person
on of the basic rule is to question onli on person at a time the testimoni of on
respond will invari influenc the testimoni of anoth there ar few hard and fast
rule but thi is on of them
privaci
anoth basic rule is to conduct interview under condit of privaci the interview is
best conduct out of the sight and sound of friend rel or fellow employe peopl
ar veri reluct to furnish inform within the hear of other
establish transit statement
onc the interview ha a commit for assist he must describ in more detail the
purpos of the interview thi is done with the transit statement us to provid a
legitim basi for the inquiri and to explain to respond how thei fit into the inquiri
thi is usual done by mean of a broad descript when interview employe in the
same compani most of them alreadi presum the legitimaci of your request for assist
after describ the basic natur of the inquiri with the transit statement the
interview should seek a second commit for assist
exampl
interview
it pretti routin realli im gather some inform about the purchas function and
how it is suppos to work it would be help to me if i could start by ask you to tell me
about your job okai
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3221
when interview stranger the interview might have to describ with more particular
how the respond assist is need thi can be accomplish by on or more of the
method illustr below where the interview is talk to an outsid vendor
exampl
interview
it pretti routin realli as i sai i work for bailei book and iv been assign a project
to gather some inform about some of our procedur and becaus you work for on of our
vendor i thought it might be help to talk to you okai
or
it pretti routin realli i have been ask by the compani to gather inform on some of
our procedur i thought you might be abl to help by answer a few question okai
or
it pretti routin realli i have been ask by the compani to gather some inform and
thei suggest i might contact you okai
seek continu agreement
throughout the interview process from the introduct to the close the interview
should attempt to phrase question so that thei can be answer ye it is easier for peopl
to repli in the affirm than the neg
exampl
interview
okai
can you help me
that okai isnt it
do not invad bodi space
dure the introductori part of the interview the interview gener should remain at a
distanc of four to six feet do not invad the person zone closer than about three feet
as it might make the respond uncomfort
interview theori and applic investig
3222 2011 fraud examin manual
inform question
inform question ar nonconfront nonthreaten and ar ask for
informationgath purpos the great major of the interview question fall into
thi categori these type of question mai be ask dure ani of the follow type of
interview
interview to gain an understand of account control system
interview concern document
interview to gather inform regard busi oper or system
preemploy interview
inform question seek to elicit unbias factual inform the interview will be
alert to inconsist in fact or behavior
question sequenc
as a gener rule question should proce from the gener to the specif that is it is
best to seek gener inform befor seek detail a variat is to reach backward
with the question by begin with known inform and work toward unknown
area an effici method of do thi is to recount the known inform and then frame
the next question as a logic continu of the fact previous relat
it is common especi in account and fraudrel matter for figur or number to
be critic unfortun some wit ar unabl to recal specif amount the
interview can jog the memori of the respond by compar unknown item with item
of known quantiti
exampl
interview
wa the amount of monei involv more than last year figur
question techniqu
ask the right question is necessari to conduct an effect interview by us the right
question the interview can improv a whole rang of commun skill
inform question as well as other fall into sever gener categori but
gener inform question will be on of three type open close or lead
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3223
open question
open question ar those word in a wai that make it difficult to answer ye or no
the answer is also not depend on the question the typic open question call for a
monologu respons and it can be answer in sever differ wai dure the
inform phase of the interview the interview should endeavor to ask primarili
open question thi is to stimul convers some of the best open question ar
subtl command
exampl
interview
pleas tell me about your job
pleas tell me about the oper of your depart
what do you think about thi problem
pleas describ the procedur to me
close question
close question ar those that requir a precis answer usual ye or no close
question also deal with specif such as amount date and time as far as possibl
close question should be avoid in the inform part of the interview thei ar us
extens in close question
exampl
interview
do you work here
what dai of the week did it happen
lead question
lead question contain the answer as a part of the question most commonli thei ar
us to confirm fact alreadi known thi type of question give the subject much less room
to maneuv than an open or close question becaus thei direct the subject to answer in a
particular wai lead question impli that the interview alreadi know the answer
interview theori and applic investig
3224 2011 fraud examin manual
ask the subject to confirm what is alreadi known and thei can be particularli effect in
interview situat
exampl
interview
so there have been no chang in the oper sinc last year
ar you still emploi by the bailei book corpor
you got promot right
dont you get your incom from variou sourc
doubleneg question
question or statement contain doubleneg ar confus and often suggest an
answer opposit to the correct on thei should not be us
exampl
interview
didnt you suspect that someth wasnt right what doe a neg answer
mean here
complex question
complex question and statement ar too complic to be easili understood cover more
than on subject or topic requir more than on answer andor requir a complic
answer thei should be avoid
exampl
interview
what ar your duti here and ho w long have you been emploi
attitud question
the attitud of the interview can be convei by the structur of the question or
statement and by the manner in which the question is ask when the interview wish
to establish a friendli mood these question can be emploi
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3225
exampl
interview
how ar you do thi morn ms de la garza
do you like sport
it is alwai a good idea howev to ask a question for which you know beforehand
that the answer will be ye
control answer techniqu
control answer techniqu or statement might be us to stimul a desir answer or
impress these techniqu direct the interview toward a specif point for exampl it
might be possibl to get a person to admit knowledg of a matter by phrase the question
like thi i understand you were present when the intern control were develop would you pleas describ
how thei were construct thi phrase provid a stronger incent for the respond to
admit knowledg than doe were you present when the intern control were develop
to stimul the person to agre to talk or provid inform you might us a prompt
such as becaus you ar not involv in thi matter i am sure you would not mind discuss it with me
thi provid a stronger incent to cooper than do you have ani object to tell me
what you know avoid neg construct such as i dont guess you would mind answer a
few question
free narr
the free narr is an orderli continu account of an event or incid given with or
without prompt it is us to get a quick rsum of what is known about a matter be
sure to design specif the occurr that you wish to discuss
sometim the respond must be control to prevent unnecessari digress otherwis
us a minimum of interrupt and do not stop the narr without good reason the
respond will sometim provid valuabl clue when talk about thing that ar onli
partial relat to the matter under inquiri
suggest
below ar suggest to improv the qualiti of the interview dure the informationgath
phase
interview theori and applic investig
3226 2011 fraud examin manual
begin by ask question that ar not like to caus the respond to becom
defens or hostil
ask the question in a manner that will develop the fact in the order of their
occurr or in some other systemat order
ask onli on question at a time and frame the question so that onli on answer
is requir
ask straightforward and frank question gener avoid shrewd approach
give the respond ampl time to answer do not rush
try to help the respond rememb but do not suggest answer and be care not to
impli ani particular answer by facial express gestur method of ask question
or type of question ask
repeat or rephras question if necessari to get the desir fact
be sure you understand the answer and if thei ar not perfectli clear have the
respond interpret them at the time instead of ask for more explan later
give the respond an opportun to qualifi hi answer
separ fact from infer
have the respond give comparison by percentag fraction estim of time and
distanc and other such comparison to ascertain accuraci
get all of the fact almost everi respond can give you inform beyond what wa
initi provid
after the respond ha given a narr account ask question about everi item that
ha been discuss
upon conclus of the direct question ask the respond to summar the
inform given then summar the fact as you understand them and have the
respond verifi that these conclus ar correct
methodolog
onc the introduct ha been complet the interview need a transit into the bodi
of the interview thi is usual accomplish by ask peopl an easi question about
themselv or their duti
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3227
exampl
interview
as i said i am inform gather inform about bailei oper i dont know if
you can realli help me can you give me an idea of what you do here
begin with background question
assum the respond doe not have a problem answer the transit question the
interview should then ask a seri of easi open question design to get the respond
to talk about himself
exampl
interview
what is your exact titl
what do your respons involv
how long have you been assign here
what do you like best about your job
what do you like least about your job
what would you eventu like to do for the compani
overal how do you like your current job
observ verbal and nonverb behavior
dure the period when the respond is talk about himself the interview should
discreetli observ verbal and nonverb behavior
ask nonlead open question
open question techniqu ar us almost exclus in the inform phase of the
interview the question must be inquisitori and not accusatori rememb the most
effect question is construct as a subtl command
interview theori and applic investig
3228 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
pleas tell me about
pleas tell me about your current job procedur
pleas tell me what paperwork you ar respons for
pleas explain the chain of command in your depart
pleas tell me what procedur ar in effect to prevent error in the paperwork
pleas explain what you understand to be the system of check and balanc or intern
control in your depart
pleas explain where you see area that need to be improv in the system of check and
balanc in your depart
onc the respond ha answer open question the interview can go back and review
the fact in greater detail if the answer ar inconsist try to clarifi them but the
interview should not challeng the honesti or integr of the respond at thi point
approach sensit question carefulli
word such as routin question can be us to plai down the signific of the inquiri
it is import for informationgath purpos that the interview doe not react
excess to the respond statement the interview should not express shock
disgust or similar emot dure the interview follow ar exampl of wai to
discuss fraud within a compani the question ar pose in a hypothet wai to avoid
be accusatori
exampl
interview
part of my job is to prevent and uncov wast fraud and abus you understand that dont
you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3229
pleas tell me where you think the compani is wast asset or monei
where do you think the compani is vulner to someon here abus their posit
deal with resist
there is alwai the possibl that the respond will refus a request for interview when
the respond and the interview have no connect studi show that as mani as 65
percent of the respond will refus an interview if contact first by telephon in
contrast on studi conclud that onli onethird of respond will be reluct to be
interview when contact in person the more unpleas the topic the more like the
respond is to refus
with inexperienc interview there is a danger that the interview will perceiv
resist when there is none as a result the interview might becom defens it is
incumb upon the interview to overcom such feel to complet the interview the
follow ar specif exampl of the type of resist that will be encount and how
to try to overcom them
im too busi
when the interview contact the respond without a previou appoint there is a
possibl that the respond will be too busi at the moment to cooper im too busi
is also us as an excus for the real sourc of the person resist which might be
lethargi ego threat or a dislik of talk to stranger these situat can be diffus by
the interview stress that
the interview will be short
the interview is alreadi there
the project is import
the interview will not be difficult
the interview need help
i dont know anyth about it
the interview will sometim get thi respons immedi after state the purpos of the
interview thi resist is typic diffus by accept the statement and then
respond with a question for exampl if a person sai i dont know anyth a typic
respons would be
interview theori and applic investig
3230 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
i see what do your duti involv then
or
well that wa on of the thing i want to find out do you know about intern control
then
i dont rememb
usual thi is not an express of resist instead it is an express of modesti
tent or caution on of the best wai to respond is to simpli remain silent while
the person is deliber he is sai in effect give me a moment to think if thi is not
success the best wai to counter is to pose an altern narrow question as with other
symptom of resist the resist is accept and diffus and an altern question
is pose
exampl
interview
mr mcguir i understand you might not rememb the entir transact do you rememb
if it wa more than 10000
or
it okai if you dont rememb the detail do you rememb how it made you react at the
time
what do you mean by that
when the respond ask thi question it might repres a symptom of mild resist
with which the respond is attempt to shift the attent from himself to the
interview it also might be a wai for the respond to stall for time while deliber or
it could be that the respond is not sure what the interview question mean the
interview should typic react to such a question by treat it as a mere request for
clarif the interview should not becom defens to do so gener will escal
the resist
difficult peopl
the interview will invari encount a few difficult peopl there ar five common
sens step to take with such peopl
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3231
dont react
sometim a respond will insist on give the interview a hard time for no appar
reason though in realiti there can be a multitud of reason why the person refus to
cooper there ar three natur reaction for the interview verbal assail by the
respond to strike back to give in or to termin the interview none of these tactic is
satisfactori as none lead to a product interview instead the interview should
conscious ensur that he doe not react to anger with hostil
disarm the person
a common mistak is to try to reason with an unrecept person you must disarm the
hostil person the best tactic is surpris if the person is stonewal he expect the
interview to appli pressur if attack the person expect the interview to resist to
disarm the person listen acknowledg the point and agre wherev you can
chang tactic
in some situat chang tactic to reduc hostil might be the onli viabl option thi
mean cast what the respond sai in a form that direct attent back to the problem
and to the interest of both side thi normal mean ask the respond what he would
do to solv the problem
make it easi to sai ye
in try to negoti with difficult peopl the usual tactic is for the interview to make a
statement and attempt to get the respond to agre with it a better choic is to agre with
on of the respond statement and go from there it is better to break statement into
smaller on that would be difficult to disagre with thi help the difficult person
save face
make it hard to sai no
on wai of make it difficult to sai no is by ask re alitybas whatif question
these type of question ar us to get the respond to think of the consequ of
not agre
exampl
interview
what do you think will happen if we dont agre
interview theori and applic investig
3232 2011 fraud examin manual
what do you think i will have to do from here
what will you do
volatil interview
a volatil interview is on that ha the potenti to bring about strong emot reaction in
the respond typic volatil interview involv close friend and rel of a miscreant
coconspir and similar individu
the person characterist of those involv in the volatil interview vari the type
list repres the most common person characterist associ with volatil
interview some individu by natur ar resent of author figur such as fraud
examin and law enforc offic
friend rel and romant interest of a target often make for a difficult interview thei
perceiv that the examin is out to get someon close to them
physic symptom
in volatil interview the individu typic react rather than think and frequent the
individu is openli hostil to the interview individu experienc heighten emot
frequent have a dry mouth and tend to lick their lip and swallow more frequent than
normal throat clear is also an audibl sign of emot restless can be indic by
fidget shift in a chair and foottap peopl under emot stress frequent
perspir more than normal
under stress a person complexion frequent chang peopl might look red or flush
or might appear to be pale dure stress the heart beat more frequent and a keen
observ can see the carotid arteri actual pulsat the carotid arteri is the larg arteri on
each side of the neck
if an individu in a normal situat maintain ey contact an avoid of ey contact
could indic that he is under stress it is import to realiz that symptom ar not present
in all emot situat
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3233
other consider
there should be two interview involv in potenti volatil situat thi procedur
provid psycholog strength for the interview addition the second person can
serv as a wit in the event the interview turn bad
surpris should be emploi in ani interview that is consid potenti volatil in mani
instanc the potenti volatil respond is unawar that he is go to be question
and will therefor be off guard if the interview is not conduct by surpris the interview
run the risk of the respond not show up show up with a wit or be present
with counsel
in a potenti volatil interview the order of question should be out of sequenc thi is
to keep the volatil respond from know exactli the natur of the inquiri and where it
is lead although the interview will endeavor to obtain inform regard who
what why when where and how the order of the question will vari from that of other
interview thi techniqu is especi import in situat where the respond might
be attempt to protect himself
the hypothet question is gener consid to be less threaten and is therefor
ideal suit for the potenti volatil interview for exampl if you ar interview mr
smith regard mr jone rather than sai did mr jone do it ask is there ani reason why
mr jone would have done it
overcom object
volatil wit voic numer object to be interview some of the most
common object along with suggest respons ar list below
exampl
respond
i dont want to be involv
interview
the interview should answer thi question by point out that he would not be
there ask question if the respond were not involv point out that you ar
save the respond troubl by discuss the matter inform do not sai off
the record
interview theori and applic investig
3234 2011 fraud examin manual
respond
why should i talk to you
interview
the interview should answer that he is try to clear up a problem and that the
respond assist is import
respond
you cant prove that
interview
the interview should tell the person that he is not try to prove or disprov you
ar simpli gather inform
respond
you cant make me talk
interview
tell the person that you ar not attempt to make him do anyth you ar try
to resolv a problem and would deepli appreci help
close question
in routin inform interview close the interview on a posit note is a must
dure interview close question ar ask for the follow purpos to reconfirm
fact to gather addit fact and to conclud the interview
reconfirm fact
it is not unusu for the interview to have misunderstood or misinterpret statement of
the respond therefor to ensur that the interview understood the inform that
the wit provid he should review the kei fact dure the close phase of the
interview howev the interview should not attempt to revisit all the inform
provid by the subject onli the fact that ar most relev
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3235
exampl
interview
ms de la garza i want to make sure i have my inform straight let me take a
minut and summar what weve discuss
go over each of the kei fact in summari form the question should be close so that the
wit can respond either ye or no
gather addit fact
the closingquest phase also seek to obtain fact previous unknown it provid the
respond further opportun to sai whatev thei want about the matter at hand
if appropri the interview can ask if there ar other document or wit that would
be help to the case do not promis confidenti instead sai ill keep your name as quiet
as possibl final the interview want to leav the discuss on a posit note
peopl be interview often do not volunt addit inform regard other
wit or evid the theme therefor is to provid the respond an opportun to
furnish further relev fact or opinion at the conclus attempt to determin which
fact provid by the respond ar the most relev do not attempt to go over all the
inform a second time
exampl
interview
you have known linda reed collin eight year correct
you knew collin had some financi problem is that right
you suspectedbut didnt know for sureth at collin might have had an improp
relationship with on of our vendor is that correct
on absolut vital fact provid by the respond add ar you sure
exampl
interview
ms de la garza ar you sure you su spect ms collin falsifi invoic
interview theori and applic investig
3236 2011 fraud examin manual
to obtain addit fact ask the respond if there is someth els she would like to
sai thi give the correct impress that the interview is interest in all relev
inform regardless of which side it favor try to activ involv the respond in
help solv the caseif you were try to resolv thi issu what would you do thi
techniqu give the respond an opportun to assist the interview and it make the
respond feel like a vital part of the interview in addit ask the wit if there is
anyth els thei would like to sai open the door for them to provid addit
inform that wa not specif ask for similarli ask the subject if thei know of
someon els whom you might talk to can be help and lead to other potenti sourc
of inform
exampl
interview
ms de la garza there might be someon els i should talk to ar there document
avail that relat to thi that we havent alreadi discuss if i keep your name as quiet as
possibl ar there ani suggest you can give me about whom els i might talk to about thi
or
ar there ani other document or evid i might look for
or
if you were in my shoe what would you do next
conclud the interview
establish rapport with the subject is import becaus it help ensur futur
cooper ask if the respond ha anyth els to sai thi give the respond on
final time chanc to make ani statement also ask if the interview can call with ani
addit question it leav the door open to addit cooper
to maintain good will it is also a good idea to ask respond if thei have been treat
fairli it is especi help to ask thi when the respond ha not been cooper or at
the conclus of an admissionseek interview the interview gener should ask the
question as if it were perfunctori
exampl
interview
ms de la garza thi is just a standard que stion do you feel that i have treat you fairli
in thi interview
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3237
in addit leav the respond a busi card or a telephon number invit the
respond to call about anyth els relev
also in some case the interview should attempt to obtain a commit that the
respond will not discuss the matter howev thi step is not recommend with advers
or hostil respond it mai give them the idea to share the inform here is an
exampl of the proper approach
exampl
interview
in these kind of situat innoc peopl ca n have their reput hurt becaus of rumor
and innuendo we dont want that to happen and neither do you therefor id like your
cooper can i count on you not to discuss thi until all the fact ar out
final the interview should shake hand with the respond and thank them for their
time and inform
exampl
interview
ms de la garza i know you have given your time and effort to help me i appreci it
goodby
assess question
the closer you get to the admissionseek interview the greater chanc of face
decept wit might try to cover up what thei know and the target mai lie to try to
convinc you that thei ar not guilti when you believ the respond answer mai be
decept you should begin ask assess question
assess question seek to establish the credibl of the respond thei ar us onli
when the interview consid previou statement by the respond to be inconsist
becaus of possibl decept
onc the respond ha answer all question about the event and the interview ha
reason to believ the respond is be decept a theme must be establish to justifi
addit question thi theme can ordinarili be put forth by sai i have a few addit
interview theori and applic investig
3238 2011 fraud examin manual
question do not indic in ani wai that these question ar for a differ purpos than
seek inform
norm or calibr
norm or calibr is the process of observ behavior befor critic question ar ask
as oppos to do so dure question norm should be a routin part of all
interview peopl with truth attitud will answer question on wai those with
untruth attitud will gener answer them differ assess question ask the
subject to agre with matter that go against the principl of most honest peopl in other
word dishonest peopl ar like to agre with mani of the statement while honest peopl
wont assess question ar design primarili to get a verbal or nonverb reaction
from the respond the interview will then carefulli assess that reaction
suggest for observ the verbal and physic behavior of the respond includ
us your sens of touch sight and hear to establish a norm
do not stare or call attent to the person behavior symptom
be awar of the respond entir bodi
observ the time and consist of behavior
note cluster of behavior
the best wai to calibr a wit is through the us of noncrit question on
background inform place of employ and the like if the wit displai gener
nervous or other verbal and nonverb clue dure thi phase of question
subsequ indic mai not be reliabl the kei is to observ chang in behavior when
pertin question ar ask
base on the respond reaction to the assess question the interview then
consid all the verbal and nonverb respons togeth not in isol to decid
whether to proce to the admissionseek phase of the interview no on behavior
should be isol or a conclus drawn from it thei should be consid togeth
physiolog of decept
it is said that everyon li and doe so for on of two reason to receiv reward or to
avoid punish in most peopl ly produc stress the human bodi will attempt to
reliev thi stress even in practic liar through verbal and nonverb clue
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3239
conclus concern behavior must be temper by a number of factor the physic
environ in which the interview is conduct can affect behavior if the respond is
comfort fewer behavior quirk might be exhibit the more intellig the respond
the more reliabl verbal and nonverb clue will be if the respond is bias toward the
interview or vice versa thi will affect behavior
peopl who ar mental unstabl or ar under the influenc of drug will be unsuit to
interview behavior symptom of juvenil ar gener unreli racial ethnic and
econom factor should be carefulli note some cultur for exampl discourag look
directli at someon other cultur us certain bodi languag that might be misinterpret
becaus profession patholog liar often ar familiar with interview techniqu thei ar
less like to furnish observ behavior clue
verbal clue
verbal clue ar those relat to word express and respons to specif question
verbal respons includ spoken word and gestur that serv as word substitut
includ nod or shake the head to indic ye and no the follow ar some
exampl of verbal clue
chang in speech pattern
decept peopl often speed up or slow down their speech or speak louder there might
be a chang in the voic pitch as a person becom tens the vocal chord constrict
decept peopl also have a tendenc to cough or clear their throat dure time of
decept
repetit of the question
repeat the question is a mean for a decept respond to gain more time to think of
what to sai the respond mai repeat the question verbatim or he mai frame the answer
with a request to repeat the question eg what wa that again or similar languag
convers a truth subject usual doe not have to contempl hi answer
comment regard interview
decept peopl will often complain about the physic environ of the interview room
such as it cold in here thei will also sometim ask how much longer the interview
will take
interview theori and applic investig
3240 2011 fraud examin manual
select memori
in some case the decept person will have a fine memori for insignific event but
when it come to the import fact just cant seem to rememb
make excus
dishonest peopl will frequent make excus about thing that look bad for them such as
im alwai nervou dont pai ani attent to that
emphasi on certain word
on frequent occas dishonest peopl will a dd what thei believ to be credibl to their
li by us of emphasi
oath
dishonest person frequent us express such as i swear to god honestli frankli
or to tell the truth to add credibl to their li
charact testimoni
a liar will often request that the interview check with my wife or talk to my minist
thi is frequent done to add credibl to a fals statement
answer with a question
rather than deni the alleg outright the liar might frequent answer with a question
such as why would i do someth like that as a variat the decept person will
sometim question the interview procedur by ask why ar you pick on me
overus of respect
some decept peopl will go out of their wai to be respect and friendli when accus
of wrongdo it is unnatur for a person to react in a friendli and respect manner
exampl
respond
im sorri sir i know your just do your job but i didnt do it
increasingli weaker denial
when an honest person is accus of someth he did not do that person is like to
becom angri or forc in make denial the more the innoc person is accus the
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3241
more forc the denial becom the dishonest person on the other hand is like to make
a weak denial upon repeat accus the dishonest person denial becom weaker to
the point that the person becom silent
failur to deni
dishonest peopl ar more like than honest peopl to deni an event specif an
honest person might offer a simpl and clear no while the dishonest person will qualifi the
denial no i did not steal 43500 fr om the compani on june 27 other qualifi denial phrase
includ to the best of my memori and as far as i recal or similar languag
avoid of emot word
a liar will often avoid emotion provoc term such as steal lie and crime instead the
dishonest person frequent prefer soft word such as borrow and it refer to the deed
in question
refus to implic other suspect
both the honest respond and the liar will have a natur reluct to name other
involv in misde howev the liar will frequent refus to implic possibl suspect
no matter how much pressur is appli by the interview thi is becaus the culpabl
person doe not want the circl of suspicion to be narrow
toler attitud
dishonest peopl typic have toler attitud toward miscreant conduct the interview
in an intern theft case might ask what should happen to thi person when he is caught the
honest person will usual sai thei should be firedprosecut the dishonest individu is
much more like to repli how should i know or mayb he is a good employe who got into
problem perhap he should be given a second chanc
reluct to termin interview
dishonest peopl will gener be more reluct than honest on to termin the
interview the dishonest individu want to convinc the interview that he is not
respons so that the investig will not continu the honest person on the other
hand gener ha no such reluct
interview theori and applic investig
3242 2011 fraud examin manual
feign unconcern
the dishonest person will often try to appear casual and unconcern will frequent adopt
an unnatur slouch postur and might react to question with nervou or fals laughter
or feebl attempt at humor the honest person convers will typic be veri concern
about be suspect of wrongdo and will treat the interview question serious
nonverb clue
nonverb clue to decept includ variou bodi movement and postur accompani
the verbal repli some of these ar discuss below
fullbodi motion
when ask sensit or emot question the dishonest person will typic chang hi
postur complet as if move awai from the interview the honest person will
frequent lean forward toward the interview when question ar seriou
anatom physic respons
anatom physic respons ar those involuntari reaction by the bodi to fright such as
increas heart rate shallow or labor breath or excess perspir these reaction
ar typic of dishonest peopl accus of wrongdo
illustr
illustr ar the motion made primarili with the hand to demonstr point when
talk dure nonthreaten question the illustr might be done at on rate dure
threaten question the us of illustr might increas or decreas
hand over the mouth
frequent dishonest peopl will cover the mouth with the hand or finger dure
decept thi reaction goe back to childhood when mani children cover their mouth
when tell a lie it is done subconsci to conceal the statement
manipul
manipul ar motion like pick lint from cloth plai with object such as
pencil or hold on hand while talk manipul ar displac activ that
reduc nervous
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3243
flee posit
dure the interview dishonest peopl will often postur themselv in a flee posit
while the head and trunk might be face the interview the feet and lower portion of the
bodi might be point toward the door in an unconsci effort to flee from the
interview
cross the arm
cross on arm over the middl zone of the bodi is a classic defens reaction to
difficult or uncomfort question a variat is cross the feet under the chair and
lock them these cross motion occur mostli when be decept
reaction to evid
while try to be outwardli concern the guilti person will have a keen interest in
implic evid the dishonest person will often look at document present by the
interview attempt to be casual about observ them and then shove them awai as if
want noth to do with the evid
most action that ar design to interrupt the flow of speech ar stress relat exampl
includ
close the mouth tightli
purs the lip
cover the mouth with the hand
lip and tongu bite
lick the lip
chew on object
genuin smile usual involv the whole mouth fals on ar confin to the upper half
peopl involv in decept tend to smirk rather than to smile
cross
the bodi or leg might be cross to reduc stress when the hand ar cross the bodi it
is a defens gestur to protect the soft underbelli
methodolog of assess question
assess question should proce logic from the least to the most sensit the
follow question illustr the pattern that an interview might take in question a
interview theori and applic investig
3244 2011 fraud examin manual
wit when he ha some reason to believ the respond a compani employe ha
knowledg of a suspect fraud in most exampl the question basi is explain befor
the question is ask the initi question seek agreement
the follow question assum the examin ha some reason to believ the respond a
compani employe ha knowledg of a suspect fraud
exampl
interview
the compani is particularli concern about fraud and abus there ar some new law in
effect that will cost the compani million if abu es go on and we dont try to find them do you
know which law i am talk about
explan
most individu will not know about the law concern corpor sentenc
guidelin and will therefor answer no the purpos of thi question is to get the
respond to understand the seriou natur of fraud and abus
exampl
interview
congress recent pass a law last year that can levi fine of more than 200 million against
compani that dont try to clean their own hous 200 million is a lot of monei so you can
understand why the compani concern cant you
explan
the major of peopl will sai ye to thi question in the event of a no answer the
interview should explain the issu fulli and thereaft attempt to get the respond
agreement if that agreement is not forthcom the interview should assess why not
exampl
interview
of cours thei ar not talk about a loyal employe who get in a bind theyr talk
more about senior manag have you ever read in the newspap about what kind of
peopl engag in compani misde
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3245
explan
most peopl read the newspap and ar at least gener familiar with the problem of
fraud and abus agreement by the respond is expect to thi question
exampl
interview
most of them arent crimin at all a lot of time theyr just try to save their job or just
try to get by becaus the compani is so cheap that it wont pai peopl what thei ar worth
do you know what i mean
explan
although the honest person and the dishonest person will both probabl answer ye
to thi question the honest individu is less like to accept the premis that these
peopl ar not wrongdoer mani honest peopl might repli ye i understand but that
doesnt justifi steal
exampl
interview
why do you think someon around here might be justifi in take compani properti
explan
becaus fraud perpetr frequent justifi their act the dishonest individu is more
like than the honest person to attempt a justif such as everyon doe it or the
compani should treat peopl better if thei dont want them to steal the honest person on the
other hand is much more like to sai there is no justif for steal from the compani it
is dishonest
exampl
interview
how do you think we should deal with someon who got in a bind and did someth wrong in
the ey of the compani
explan
similar to other question in thi seri the ho nest person want to throw the book at the
miscreant while the culpabl individu typic will sai how should i know it not up to
me or if thei were a good employe mayb we should give them anoth chanc
interview theori and applic investig
3246 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
interview
do you think someon in your depart might have taken someth from the compani
becaus thei thought thei were justifi
explan
most peopl honest or dishonest will answer no to thi question the culpabl
person howev will more like sai ye wi thout elabor the honest person if
answer ye will most like provid detail
exampl
interview
have you ever felt yourselfeven though you di dnt go through with itjustifi in take
advantag of your posit
explan
again most peopl both honest and dishonest will answer thi question no the
dishonest person howev is more like to acknowledg have at least thought of
do it
exampl
interview
who in your depart do you feel would think thei were justifi in do someth against
the compani
explan
the dishonest person will not like furnish an answer to thi question sai instead
that i guess anyon could have a justif if thei want to the honest individu on the
other hand is more like to name namesalbeit reluctantli
exampl
interview
do you believ that most peopl will tell their manag if thei believ a colleagu wa do
someth wrong like committin g fraud against the compani
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3247
explan
the honest person ha more of a sens of integr and is much more like to report a
misde the dishonest person is more like to sai no when press for an
explan thi person will typic sai no noth would be done about it and thei
wouldnt believ me anyhow
exampl
interview
is there ani reason why someon who work with you would sai thei thought you might feel
justifi in do someth wrong
explan
thi is a hypothet question design to place the thought in the mind of a wrongdoer
that someon ha name him as a suspect the honest person will typic sai no
the dishonest person is more like to try to explain by sai someth like i know
there ar peopl around here who dont like me
exampl
interview
what would concern you most if you did someth wrong and it wa found out
explan
the dishonest person is like to sai someth like i wouldnt want to go to jail the
honest person howev might reject the notion by sai im not concern at all becaus
i havent done anyth if the honest person doe explain it will usual be along the line
of disappoint friend or famili the di shonest person is more like to mention
punit measur
interview theori and applic investig
3248 2011 fraud examin manual
typic attitud displai by respond
truth untruth
calm impati
relax tens
cooper defens
concern outwardli unconcern
sincer overli friendli polit
inflex defeat
cordial surli
admissionseek question
the choic of when to conduct an admissionseek interview of a suspect is critic
normal the interview should ask accusatori or admissionseek question when there
is a reason probabl that the respond ha commit the act in question all other
reason investig step have been complet and as much inform as possibl ha
been develop from other sourc and the interview can reason control the place
time and subject matter of the interview an assess of culpabl might be base on
verbal and nonverb respons to interview question as well as document physic
evid and other interview
a transit theme is necessari when proceed from assessmentseek question to
admissionseek question part of the purpos of thi theme is to creat in the mind of
the miscreant that he ha been caught under the ideal circumst the interview will
leav the room for just a few minut sai thi is to check on someth if the
interview ha incrimin document copi can be place insid a file folder and
brought back to the interview if no document exist it might be appropri to fill a file
folder with blank paper
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3249
exampl
when the interview return to the room the file folder is place on the desk and the
interview ask is there someth that you would like to tell me about
or
is there ani reason why some on would sai that you
hand the document to the respond and ask for comment do not introduc the
evid or explain it in about 20 percent of the case the miscreant will admit to
incrimin conduct if not proce onc the interview is reason convinc of
guilt it might be appropri to confront the respond
purpos of question
admissionseek question have at least three purpos the first purpos is to distinguish
innoc peopl from guilti a culpabl individu will frequent confess dure the
admissionseek phase of an interview while an innoc person will not do so unless
threat or coercion ar us in some instanc the onli wai to differenti the culpabl
from the innoc is to seek an admiss of guilt
the second purpos is to obtain a valid confess confess under the law must be
voluntarili obtain the import of a valid and bind confess to wrongdo
cannot be overst the third purpos of admissionseek question is to convinc the
confessor to sign a written statement acknowledg the fact although oral confess ar
legal as bind as written on the written statement ha greater credibl it also
discourag miscreant from later attempt to recant
prepar
the interview should be schedul when the interview can control the situat it
normal should not be conduct on the accus turf and is best conduct by surpris
interview room
when prepar a room for an admissionseek interview it is import that the
interview consid the privaci afford by the room the locat should establish a sens
of privaci the door should be close but not lock there should be no physic barrier
prevent the target from leav and the suspect should be made awar that he is free to
leav thi is to avoid alleg of custodi interrog
interview theori and applic investig
3250 2011 fraud examin manual
distract should be kept to a minimum ideal there should be no photograph
window or other object in the room chair should be place about four to six feet apart
and the accus should not be permit to sit behind ani physic barrier such as chair
tabl or desk thi is to prohibit a psycholog barrier for the accus to hide behind
notetak
when conduct an admissionseek interview note take should be kept to a minimum
in some case take note should be altogeth avoid sinc the ultim goal of the
admissionseek interview is to obtain a sign statement in which the suspect admit guilt
it is not necessari to take extens note which can be distract to the suspect and can
reveal what point the examin believ to be import note if taken dure the
interview should be done in a wai that doe not reveal their signific
presenc of outsid
it is usual not necessari to inform the subject that he mai have counsel present of cours
thi right cannot be deni if the subject wish to have an attornei present if counsel is
present you should have an understand that he will be an observ onli attornei should
not ask question or object other than the subject and two examin no other observ
should be permit in the admissionseek interview if the accus is in a union a union
repres or a union attornei might have the right to attend howev thi might
present legal problem in broadcast the alleg to a third parti it is veri difficult to
obtain a confess with wit present the examin should therefor consid whether
the case can be proven without the admissionseek interview pleas refer to the law
section of the fraud examin manual for more inform
miranda warn
as a gener rule privat employe conduct an intern investig ar not requir to
give miranda warn howev there ar except to the rule see the chapter on
individu right in the law section of the fraud examin manual for more inform
theme develop
peopl rare confess voluntarili peopl will confess to matter when thei perceiv that the
benefit of confess outweigh the penalti a good interview through the applic of
sophist techniqu will be abl to convinc the respond that the confess is in hi
best interest
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3251
peopl gener will not confess if thei believ that there is doubt in the mind of the accus
regard their guilt the interview must convei absolut confid in the admissionseek
even if not fulli convinc the inter viewer must make the accus in the form
of a statement of fact accusatori question do not ask did you do it thei ask why did
you do it
an innoc person gener will not accept the question premis peopl confess need
adequ time to come to term with their guilt obtain admiss and confess take
patienc therefor admissionseek interview should be done onli when there is
suffici privaci and time is not a factor the interview must not express disgust outrag
or moral condemn about the confessor action to do so goe against the basic logic
of obtain confess which can be sum up as maxim sympathi and minim the
percept of moral wrongdo
the interview must offer a moral accept reason for the confessor behavior the
interview cannot convei to the accus that he is a bad person guilti peopl will
almost never confess under such condit to obtain a confess the interview must be
firm but must project compass understand and sympathi the interview must
attempt to keep the confessor from voic a denial onc the accus deni the act
overcom that posit will be veri difficult
the threat of a lawsuit is alwai present when alleg of wrongdo ar made against
certain employe it is therefor import that examin understand exactli what action
ar permit so that thei can avoid potenti liabil it is gener legal to accus innoc
peopl of misde thei did not commit as long as
the accus ha reason suspicion or predic to believ the accus ha
commit an offens
the accus is made under condit of privaci
the accus doe not take ani action like to make an innoc person confess
the accus is conduct under reason condit
step in the admissionseek interview
direct accus
the accus should not be made in the form of a question but as a statement emot
word such as steal fraud and crime should be avoid dure the accusatori process the
interview theori and applic investig
3252 2011 fraud examin manual
accus should be phrase as though the accus guilt ha alreadi been establish so
that the accus is psycholog trap with no wai out
exampl
wrong
we have reason to believ that you
or
we think suspect you might have
right
our investig ha clearli establish that you
made a fals entri avoid fraud
took compani asset without permiss avoid us theft embezzl or steal
accept monei from a vendor avoid bribe or kickback
have not told the complet truth avoid lie or fraud
or
we have been conduct an investig into and you ar the onli person we
have not been abl to elimin as be respons
observ reaction
when accus of wrongdo the typic guilti person will react with silenc if the accus
doe deni culpabl those denial will usual be weak in some case the accus will
almost mumbl the denial it is common for the culpabl individu to avoid outright denial
rather that person will give reason why he could not have commit the act in question
the innoc person will sometim react with genuin shock at be accus it is not at
all unusu for an innoc person wrongfulli accus to react with anger as oppos to
the guilti person the innoc person will strongli deni carri out the act or act
in question
repeat accus
if the accus doe not strenuous object after the accus is made the interview
should repeat the accus with the same degre of convict and strength
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3253
exampl
interview
as i said linda our examin ha conclud that you ar the respons person it is not
so much a question of what you did but why you did it
interrupt denial
both the truth and untruth person will normal object to and deni the accus
but when compar to an innoc person a culpabl person is more like to stop short of
an outright denial i didnt do it and is more apt to furnish the interview with
explan as to why he is not the respons parti an innoc person is unlik to
allow the interview to prevail in stop the denial
exampl
respond
i wasnt even there the dai that entri wa made
or
it could have been anybodi
or
i dont know what your talk about
both the innoc and the guilti person will make an outright denial if forc to do so
accordingli the interview should not solicit a denial at thi stage of the admissionseek
interview
exampl
wrong
interview
did you do thi
or
ar you the respons person
right
interview
why did you do thi
addition the interview must prevent the subject from make an outright denial
becaus it becom extrem difficult to chang a denial onc it is utter if the person
interview theori and applic investig
3254 2011 fraud examin manual
deni the accus and later admit it he is admit to ly and thi type of admiss
is hard to make therefor the interview job is to prevent the subject from make an
outright denial therebi make it easier for the subject to confess to the act
examin can us sever techniqu to stop or interrupt denial
delai
on of the most effect techniqu to stop or interrupt the denial is through a delai
tactic the interview should not argu with the accus but rather attempt to delai the
outright denial
exampl
interview
linda i hear what you ar sai but let me finish first then you can talk
the innoc person usual will not hold on or let the interview continu to develop
the theme
repeat interrupt
occasion it might be necessari to interrupt the accus attempt denial repeatedli
becaus thi stage is crucial the interview should be prepar to increas the tone of the
interrupt to the point when he is prepar to sai linda if you keep interrupt i am go
to have to termin thi convers the guilti individu will find thi threaten becaus she
want to know the extent of incrimin evid in the interview possess
reason
if the abov techniqu ar unsuccess the interview might attempt to reason with the
accus and emploi some of the tactic normal us for diffus alibi see below
under these tactic the accus is present with evid implic him the interview
howev normal should not disclos all the fact of the case but rather small portion here
and there
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3255
exampl
interview
i know what you sai linda but that doesnt squar with these invoic here in front of me
look at the invoic in the amount of 1021 36 the fact clearli show you ar respons
do not ask the accus to explain the evid at thi point
or
linda i have talk to mani pe opl befor i sat down here with you i am not ask you if
your respons i know you ar thi is your opportun to tell your side to someon who can
understand do not disclos the ident or number of the wit who have
been interview
establish ration
onc the accus ha been made repeat and denial ar stop it is time for the
interview to establish a moral accept ration that will allow the accus to
squar the misde with hi conscienc it is not necessari that thi theme be relat to the
underli caus of the misconduct it is common and accept for the accus to explain
awai the moral consequ of the action by seiz onto ani plausibl explan other
than be a bad person
if the accus doe not seem to relat to on theme the interview should go on to anoth
until on seem to fit thereaft that theme should be develop fulli note that the theme
develop explain awai the moralbut not the legalconsequ of the misde
the interview is caution not to make ani statement that would lead the accus to
believ he will be excus from legal liabil by cooper
the question pose in the exampl rather than be confront constantli seek
agreement from the accus the interview must strike a balanc between be in control
of the interview and still appear compassion and understand again no matter what
conduct the accus ha supposedli commit the interview should not express shock
outrag or condemn
unfair treatment
probabl the most common explan for crimin activ in gener and intern fraud in
particular is unfair treatment and the accus attempt to achiev equiti studi have
shown that counterproduct employe behaviorinclud stealingi motiv
primarili by job dissatisfact employe and other feel that strik ing back is import
interview theori and applic investig
3256 2011 fraud examin manual
to their selfesteem the sensit interview can capit on these feel by suggest
to the accus that he is a victim
exampl
interview
linda i feel like i know what make you tick and i know it isnt like you to do someth
like thi without a reason you have work hard here to get a good reput i dont think
the compani ha paid you what your realli worth and that the wai you feel too isnt it
or
linda iv seen situat like thi befor and i think the compani brought thi on
themselv if you had been fairli treat thi wouldnt have happen dont you agre
inadequ recognit
some employe might feel that their effort have gone complet without notic by the
compani as with similar theme the interview should be empathet
exampl
interview
linda i have found out a few thing about you it look to me that you have given a lot more
to thi compani than thei have re cogniz isnt that right linda
financi problem
intern crimin especi execut and upper manag frequent engag in fraud
to conceal their true financi condit either person or busi here ar exampl of
how to develop a theme involv financi problem as a motiv in the follow exampl
e j is an execut of a compani and is suspect of fraud
exampl
interview
e j i wa astonish to find out some of your invest have taken such a beat i dont
know how you manag to keep everyth afloat as well as you did you just did thi to stai
aliv financi didnt you e j
or
e j i have found out what youv been paid around here and frankli i wa surpris i
thought it might be a lot more no wonder you had to get involv in thi you pretti much
need to do thi to surviv didnt you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3257
aberr of conduct
mani miscreant believ their conduct constitut an aberr in their live and that it is
not repres of their true charact the interview might establish thi theme by
appli the follow exampl
exampl
interview
linda i know thi is total out of charact for you i know that thi would never have
happen if someth wasnt go on in your life isnt that right linda
or
e j youv work hard all your life to get a good reput i feel you wouldnt normal
have done someth like thi it just doesnt fit unless you felt like you were forc into it you
felt forc to do thi didnt you e j
famili problem
some peopl commit fraud becaus of famili problem financi woe caus by divorc
an unfaith spous or demand children men especi who have been social
condit to tie their masculin to earn power might hold the notion that wealth
connot famili respect for their part women have been found to commit whitecollar
crime in the name of their respons to the need of their husband and children the
skill interview can convert thi motiv to hi advantag by appli on of the follow
approach
exampl
interview
linda i know you have had some famili problem i know your recent divorc ha been
difficult for you and i know how it is when these problem occur you never would have done
thi if it hadnt been for famili problem isnt that right linda
or
e j someon in your posit and with your ethic just doesnt do thing like thi without a
reason and i think that reason ha to do with try to make the best possibl life for your
famili i know it would be difficult for me to admit to my famili that were not as well off as we
were last year and that why you did thi isnt it e j
interview theori and applic investig
3258 2011 fraud examin manual
accus action
dont disclos the accus ident if it is not alreadi known but in case where the
accus ident is known to the accus it can be help to blame the accus for the
problem the accus can be a colleagu manag auditor fraud examin or ani similar
person altern the problem can be blame on the compani
exampl
interview
linda you know what these auditor ar like thei ar hire to turn over everi stone i
wonder how thei would look if we put them under a microscop compar to other thing that
ar go on what youv done isnt that bad right linda
or
e j i realli blame a larg part of thi on the compani if some of the thing that went on
around thi compani were known it would make what youv done seem pretti small in
comparison wouldnt it e j
stress drug and alcohol
employe will sometim turn to drug or alcohol to reduc stress in some instanc the
stress itself will lead to aberr behavior in a few individu a ration establish
by the interview could be similar to the follow
exampl
interview
linda i know what youv done isnt realli you insid you have been in a lot of turmoil a
lot of peopl drink too much when thei have problem i have been through period like that
myself and when thing build up insid it sometim make all of us do someth we
shouldnt that what happen here isnt it linda
or
e j your on of the most respect men in thi compani i know you have been under
tremend pressur to succe too much pressur realli there is onli so much ani of us can
take that behind what ha happen here isnt it e j
reveng
similar to other theme reveng can be effect develop as a motiv in thi techniqu
the interview attempt to blame the offens on the accus feel that he must get
back at someon or someth
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3259
exampl
interview
linda what ha happen is out of charact for you i think you were try to get back at
your supervisor for the time he pass you over for a rais i would probabl feel the same
that what happen isnt it linda
or
e j everyon around here know that the board ha not support you in your effort to turn
thi compani around i would understand if you said to yourself ill show them is that what
happen e j
deperson the victim
in case involv employe theft an effect techniqu is to deperson the victim the
accus is better abl to cope with the moral dilemma of hi action if the victim is a faceless
corpor or agenc
exampl
interview
linda it isnt like you took someth from a friend or neighbor i can see how you could sai
well thi would be okai to do as long as it wa against the compani and not my cowork
is that right linda
or
e j it not like what youv done ha realli hurt on person mayb you thought of it thi
wai at most iv cost each sharehold a few cent is that the wai it wa e j
minor moral infract
the interview in mani case can reduc the accus percept of the moral serious
of the matter thi is not to be confus with the legal serious fraud examin and
interview should be care to avoid make statement that could be constru as
reliev legal respons for exampl the examin should not state it is not a big deal
legal it just a technic violat instead the interview should plai down the moral side
on effect wai is through comparison such as those illustr below
exampl
interview
linda thi problem we have doesnt mean your jack the ripper when you compar what
youv done to thing other peopl do thi situat seem pretti insignific doesnt it
interview theori and applic investig
3260 2011 fraud examin manual
or
e j everyth is rel what youv done doesnt even come close to some of the other
thing that have happen your not berni madoff right e j
or
i could see myself in your place i probabl wo uld have done the same thing wouldnt i
altruism
in mani case the moral serious of the matter can be reduc by claim the action
wa for the benefit of other thi is especi true if the accus view himself as a
care person
exampl
interview
linda i know you didnt do thi for yourself i have look into thi matter carefulli and i
think you did thi to help your husband didnt you
or
e j you have a big responsibili ty in thi compani a lot of peopl depend on you for their
job i just know you did thi becaus you thought you were do the right thing for the
compani didnt you
genuin need
in a veri small number of case fraud is predic by genuin need for exampl the
accus might be pai for the medic care of sick parent or a child or some other
financi disast might have befallen the miscreant in those case the follow techniqu
might be effect
exampl
interview
linda i dont know mani peopl who have had so mani bad thing happen all at onc i can
see where you thought thi wa pretti much a matter of life or death right linda
or
e j your like everyon els you have to put food on the tabl but in your posit it is
veri difficult to ask for help you genuin need to do thi to surviv didnt you e j
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3261
diffus alibi
even if the accus is present with an appropri ration it is like that he will
continu to want to deni culpabl when the interview is success in stop denial
the accus normal will then turn to variou reason why he could not have commit the
act in question the purpos of thi stage is to convinc the accus of the weight of the
evid against him miscreant usual have a keen interest in materi that tend to
implic them alibi gener can be diffus us on of the method list below
displai physic evid
it is common for most guilti peopl to overestim the amount of physic evid the
interview want to try and reinforc thi notion in the wai the evid is laid out to the
accus the physic evid usual document in fraud matter gener should be
displai on piec at a time in revers order of import in thi wai the full extent of
the evid is not immedi known by the accus when the accus no longer deni
culpabl the interview should stop displai evid
each time a document or piec of evid is laid out to the accus it signific should
be note by the interview dure thi phase the accus is still try to come to grip
with be caught the interview should therefor expect that the accus will attempt to
lie hi wai out of the situat like denial the interview should stop the alibi and other
falsehood befor thei ar fulli articul
onc the alibi ar diffus the interview should return to the theme be develop
the follow is an exampl of thi techniqu us on linda reed collin who set up a
fictiti compani and embezzl monei by approv payment from her employ to a
shell corpor
exampl
respond
i couldnt have done thi i am not respons for pai invoic
interview
here is on of the invoic in question displai document we never receiv the merchandis
dont mention whether you have talk to the account payabl depart or
whether you have subject the invoic to ani document analysi
interview theori and applic investig
3262 2011 fraud examin manual
look linda it is useless for you to try to deni the truth we have lot of evid let just
try to work thi out but youv got to help me okai dont accus the person of
ly thi just prolong the process
discuss wit
anoth techniqu for diffus alibi is to discuss the testimoni of wit the object
is to give enough inform about what other peopl would sai without provid too
much ideal the interview statement will creat the impress in the mind of the
accus that mani peopl ar in a posit to contradict hi stori
the interview is again caution about furnish enough inform to the accus so
that he can identifi the wit thi might place the wit in a difficult posit and the
accus could contact the wit in an effort to influenc testimoni the accus could
take repris against potenti wit though thi is rare
exampl
respond
i couldnt possibl have done thi it would requir the approv of a supervisor
interview
in normal situat it would the problem is that your statement doesnt hold up there ar
sever peopl who will tell a complet differ stori i can understand how you would want
me to believ that but your onli worsen the situat by make these statement if you
will help me on thi youll also be help yourself understand
discuss decept
the final techniqu is to discuss the accus de ception the purpos is to appeal to the
accus logic not to scold or degrad thi techniqu is sometim the onli on avail
if physic evid is lack as with other interview situat the word ly should
be avoid
exampl
respond
there is no wai i could have done thi i didnt have the opportun
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3263
interview
linda here is the situat you know what you ve done and so do i i can understand it is
difficult for you to admit but if all the fact have to be present everyon will reach the same
inescap conclus you ar respons if you continu to deni what youv done youll just
make the situat wors you understand that dont you
present an altern question
after the accus alibi have been diffus he normal will becom quiet and withdrawn
some peopl in thi situat might cry if so be comfort do not discourag the accus
from show emot in thi stage the accus is decid whether to confess the
interview at thi point should present an altern question to the accus the
altern question forc the accus to make on of two choic on altern allow
the accus a moral accept reason for the misde the other paint the accus in a
neg light regardless of which answer the accus choos he is acknowledg guilt
exampl
interview
linda did you plan thi deliber or did it just happen
or
linda did you just want extra monei or did you do thi becaus you had financi
problem
or
linda did you just get greedi or did you do thi becaus of the wai the compani ha treat
you
obtain a benchmark admiss
either wai the accus answer the altern question either ye or no he ha made a
culpabl statement or a benchmark admiss onc the benchmark admiss is made the
miscreant ha made a subconsci decis to confess
the question for the benchmark admiss should be construct as lead question so
thei can be answer ye or no thei should not be construct so that the answer
requir some type of explan that will come later the accus might also answer in
the neg
interview theori and applic investig
3264 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
respond
i didnt do it deliber
or
i didnt do it just beca us i want extra monei
or
no im not just greedi
in the case where the accus answer the altern question in the neg the
interview should press further for a posit admiss
exampl
interview
then it just happen on the spur of the moment
or
then you did it to take care of your financi problem
or
then you did it becaus of the wai youv been treat here
should the accus still not respond to the altern question with the benchmark
admiss the interview should repeat the question or variat thereof until the
benchmark admiss is made it is import for the interview to get a respons that is
tantamount to a commit to confess
reinforc ration
onc the benchmark admiss is made the interview should reinforc the confessor
decis then the interview should make the transit into the verbal confess where
the detail of the offens ar obtain reinforc the ration develop earlier will
help the confessor feel comfort believ that the interview doe not look down
on him
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3265
exampl
interview
linda i am glad to hear that you had a good reason to do thi that reinforc what i
thought all along that you were caught up in extraordinari circumst when wa the first
time you did it
verbal confess
the transit to the verbal confess is made when the accus furnish the first detail
inform about the offens thereaft it is the interview job to probe gentli for
addit detail prefer includ those that would be known onli to the miscreant as
with ani interview there ar three gener approach to obtain the verbal confess
chronolog by transact or by event the approach to be taken should be govern
by the circumst of the case
dure the admissionseek interview it is best to first confirm the gener detail of the
offens for exampl the interview will want the accus estim of the amount
involv other parti to the offens and the locat of physic evid after these basic
fact ar confirm the interview can then return to the specif in chronolog order
it is imper that the interview obtain an earli admiss that the accus knew the
conduct in question wa wrong thi confirm the essenti element of intent
becaus of the psycholog of confess most confessor will lie about on or more
aspect of the offens even though confirm overal guilt when thi happen dure the
verbal confess the interview should make a mental note of the discrep and
proce as if the falsehood had been accept as truth
such discrep should be save until all other relev fact ar provid by the accus
if the discrep ar materi to the offens then the interview should either resolv
them at the end of the verbal confess or wait and correct them in the written confess
if not materi such inform can be omit altogeth from the written confess the
follow item of inform should be obtain dure the verbal confess
the accus knew the conduct wa wrong
intent ie the state of mind with which someth is done is requir in all matter
involv fraud not onli must the confessor have commit the act he must have known
interview theori and applic investig
3266 2011 fraud examin manual
the conduct wa wrong and intend to commit it thi inform can be develop as
illustr in the follow exampl
exampl
interview
linda now that you have decid to help yourself i can help you too i need to ask you some
question to get thi clear up as i understand it you did thi and you knew it wa wrong
but you didnt realli mean to h urt the compani is that right
note that the question is phrase so that the confessor acknowledg intent but didnt
mean to hurt anyon make sure the question is not phrase so that the confessor
fals sai that he didnt mean to do it
fact known onli to confessor
onc the intent question is solv the questi on turn to those fact known onli to the
confessor these fact includeat a minimum the accus estim of the number of
instanc of wrong conduct as well as the total amount of monei involv the question
should not be phrase so that the confessor can answer ye or no
estim of number of instancesamount
in fraud matter especi it is common for the accus to underestim the amount of
fund involv as well as the number of instanc thi is probabl becaus of a natur
tendenc of the human mind to block out unpleas matter take the figur with a grain
of salt if the accus respons is i dont know start high with the amount and
gradual come down
exampl
interview
linda how mani time do you think thi happen
respond
i dont have ani idea
interview
wa it as mani as 100 time
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3267
respond
no wai
interview
how about 75 time
respond
that still too high probabl not more than two or three time
interview
ar you pretti sure linda if the accus estim ar too low gentli get her
to acknowledg a higher figur but do not challeng the accus by call her a
liar
respond
mayb three time but certainli not more than that
motiv for offens
motiv is the move power that prompt a person to act motiv howev should not be
confus with intent which refer to the state of mind of the accus when perform the
act motiv unlik intent is not an essenti element and crimin law gener treat a
person motiv as irrelev even so motiv is relev for other purpos it will often
guid the interview to the proper ration it further incrimin the accus and it
is import for a success prosecut therefor it is best that the interview elicit the
suspect motiv when obtain a verbal confess the motiv might be the same as the
theme the interview develop earlieror it might not the most common respons is i
dont know the interview should probe for addit inform but if it is not
forthcom then attribut the motiv to the theme develop earlier the motiv should be
establish along the line below
exampl
interview
linda we have discuss what might have led you to do thi but i need to hear it in your
word why do you think you did thi
interview theori and applic investig
3268 2011 fraud examin manual
when offens commenc
the interview will want to know the approxim date and time that the offens start
thi is usual develop by a question similar to the follow
exampl
interview
linda i am sure you rememb the first time thi happen
respond
ye
interview
tell me about it
respond
around the middl of januari of last year
interview
linda i admir you for have the courag to talk about thi your do the right thing
tell me in detail about the first time
whenif offens wa termin
in fraud matter especi intern fraud the offens ar usual continu that is the
miscreant seldom stop befor he is discov if appropri the interview should seek
the date the offens termin the question is typic phrase as follow
exampl
interview
linda when wa the last time you did thi
other involv
most fraud ar solo venturescommit wit hout the aid of an accomplic rather than
ask if anyon els wa involv phrase the question someth like thi
exampl
interview
linda who els knew about thi besid you
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3269
by ask who els knew the interview is in effect not onli ask for the name of
possibl conspir but also about other who might have known what wa go on and
fail to report it thi question should not be word as did someon els know but rather
who els knew
obtain physic evid
physic evid regardless of how limit it might be should be obtain from the
confessor in mani instanc illicit incom from fraud is deposit directli in the bank
account of the perpetr the interview will typic want to ask the confessor to
surrend hi bank record voluntarili for review it is recommend that either 1 a
separ written author be creat or 2 specif languag be ad to the
confess note the voluntari surrend of bank inform the first method is
gener prefer
if there ar other relev record that can be obtain onli with the confessor consent
permiss to review those should be sought dure the oral confess in some instanc
it might be advis to delai thi step until the written confess is obtain the request
for physic evid from the confessor can be set up like thi
exampl
interview
linda as a part of wrap up the detail i will need your bank record or other
physic evid you understand that dont you
respond
no i dont
interview
well i just need to document the fact and clear up ani remain question you have
decid to tell the complet stori includ your side of it i just want to make sure the fact ar
accur and fair to you we want to make sure your not blame for someth someon els
did and i want to report that you cooper fulli and want to do the right thing
okai avoid the us of the word evid or refer to higher tribun such
as court or prosecutor
interview theori and applic investig
3270 2011 fraud examin manual
respond
okai
interview
where do you keep your bank account if the interview know of at least on
bank where the confessor doe busi the question should be phrase linda
where do you do busi besid florida marin nation bank
respond
just florida marin
interview
ill need to get your okai to get them from the bank if we need them where do you keep the
origin record do not ask the accus permiss to look at the record
rather tell her the record ar need let the accus object if she ha a
problem with it
disposit of proce
if it ha not come out earlier the interview should find out in gener what happen to
ani illicit incom deriv from the misde it is typic for the monei to have been us
for frivol or ostentati purpos it is import howev that the confessor see hi
action in a more posit light the interview should avoid comment or question relat
to high live
exampl
interview
linda what happen to the monei let the accus explain do not suggest an
answer unless the confessor doe not respond
locat of asset
in appropri situat the interview will want to find out if there ar residu asset that
the confessor can us to reduc loss rather than ask the accus is there anyth left the
question should be phrase as what left
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3271
exampl
interview
linda what do you have left from all of thi
respond
not much i us most of the monei to cover my husband bill and financi problem a
littl monei and a boat that is paid for is all i have
interview
well whatev it is thi whole thing will look a lot better if you vol unteer to return what
you could dont you agre rememb do not specif promis the confessor
lenienc it will typic invalid the confess
specif of each offens
onc the major hurdl ar overcom the intervi wer should return to the specif of each
offens gener thi should simpli start with the first instanc and work through
chronolog in a logic fashion
becaus these question ar inform seek thei should be openli phrase so that the
answer is independ of the question it is best to seek the independ recollect of the
confessor first befor displai physic evid if the confessor cannot independ
recal document can be us to refresh hi recollect it gener is best to resolv all
issu on each instanc befor proceed to the next in determin the specif of the
offens the interview should usual ask
who ha knowledg of thi transact
what doe thi document mean
when did thi transact occur
where did the proce of the transact go
why wa the transact done
how wa the transact cover up
interview is a difficult act seldom master without consider practic the preced
techniqu when properli emploi can immeasur aid in develop truth reliabl
and legal valid inform
interview theori and applic investig
3272 2011 fraud examin manual
kines interview and interrog
the kines interview or interrog is a method that ha becom more popular among the
law enforc commun in recent year thi type of interview is differ than
tradit interview method becaus the interview is not necessarili look for a
confess from the interview subject instead of search for inform from the
subject the interview is attempt to assess whether the subject is tell the truth by
read hi bodi languag and other physic manifest of decept
in the book the kines interview techniqu author frederick c link and d glen foster
defin the kines interview techniqu as
an interview techniqu us for gain inform from an individu who is not willingli or
intention disclos it
link and foster believ that the kines inter view techniqu is base entir on the concept
of stress an event or circumst that forc an individu mind or bodi out of
psycholog equilibrium when stress occur human like ani other live creatur have
an emot reaction link and foster refer to thi as the fight or flight syndrom in
which we either run from a stress situat or brace to face it either wai thei
hypothes our animalist tendenc dictat that we must react to stress when thi
concept is appli to the interview situat the kines interview techniqu is appli to
attempt to read the interview subject reaction to stress
thi method reli in a broad sens on the interview abil to observ the interview
subject for sign or symptom of deceit the kines interview is conduct not just to
observ what the subject sai but also how the subject sai it the subject gestur
postur facial express and voic inflect ar just a few of the trait that an
investig look at thi style of interview assum that when most human be lie or
ar deceit to other thei will reveal thi deceit through their bodi languag
these reaction ar gener subconsci in most case the interviewe doe not even
realiz that he is act notic differ the action or sign that an interview is
look for ar call meaning behavior activ that mai suggest that an interviewe is
under stress
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3273
link and foster identifi three distinct categori into which meaning behavior can
be divid
selfiniti verbal statement that the interviewe initi without prompt
prompt verbal respons or statement made by the interviewe in respons to
structur question ask by the interview
nonverb behavior or bodi languag which includ bodi posit movement lack
of movement and observ physiolog chang
selfiniti verbal statement
these respons from interviewe ar made without ani prompt by the interview
exampl of these statement includ chang in speech pattern overli respect or friendli
word direct at the interview or indirect answer and statement the subject speech
speed will tend to increas or the subject will hesit or stammer frequent befor give
ani respons these verbal clue ar a subconsci attempt by the interviewe to dodg
the line of question or suppress the guilti feel he feel
gener a dishonest person is much more like to give more selfiniti verbal sign
than a person who is tell the truth
prompt verbal respons
prompt verbal respons can help an interrog to differenti an honest person from a
deceit on by util a seri of structur question we can gener get a good
indic of how truth the subject is these should be woven into a casual convers
so that the subject is not awar of the signific of the question the structur question
must not appear to be interrog in manner
structur question
the fraud examin ha sever type of load question to us in the kines interview to
shed light on the guilt or innoc of the interviewe
punish question the interview will casual discuss the punish of the crime
perpetr with the subject ask for exampl what do you think should happen to the
crimin when pose with thi sort of question gener the innoc person have
noth invest in the crime will answer that the crimin should be sever punish
sai someth like lock him up and throw awai the kei howev the interview
subject if guilti of the crime will gener answer that the crimin should be treat
interview theori and applic investig
3274 2011 fraud examin manual
fairli sai for exampl the person who stole that monei is veri sick and probabl need mental
help in essenc the guilti person is more like to answer dont hurt me
physic evid question thi type of quest ion is meant to jar the suspect into make
a mistak the interview will suggest that there is a piec of evid that might link
the interviewe to a crime ask is there ani reason that your fingerprint might have been
found near the crime scene thi question doe not assert that there is ani evid the
innoc person know that he had noth to do with the crime will simpli answer
no unconcern about the possibl evid enc the guilti parti will often becom
concern with thi possibl evid and attempt to cover for it with anoth lie
crime exist question a variat on thi question would be do you think that thi
crime wa even commit the guilti parti will see thi as a possibl wai out and answer
no while the innoc person will like answer ye
nonverb behaviorbodi languag
the evalu of an interview subject bodi lang uag can provid the fraud examin with
numer insight into the subject true intent quit often while an interviewe sai
on thing hi bodi languag tell an entir differ stori the first step in thi process is
to evalu the normal bodi languag of the subject while we will discuss some gener
tendenc that suggest that a subject is be less than truth the interview must first
evalu the subject natur tendenc mani peopl us their hand often when thei
speak while other do not
for most peopl the head is the most express portion of the bodi sever facial trait or
express can be read by the interview among them
ey the singl most import nonverb sign that an interview must look for and
recogn ar break in ey contact by the subject the subject might close hi ey
cover hi ey or turn or lower hi head ani of these break in ey contact dure the
interview can suggest a subject deceit
eyebrow movement when a subject displai disb elief or concern dure an interview it
is often a fals or decept reaction to the interview question
touch the face mani subject when under stress resort to repeatedli touch the
tip of the nose or rub the chin thi is often a nervou reaction to a threaten
situat
blush a person whose face or cheek becom red is gener experienc increas
blood pressur indic pressur or stress
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3275
adam appl the subject larynx will quit often move up and down when he is
concern or nervou
carotid arteri often the vein in a pe rson neck will becom expos when he
becom nervou
in addit mani interviewe will attempt to cover or defend themselv through bodi
languag by cross their arm or their leg thi is gener a defens postur
sever factor should be consid when appli kines techniqu
no singl behavior by itself prove anyth
behavior must be rel consist when the stimuli ar repeat
the interview must establish what is normal or baselin behavior for each subject and
then look for chang from the baselin these observ chang in the subject
baselin behavior ar diagnos in cluster not individu
behavior must be time
observ behavior and interpret it ar hard work
the subject ar watch us while we ar watch them
kines interview is not as reliabl with so me group as with the gener popul
criteriabas statement analysi
when collect wit account or interview concern a particular fraud case fraud
examin must continu assess how honest the interviewe ha been criteriabas
statement analysi can be util as a tool to uncov just how truth a subject ha been
after the interview is complet thi techniqu is differ than a kines interview in that the
fraud examin is not analyz the bodi languag or nonverb clue a subject ha given but
instead the languag us by the subject
statement analysi is base on the notion that when human speak whether intention or
unconsci we specif select the languag we us in gener the verbal clue that a
subject offer while speak ar just as promin as ani nonverb tipoff the tens that
an interviewe us is often the indic that the interviewe know more than he is
let on
for instanc in the wellpublic case of susan smith in 1995 smith claim that a
carjack forc her out of her car and drove awai with her two children in the back seat
when the children father spoke of the miss toddler he spoke of them in present tens
interview theori and applic investig
3276 2011 fraud examin manual
when smith mention them investig notic that she continu refer to the boi
in the past tens indic that she knew them to be deceas upon interrog smith
confess to drive the car into a lake kill her children
part of speech
the main item of interest to the fraud examin dure a statement analysi ar the
particular word us by the subject break down the subject sentenc carefulli mai
reveal mani undetect tendenc of the subject speech
pronoun
when describ an incid or situat a truth subject will most like us the pronoun
i if the subject is guilti of an offens or involv in some fashion that person will
attempt to distanc himself from the situat by remov the i from hi statement
often the i will be replac by we as though the subject had littl involv in or
wa not respons for the situat
exampl
i went to the groceri store with my girlfriend but i didnt steal ani of the item
we went to the groceri store but we didnt steal anyth
the subject reason subconsci is to re move himself from the situat as much as
possibl by swap we for i in the sentenc the perpetr hope to deflect
attent or blame
in a situat in which the subject us we constantli the subject is indic to the
interview that the subject ha some sort of relationship with anoth parti in the situat
if for exampl the subject continu us imperson pronoun such as my girlfriend and
i rather than we thi indic a lack of person involv with the girlfriend fraud
examin can util thi pronoun us to determin whether the interviewe is involv in a
fraudul situat with other employe
possess pronoun
when an interviewe is give bogu testimoni concern an event he will often drop the
possess pronoun to shift the blame to an exterior forc
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3277
exampl
i got on my regist at 1030 i wa work at my regist when i wa call awai by my
supervisor when i return to the regist the regist wa open and the cash wa gone
in thi statement the subject refer to the regist as my regist up until the
controversi act took place at that point my regist becom the regist indic
that the subject no longer want to be associ with a corrupt regist thi pronoun
switch indic that the subject is be less than truth
verb
verb ar veri import piec of the statement analysi puzzl the tens that is us by the
interviewe will shed light on whether the incid ha been recal or improvis becaus
the subject should be recal event from the past the verb tens us to recount the stori
should be past also
exampl
my wife and i left the hous at 700 went to dinner and then saw a movi we return to
the hous after the movi wa over
howev the decept interviewe will often chang the verb tens at precis the moment
at which he is no longer recal but rather improvis the event
exampl
my wife and i left the hous at 700 went to dinner and then saw a movi we return to the
hous and as we pull up to it we see shatter glass on the drivewai
verb tens is also crucial concern the whereabout of anoth person such as in case of
possibl kidnap if the person interview continu refer to the miss person in the
past tens there is a good chanc that the miss person ha been harm again the susan
smith case is a textbook exampl of how verb tens usag can lead to a confess
balanc of the statement
when most interview subject recount an event their version will be natur balanc the
subject will spend a fairli equal amount of time tell what happen befor the event what
took place dure the event and what happen dure the aftermath fraud examin
interview theori and applic investig
3278 2011 fraud examin manual
should look at the sheer amount of time or number of sentenc a subject spend on each
topic to get a rough estim of how balanc the account is if ani of the portion of the
account ar exception short the subject is almost certainli ly by perform thi type
of analysi the fraud examin can also determin what element ar absent from the stori
in a short amount of time
in the book criteriabas statement analysi german psychologist max stellar and guenter
koehnken identifi a number of separ criteria that the fraud examin can take into
consider when attempt to analyz a justcomplet interview
gener characterist
logic structur the fraud examin first examin the statement for plot hole
check to ensur that the recount of event is chronolog correct and doe not
contain contradict
unstructur product the fraud examin should examin thi criterion at the
begin of the interview by allow the subject to recount the event without influenc
or question gener an honest person will not tell an interview exactli what ha
taken place in complet chronolog order from start to finish it is much more like
that the initi recount of event will be told in a scattershot fashion but that these
fact and detail will eventu mesh into a complet version when an interview subject
is abl to sit down and initi describ the event that have taken place in complet
detail from begin to end it is like that the stori ha been rehears
quantiti of detail an honest subject is more like to be abl to recal mani detail
within an interview than a dishonest subject when most subject fabric a stori thei
ar unabl to bolster the stori with veri mani detail
specif content
contextu embed thi criterion suggest that a truth subject statement will be
tightli woven with incident detail such as the subject daili routin habit or famili
relationship a decept subject is much less like to associ an event with seemingli
insignific detail such as these choos to focu onli on cover up the major event
that is be discuss
descript of interact the truth subject is like to have some descript of the
action and emot involv with the describ incid or peopl involv in the
incid
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3279
reproduct of convers often the wit will becom anim when repeat
ani convers relat to the incid when thi occur the subject is gener tell
the truth as it is difficult for a fraudster to creat cohes dialogu on the spot
unexpect complic dure the incid descript of incid that disrupt the
event such as a sudden halt or interrupt of the event indic that the subject is
speak truthfulli
peculiar of content
unusu detail the appear of quirki but believ detail lend credibl to the
subject fabric statement rare contain these type of descript
superflu detail a subject who provid detail that ar not essenti or even relat
to the recal event ar most often speak truthfulli a deceit subject is so
preoccupi with not tell the truth that he will excis thi type of inform from
the stori
accur report detail misunderstood when a wit describ detail that he doe
not understand or comprehend but that make sens to the interview the wit is
most often tell the truth
relat extern associ in thi criterion the interview look for point at which
the interview subject relat the particular experi with some person or extern
experi when the subject make a relationship between the event and someth
that ha previous occur in hi life he is veri like be honest
account of subject mental state the subject who fill the interview with descript
of feel and emot is veri like be truth when a subject cannot provid
such feel dure the interview thi suggest that the subject ha not thought through
hi decept stori veri thoroughli
attribut of perpetr mental state the honest subject will often recount the
perceiv mental state of the perpetr suggest what thei believ the perpetr
wa think or feel at the time of the event
spontan correct an interview subj ect mai often correct himself dure the
cours of the interview make alter to earlier detail or event when a subject
doe thi he is most often give truth testimoni the decept subject want to
project as honest a faad as possibl and do es not want to correct himself becaus in
hi mind thi give the appear of deceit
admit lack of memori thi criterion work close with the previou on in that an
honest interviewe will often admit to not rememb certain detail when the
interview theori and applic investig
3280 2011 fraud examin manual
interviewe is ly to the interview he want to be as complet as possibl in cover
the fraudul track
rais doubt about on own testimoni a deceit interviewe will almost never
rais ani concern about whether the testimoni given is absolut correct if the subject
rais concern that he is correct he is probabl tell the truth
selfdeprec the mention of ani selfincrimin or person unflatt detail
dure the interview suggest that the interviewe is credibl a person who attempt to
fabric a stori will not want to paint an unsavori pictur of himself
pardon the perpetr should the intervi ewe attempt to excus the perpetr or
avoid bash the fraudster the interviewe is like be honest
the cognit interview techniqu
polic and fraud investig must often reli on the testimoni of wit to bring the
fact of a case togeth the testimoni of an import wit can determin the entir
outcom of a fraud case so it is essenti that wit word be as reliabl and detail
as possibl
unfortun wit ar human and human ar prone to make error fraud
investig must understand that in a time of crisi or even in a situat in which the
wit wa simpli not pai close attent the eyewit can easili miss acut detail
often wit have troubl recal larg portion of event simpli becaus thei didnt
know at the time that thei need to be look for specif detail dr r edward
geiselman and dr ronald p fisher write in the nation institut of justic articl
interview victim and wit of crime that most victim and eyewit ar so
occupi with the event that thei do not have the time to try to learn or memor detail
about a suspect at the time of the crime
becaus of these problem differ techniqu for fill out the wit testimoni have
been develop to assist the investig on of the first techniqu develop wa the us
of hypnosi on wit the notion behind thi approach wa that an investig could
open the mind of a wit and pick into hi subconsci for specif detail the merit of
thi techniqu ar highli debat and have been hotli contest in court of law
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3281
but more recent the cognit interview techniqu wa develop to serv much the same
purpos thi approach ha proven far more effect than question hypnosi techniqu
and ha been deem a reliabl method in the court of law
the cognit interview techniqu wa establish research and finetun by dr
geiselman a professor at the univers of california lo angel and other colleagu in
the psychiatr profess geiselman and other have written numer articl and
government document detail the extens research deal with the interview
of wit
geiselman believ that the cognit interview should be split into two distinct phase the
narr phase and the specificdetail phase when these phase ar us in success
dure an interview it is like that an investig will come awai from an interview with an
excel wit account of an event the narr phase deal more with what happen
dure the event the specificdetail phase work more to track down who wa involv and
obtain specif detail about the suspect
the narr phase
the first portion of the cognit interview is the narr phase in which the wit tell
the whole stori the investig should first allow the wit to recount the situat
us sever step to guid the narr portion there ar four primari step in the
narr phase of the cognit interview
reconstruct the circumst of the event
instruct the eyewit to report everyth and be complet
recal the event in differ order
chang perspect
reconstruct the circumst of the event
in thi first import step the interview should ask the eyewit to describ the context
in which the incid occur the interview should ask the wit to describ
everyth includ the weather time of dai and look and feel of the environ in
which the incid took place what did the peopl andor object in the surround
look like
interview theori and applic investig
3282 2011 fraud examin manual
the object of thi step is to mental return the wit to the scene so that he will vividli
recal the unfold event ask the wit to describ the emot state he wa in at
the time of the occurr often help accomplish thi first step
instruct the eyewit to report everyth and be complet
in thi stage the interview should ask the eyewit to recount everi last detail as
complet as possibl geiselman sai that a wit will often withhold inform that he
think mai be relev to the investig therefor the investig should instruct the
wit not to omit anyth when give testimoni no matter how trivial the inform
might seem the small detail that the wit rememb dure the interview mai not be
directli benefici to the investig but thei will be import to help the wit
rememb the event descript and thoroughli
recal the event in differ order
construct the event in a differ order will give the wit the freedom to complet
recreat the event when recount the event in sequenti order the wit mai veri well
forget minut detail in an effort to describ what happen next if the wit construct
the event from the singl moment or thing that left the greatest impress on him the
interview mai gain a foothold on the witnesss perspect
chang perspect
the final step of the cognit interview process is to get the wit to alter hi perspect
of the event the investig should ask him to reconstruct the scenario and assum a
differ posit within the situat for instanc ask the wit to pretend to be a
differ person within the event and recount the event from that perspect what wa the
other person think or feel thi techniqu mai seem a bit odd but it mai allow the
wit to consid variou element of the event that he previous had not
specif detail
onc the narr portion of the interview is comp lete it is like that the investig will
have question about specif detail geiselman and hi contemporari have develop five
techniqu to cultiv specif detail and item of inform from the wit the five
categori ar
physic appear
name
number
investig interview theori and applic
2011 fraud examin manual 3283
speech characterist
convers
physic appear
the investig can often elicit addit inform about the event by ask the wit
to describ the suspect a particularli effect techniqu is to ask the wit whether the
suspect remind the wit of anyon he know often physic descript such as the
type of cloth a suspect wa wear or the particular wai a suspect walk or look will
not be present dure the narr phase of the interview thi addit inform
howev can be kei to link a suspect with a specif crime
name
often the name of the suspect or anoth person will be spoken dure an event but mani
time the event prove too traumat or happen too quickli for a wit to recal if a
wit cannot rememb ani name spoken dure the event ask him to attempt to recal
the first letter of the suspect name or ani other name spoken by go through the
alphabet on letter at a time
number
onc the wit ha possibl establish the first letter of the suspect name the
investig should ask the wit how mani syllabl or letter were in the name
establish whether the name wa long or short mai effect jar the witnesss memori
speech characterist
the investig can also ask the wit what type of speech characterist the suspect
ha geiselman again suggest ask the wit whether the suspect speech remind the
wit of anyon els the interview should also determin whether the suspect had ani
specif accent an awkward or unusu voic or us ani word repeatedli dure the event
convers
the wit should be ask whether anyth that the suspect or anyon els said dure
the event elicit an unusu respons did the suspect or ani other wit react in a
strang manner to anyth that wa said
the extens research that geiselman and hi colleagu have done on the cognit
interview techniqu ha shown that the techniqu improv the recal perform of
interview theori and applic investig
3284 2011 fraud examin manual
wit when compar to the standard interview techniqu the emphasi is on the
witnesss recollect of detail to give investig a more complet pictur of what actual
happen dure a specif event
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3301
covert examin
a covert oper is design to obtain evid by us of agent whose true role is
undisclos to the target there ar two major form of covert oper undercov oper
and surveil oper
sever distinct defin these type of covert oper undercov oper seek to
develop evid directli from peopl involv in the offens through the us of disguis
and deceit rather than wait for the inform to come by other rout there is a
consciou decis to seek it out in contrast surveil oper us the skill of
observ to determin activ of individu the surveil oper is design to
gather inform
covert oper requir the highest degre of skill and plan us in a time manner
with great care a covert oper can produc result that cannot be achiev in ani other
wai us incorrectli or handl badli covert oper can lead to embarrass
seriou financi liabil injuri and even death
disguis and deceit in undercov oper ar well recogn by the court as a
legitim function of public and privat law enforc provid the undercov
oper is base on suffici probabl caus covert oper cannot be conduct as
fish expedit justif for conduct the oper must be legal sound and
defens and must not violat a person reason expect of privaci
prior to an undercov oper it is essenti that the basi for the oper be commit
to write prefer in a memo see re port write the memorandum should clearli
state
the inform upon which the covert oper will be base
the inform that is expect to be gain from the oper
the ident of suspect if known
oper under your care custodi or control
a fraud examin is undercov when he offici abandon hi ident as an examin and
adopt on design to obtain inform from peopl who do not realiz hi true ident
the assum ident might involv onli the adopt of anoth name or it might requir
covert examin investig
3302 2011 fraud examin manual
an elabor cover the aim should be to avoid be compromis to minim danger to
the fraud examin and to ensur ultim success of the oper
inform sought might includ the locat of outlet for stolen good the subject
method of oper detail person data on all subject and ani other relev
inform inform should be develop with care to avoid alert the target or their
associ onli those peopl who need to know should be inform of the undercov
investig
establish an ident
a cover stori must be fabric to conceal the true ident of the fraud examin the
stori should help the examin gain the subject confid but it should rare if ever be
wholli fictiti the examin should be from a citi with which he is familiar but not from
the home citi of the subject arrang should be made to have kei peopl in the
fictiti histori corrobor the undercov examin claim
particular attent should be paid to item carri by the undercov examin such as
pocketbook watch ring token suitcas ticket stub miscellan paper match
letter and sum of monei document and ident card should show the appropri
amount of wear and tear the fraud examin should be abl to explain how each item came
into hi possess
there should be a natur contact between the undercov examin and the subject the
background stori should contain element that will bring the suspect and the examin
togeth without ani contriv effort a mutual interest in hobbi sport and other leisur
activ can provid an opportun for get acquaint the examin should not pose
as an author on a subject unless total qualifi mani time an examin admit lack
of knowledgebut an interest ina given subj ect will help make the subject feel import
and not threaten
accord to timothi j walsh a secur expert the follow situat ar those in which
covert oper have tradition work well
there is reliabl inform about crimin activ or asset loss but insuffici detail
for prevent or apprehens
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3303
loss ar known to be occur in an area but there is no inform as to how thei
ar occur or who is respons
it is desir to gather inform concern person relationship or to identifi the
contact made with or by certain peopl
it is desir to compar actual practic with suppos or requir practic
it is import to obtain inform in an indirect manner from peopl believ to
possess it
covert oper should be us when there is no other practic wai to obtain
necessari inform
object
accord to paul oconnel in an articl for secur manag on of the first step in
initi an undercov oper is to identifi the object of the investig the
object must specif identifi what the oper is design to discov such as the
ident of the fraudul worker respons for a specif crime
the specif object of a covert oper depend on the type of investig be
conduct the object in the surveil of a warehous would not be the same as those
in surveil design to determin if collin is receiv a kickback from nagel howev
all covert oper have similar gener object
to obtain evid of a past current or futur crime thi evid usual bear on the
culpabl of individu if an oper in a covert investig is pose as a thief for
exampl actual thiev might confess their involv to him unawar that their
convers were be record
to identifi those engag in possibl illeg activ if for exampl cash is miss a covert
investig or surveil might disclos who is commit the offens thereaft
the covert oper might be discontinu and the evid gather by more
tradit mean
to recov illeg gain if an account payabl clerk ha been steal to purchas an
automobil locat the car might permit civil litig to recov it
to identifi coconspir if an employe is in collus with anoth employe a covert
oper might lead to the ident of the second individu
1 oconnel e paul is a ruse the best rout secur manag decemb 1995 pp 2630
covert examin investig
3304 2011 fraud examin manual
to identifi the modu operandi again in the case of miss good the ident of the
perpetr might be known or suspect but the intern control defici
permit the theft might be unknown a covert oper might discov the
miss link
problem in covert oper
in addit to the legal problem a fraud examin might encount a covert oper is the
most costli and riski work an examin can undertak such oper consum great
amount of human resourc thei should be us onli with extrem care and as a last
resort if the case can be made ani other wai the fraud examin should stai awai from
covert oper
there ar law govern surreptiti audio andor video record in some jurisdict
it is unlaw to make an audio record or to listen in on a convers unless you ar a
parti to that convers in other jurisdict it is law to record ani convers as
long as on parti to the convers consent
record convers with eavesdrop devic supersensit microphon that listen
from behind close door for exampl usual is illeg peopl behind close door have a
reason expect of privaci videotap or photograph someon in a public place
is legal if the person doe not have a rea onabl expect of privaci in such a place
for instanc a restroom or locker room might be a public place but peopl have a
reason expect of privaci that thei will not be photograph if oper or
wit ar us to record telephon or other convers written consent should
be obtain sampl form us for thi purpos can be found in the report
standard section
although it is gener not a crime to videotap a person in public if the tape is not to be
us for commerci purpos ie you will not be sell the tape if ani part of the
person convers or word ar pick up on tape then the tape is subject to all of the
law and rule regard the record of convers it as if you were record the
person on the telephon you mai be prohibit fr om record the convers if you ar
not a parti to it or you do not have the person consent
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3305
in summari the law govern audio and video record can be confus and complex
pleas refer to the chapter on individu right in the law section of the fraud examin
manual for more inform and contact a lawyer if you have ani doubt
entrap
entrap occur when law enforc offic or govern agent induc a person to
commit a crime that he is not previous dispos to commit entrap pose the biggest
legal problem in covert oper particularli in undercov oper it is imper
that the oper be properli predic again covert oper must not be us for
fish expedit
exampl
a store owner wa concern becaus hi inventori cost were unusu high in relat to sale
he hire a privat investig to pose as a cont ract driver and deliv and pick up merchandis
to and from the store the investig proceed to offer kickback to all employe in the
ship depart if thei would allow him to leav without si gning for the merchandis on
employe took the bait and wa subsequ arrest for theft the case wa thrown out
becaus of entrap the court rule that there wa no reason to believ simpli becaus of a
high sale cost that merchandis wa be stolen furthermor the investig had no suspect
in mind he wa simpli fish
surveil
surveil is the plan observ of peopl place or object it is normal
concern with peopl place and object observ ar usual incident to the primari
interest of gather inform about certain peopl
there ar two gener type of surveil mobil and fix mobil surveil is
sometim refer to as tail or shadow and fix surveil as a stakeout or
plant mobil surveil can be done on foot or by vehicl and is carri out when
peopl be observ move from locat to locat a fix surveil is us when a
person or activ remain in place although the observ might move from on vantag
point to anoth in the immedi area
covert examin investig
3306 2011 fraud examin manual
surveil whether by foot or vehicl is predominantli an exercis in common sens
skill tact and ingenu on the part of the observ carefulli plan and properli execut
surveil can be of tremend valu in an investig convers lack of prepar
poor time and unsound surveil practic can destroi an otherwis good case
surveil can be us to locat resid busi or other place of interest to
the investig and place where crimin activ is conduct it can also produc
import evid concern the scope and natur of a person activ surveil
activ must be carefulli record detail note and log film and video often with
special lens and light sourc tape record and miniatur electron listen devic
must be us appropri
method of surveil
dure loos surveil target need not be kept under constant observ the surveil
should be discontinu if the person becom suspici in close surveil subject ar kept
under observ continu even if thei appear to becom suspici
circumst might requir a chang from a loos to a close surveil preplan
help but the examin must observ and interpret the act or circumst to decid what
tactic to emploi if the plan call for loos surveil until the complet of a specifi
act or until a meet with anoth person after which the subject is to be put under close
surveil or apprehend the observ must determin when the specif incid ha
taken place
prepar
the observ attir should fit in with the ar ea andor group dress should be conserv
unless conserv dress is not appropri for the area attir should not be loud or flashi
so that if the subject note the observ he will be less like to form ani last impress
minor chang in outer cloth or handcarri item might alter the overal impress and
help prevent recognit by the subject
two or more observ work togeth need complet agreement about the surveil
techniqu and schedul discreet signal will help each observ understand ani given
situat plan is essenti but the observ adapt and ingenu ar vital
observ should be chosen for both aptitud and resourc thei must have pois
patienc and endur prior to the surveil the observ should prepar and
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3307
document a cover stori that will stand up under scrutini thi cover stori should provid
the observ with a reason excus for be in the area and for do what ha to be
done there
electron equip
us of electron surveil equip should be consid for surveil on foot
transmit and receiv devic can easili be hidden on the person without arous
suspicion transmitt can be conceal in packag briefcas or on the person light
gather binocular andor metascop equip for night surveil should be us if
necessari see the law section of the fraud examin manual for a descript of legal
electron monitor techniqu
basic precaut
an observ should refrain from make abrupt unnatur move that could attract
attent disguis such as fals beard ar impract hard to maintain and easili
detect the observ should not look directli into the subject ey inexperienc
observ must overcom the tendenc to believ that thei have been made identifi
becaus the subject glanc at them sever time the geographi of the area where
surveil is to take place should be studi carefulli the observ should know the
locat of culsdesac or deadend street or allei to avoid be trap or discov a
suspici subject might suddenli revers cours enter a deadend street board and
suddenli depart from public transport or engag in a varieti of other evas action
the observ can counter these strategi by follow approv surveil techniqu
techniqu of foot surveil
oneperson surveil
oneperson surveil is best for a fix sur veillanc if a move oneperson surveil
must be us the observ should follow the subject on the same side of the street and keep
fairli close crowd and street condit will dictat the appropri distanc when the
subject turn a corner in an uncrowd area the observ should continu cross the
intersect street by glanc up the street in the subject direct the subject posit
and action can be note
in a crowd area surveil distanc might be decreas unless the subject is stand
just around the corner surveil can be continu from the same side of the street do
not turn a corner immedi behind the subject when oper across the street from the
covert examin investig
3308 2011 fraud examin manual
subject circumst will dictat whether to oper forward to the rear or abreast of the
target the observ should be abreast of the target when he turn a corner to observ ani
contact with individu or entri into a build
twoperson surveil
in the ab surveil techniqu the observ directli behind the target is known as the
a observ a follow the target and b follow a either on the same side or from across
the street when both observ oper from the same side of the street and the subject
turn a corner a continu in the origin direct and cross the intersect street from
a vantag point a signal the correct move to b when b is oper across the street and
the subject turn a corner to the right b will cross the street behind the subject and take up
the a posit thi move should be prearrang no signal should be necessari all visual
signal should be discreet and consist with the environ should the subject turn to
the left and cross the street toward b b should drop back to avoid meet the subject b
should keep a in sight to observ signal indic hi next move
threeperson surveil
the abc techniqu of surveil is intend to keep two side of the subject cover
a follow the subject b follow a and concentr on keep him rather than the subject
in sight the normal posit for b is behind a c normal oper across the street from
the subject and slightli to hi rear enabl c to observ the subject without turn hi
head variat such as have both b and c ac ross the street or all three of the observ
behind the subject on the same side of the street might be necessari becaus of crowd
condit or traffic in thi techniqu if the subject turn a corner a continu in the
origin direct cross the intersect street and then signal instruct to the other
observ from that vantag point either b or c can be given the a posit and a might
take up the origin c posit and continu hi observ of the subject from across
the street
in anoth variat of thi techniqu both a and b might continu in the origin direct
and cross the street a signal c to take up the a posit b then recross the street and
assum hi former b posit a assum the c posit in the third situat when c
notic that the subject is about to turn a corner c signal both a and b what posit
to assum
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3309
other techniqu
there ar other wai to lessen the chanc of an observ be made first by either pre
arrang or signal the two or more observ can chang place with each other thi is
commonli refer to as the leapfrog method
progress surveil is us when extrem caution is necessari with thi techniqu the
subject is follow a certain distanc and the surveil is discontinu and the time note
the next dai anoth observ pick up the subject at the time and place where the
surveil wa previous discontinu and again follow the subject for a short distanc
thi continu dai after dai until the surveil is complet
techniqu of vehicl surveil
gener
vehicl surveil demand addit prepar a depend vehicl similar to type
commonli found in the area where the surveil is to take place must be us thi can
be a panel truck automobil or a larg truck or trailer the licens should be of the state and
counti where the surveil will take place if more than on vehicl is to be us twowai
radio or cellular telephon convers is usual necessari consider should be given
to gasolin water firstaid equip and roadmap requir
whenev possibl combin foot and vehicular surveil is an advantag the
observ will like remain more alert when a subject park hi vehicl and remain in it an
observ on foot can better monitor the subject action and those of passersbi
as in foot surveil vehicular surveil requir inconspicu action observ
should gener stai in the same lane as the target to avoid have to make turn from the
wrong lane if the situat allow observ should chang direct perhap go around
a block in order to break continu befor the suspect becom suspici it is difficult at
night for the observ to be sure thei ar follow the right vehicl the target car can be
kept in sight better if it is distinct if the opportun aris reflect tape can be attach
to the rear of the subject car the dome light of the observ car should be disconnect
so that the light will not show when a door is open headlight and licensepl light can
be wire to allow them to be turn on or off
covert examin investig
3310 2011 fraud examin manual
onevehicl surveil
when on vehicl is us it must remain close enough to allow the observ to monitor the
subject action but far enough behind to avoid detect when a subject car stop on
observ should follow hi action on foot the subject normal will not expect to be tail
by a person on foot while he is us hi car when the subject turn a corner the observ
can make on of two possibl move thei can continu in the origin direct cross the
intersect street and make a uturn the subject will take littl interest in a car turn into
the street behind him come from the opposit direct an altern would be to
continu in the origin direct cross the intersect street and continu around
the block
twovehicl surveil
thi techniqu us two vehicl to follow the subject at differ distanc on the same
street as in the ab method of foot surveil thi techniqu can be vari by have
on vehicl go in the same direct as the subject on a parallel street while receiv
radiotransmit direct from the observ directli behind the subject thi techniqu is
more flexibl becaus the two vehicl can chang place from time to time
fix surveil
a fix surveil or stakeout is us when the subject remain stationari the observ
can move around for closer observ when on observ is detail to watch a place
with more than on exit he might have to move about consider when prepar for a
stakeout the base of oper should be well plan it might be a store apart
hous automobil or truck a thorough but cautiousarea reconnaiss should be
conduct necessari equip should be readili avail such as binocular electron
investig aid camera and sound record devic
satellit surveil
although fraud examin will rare need it satellit data ar now avail for a rel
small amount an examin can bui detail imag from nearli anywher in the world
plant secur lend itself to satellit imageri in addit to provid much of the same
inform as convent satellit photograph multispectr imageri can detect muddi
ground path taken by peopl and vehicl and other inform that might help identifi
potenti secur problem
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3311
satellit imageri can be us in surveil if it is combin with more tradit type of
photograph intellig thi is especi true for larg estat or industri site where
aerial photographi is prohibit it also can be benefici in a covert oper
satellit imageri can help to determin wai to penetr a site develop a map of the
ground and identifi import area in addit satellit imageri can be us to
investig area that ar too remot expens or danger to send oper
bui satellit imageri is simpl if the latitud and longitud of the target is known the
product rang from photograph print of the imag to magnet tape of geograph
correct data print not much differ from the enlarg from a film processor ar
usual the cheapest product while thei dont allow sophist enhanc thei onli
requir a magnifi glass to examin
the next most expens product is a transpar or a neg it allow the interpret to
make print and is conveni for exhibit with an overhead projector stereogram ar
pair of imag that show the same object from slightli differ posit and provid a
threedimension view when look at with stereoscop glass thei ar avail as either
print or transpar magnet tape is the digit version of the imag a particularli
sophist analysi of the target is possibl with magnet tape
night surveil equip
basic there ar two type of night view devic activ and passiv the activ type put
out it own light sourc an infrar beam which is visibl to the user through the infrar
scope that is part of the unit the advantag of the activ type of night view devic is that
the user can see in total dark disadvantag includ limit rang and the fact that the
infrar beam is visibl to anyon look through an infrar scope or through a passiv
night view devic
the passiv type of night view devic electron amplifi whatev exist light is in
the environ such as moonlight or sky glow thi is why such unit sometim ar
refer to as starlight scope night view devic have been in us sinc 1969 their
primari purpos is to allow the observ of event occur more than on block awai at
night night view devic with adapt can be attach to the front of camera to
obtain evid that will stand up in court televis videotap movi and still photo
can all be obtain us night view devic
covert examin investig
3312 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc and inform
sourc and inform both serv the same purposeto provid inform to help
develop a case howev there ar notabl differ between confidenti sourc and
confidenti inform the term should not be us interchang
a confidenti sourc furnish inform as a result of occup or profess and ha no
culpabl in the alleg offens for exampl confidenti sourc might includ barber
attornei account and law enforc personnel a confidenti inform ha a direct or
indirect involv in the matter under investig and might be culpabl the
distinct between the two is their involv in the offens inform can pose
treacher legal issu for the examin
tom melsheim a former feder prosecutor suggest from hi experi that no piec of
evid is quit as convinc to a juri as a secretli photograph or record convers
that an inform can obtain firsthand thi inform is gener accept as a slam
dunk for a crimin prosecutor becaus there is littl that a whitecollar crimin can disput
when caught in the act of a fraud for thi reason the us of inform is like to increas
in futur fraud investig
type of inform
in the book crimin investig author paul b weston and kenneth m well identifi
sever differ type of inform the basic lead the particip the covert and the
accomplicewit
basic lead inform
thi type of inform suppli inform to the polic about illicit activ that thei have
encount the reason that the inform decid to suppli inform ar vari some
inform simpli want to do their part to stop an unscrupul activ while other ar
interest in harm the crimin against whom thei ar inform for instanc mani
inform in the drug prostitut or illeg gambl area ar involv in those area as
well and intend to elimin some of their competit whatev the reason these
inform onli role in a covert investig is to suppli law enforc with
inform
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3313
particip inform
the particip inform is directli involv in gather preliminari evid in the
investig the inform in thi instanc not onli suppli an investig with
inform but the inform is also involv in set up a sting oper initi
contact with the crimin for arrest purpos a particip inform is just what the name
suggestsa particip in the investig of fraudul or crimin activ
covert inform
a covert inform serv the same basic function that ani other type of inform doe by
suppli inform to author on crimin behavior the differ in thi categori is
that a covert inform is on who ha been embed in a situat or scenario for a
number of year and is call upon onli sporad for tipoff and lead these type of
inform ar often refer to as mole becaus of the natur of their insul situat as
insid sourc weston and well identifi two instanc in which covert inform ar
commonli us in organ crime and hateextremist group investig covert
inform ar often cull to get inform about upcom crimin activ by
the group
accomplicewit inform
the accomplicewit inform is call upon by investig quit often to provid
inform on crimin activ the distinct in thi categori is that if the
accomplicewit inform were not feed inform to investig he would be
liabl to be prosecut for the same offens the accomplic inform is often persuad
to spill the bean on a coconspir in exchang for lenienc in the prosecut phase of
the investig
object of sourc and inform inform
there ar three essenti procedur when us sourc and inform first to keep the
person ident as confidenti as possibl second to independ verifi the inform
provid by the sourc or inform third to develop wit and documentari evid
from independ verifi inform
if the confidenti sourc or inform ha provid document name of potenti
wit or other evid all reason step must be taken to protect the ident of that
sourc care should be taken to ensur that question of other wit is done in a
manner that doe not reveal it origin thi can usual be accomplish through the
covert examin investig
3314 2011 fraud examin manual
phrase of question for exampl mari rodriguez de la garza furnish confidenti
inform about linda reed collin when the examin confront collin he doe not
want her to know that he ha talk to ms de la garza
exampl
wrong
ms collin someon told me you were take kickback
right
ms collin i have inform indic you ar take monei from a vendor
you have made the confront direct but you have not reveal the origin of your
inform if collin press to learn how you knew
ms collin
who did you get that inform from
examin
document i have from the compani record plu other inquiri conduct in thi matter
in thi exampl if need be the examin would displai the evid from wit and
document that would not reveal the sourc or inform ident the inform from
the sourc or inform is basic useless unless the examin can verifi it authent and
independ corrobor it suppos a sourc furnish the examin with copi of
account payabl document show that bailei book incorpor cost of materi ha
increas by 16 percent sinc linda reed collin took over the account at the orion
corpor thi kind of evid would corrobor the sourc stori if a sourc told the
examin that collin frequent had drink with jim nagel the account repres for
orion the examin would want to find out some wai to verifi thi report the third
object when us sourc is to develop the witnesss inform and other evid so
that it make a cohes case
recruit of sourc and inform
fraud examin should recal the need to develop sourc busi and financi institut
execut law enforc and other government personnel medic and educ
profession and intern and extern auditor ar good contact for fraud examin
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3315
the examin should make contact in the commun well in advanc of need
inform thi is simpli good public relat if the fraud examin receiv an alleg
and need confidenti inform perhap a sourc cultiv earlier can assist sourc
need to feel confid that thei can share inform without be compromis in
theori the sourc will never have to testifi he ha no firsthand knowledg hi inform
come from a wit or document
the examin might also meet sourc when track lead dure a specif investig
he might interview a stockbrok from whom the target purchas stock who doe not want
hi ident reveal the examin should not encourag a person to provid confidenti
inform but rather try to get report on the record but if the sourc inform must
be kept confidenti abid by that promis
activ recruit of inform is gener not desir it might appear untoward to a
juri it is better to encourag an inform to come forward it is desir to develop an
inform relationship but thi situat must be handl carefulli the examin must
clearli document an adequ predic for inform involv the most seriou
question is the culpabl of the inform there have been case where the inform is
guiltier than the target the court might rule that the inform inform cannot be
introduc
motiv of sourc and inform
sourc
in some instanc but not mani the sourc might want monei or other consider for
furnish inform the examin should not offer ani compens it is better to
have the sourc request it thi is to avoid ani alleg of misconduct on the part of the
examin for pai for inform sourc have their reason for inform it might be
the sens of import that come from be involv or a chanc to plai detect in
other case the sourc might have a grudg against the target other reason includ a
feel of moral respons to report inform perhap more than ani other reason a
sourc will furnish inform becaus he like and trust the examin and want to help
inform
inform especi incident on commonli want someth in return for their
inform thei take the attitud that their involv ha person risk and thei want
covert examin investig
3316 2011 fraud examin manual
to be paid for their troubl the inform is like to be predispos to sell inform
to the highest bidder
mani informantsperhap the majorityar unstabl as often as not an inform
motiv is to get the target not becaus of ani sens of moral but becaus the
inform and the target ar close involv in the case of drug deal for exampl an
inform might furnish inform becaus the target is the competit in other case
the inform is motiv by a sens of selfimport he is a big man peopl take
him serious
probabl the most common reason inform suppli inform is becaus thei ar
involv in the offens and by furnish inform on the target which is commonli
fals thei can diffus suspicion from their own activ in mani instanc the examin
initi doe not know the truth about the inform
the fraud examin must also be awar of the overzeal inform melsheim caution
that most of the recent catalogu case concern the abus of inform were the
result of involv inform who ar privat citizen selfmotiv to satisfi their law
enforc sponsor at virtual ani cost in an attempt to ingrati themselv to
investig the inform will often engag in unscrupul activ to provid the
inform thei think the investig ar look for the fraud examin must lai out the
ground rule for the inform befor begin thi type of investig or risk the
embarrass and punish that a lessthantruth inform can provid
legal consider
as note deal with sourc and inform is fraught with legal pitfal the examin
should be circumspect in all interact with sourc and inform the examin might
be abl to trust a sourc but rare an inform alwai document contact with sourc
and inform in case of problem
mani jurisdict guarante the accus the right to confront hi accus that is an
absolut right of the accus it is not possibl to crossexamin someon who lurk behind
a cloak of secreci the examin will usual not be abl to testifi to what a sourc or
inform said becaus of the hearsai rule the wit can testifi onli to what he know
not what someon els ha said
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3317
if a decis is made to pai an inform or sourc the payment should be made in cash and
a receipt should be secur if the sourc will not sign a receipt do not pai there have been
numer instanc where a receipt wa not obtain and the inform subsequ deni
receiv fund or challeng the amount the examin then ha to defend himself without
proof inde some investig have been accus of have embezzl the payment
payment should onli be on a cod basi the inform should be furnish and verifi
befor turn over ani monei if not the examin might becom the victim of a scam
entrap is sometim rais as a crimin defens thi is especi true when the
inform is do thing at the behest of law enforc the defens is that the target is
innoc but wa unlawfulli lure into a crime that he otherwis would not have
commit thi can best be overcom by ensur that the sourc or inform onli gather
inform and plai a limit role in the case
report contact
it is recommend that all contact with inform and sourc be report on a
memorandum of interview although the confidenti sourc or inform ident should
not be includ in the report symbol to denot the inform ident should be us it
is further recommend that sourc be preced with an s follow by a uniqu identifi
ie sourc 1 would be s1 sourc 2 would be s2 the symbol for inform
would then be i1 and i2
as a gener rule disclosur of the ident of sourc and inform should be on a strict
needtoknow basi for that reason the person ident should be maintain in a secur
file with limit access and crossindex by hi symbol number the reliabl of the
sourc if known and whether the person is in a posit to furnish relev inform
should both be note in write
exampl
a sourc of unknown reliabl but in a posit to furnish relev
inform hereinaft refer to as s1 advis as follow
or
an inform of known reliabl and in a posit to furnish relev inform
hereinaft refer to as i2 advis as follow
covert examin investig
3318 2011 fraud examin manual
the fraud examin is not in a posit to promis lenienc to peopl involv in the
commiss of a crime or tort to do so is seriou misconduct and a violat of the
certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic promis of lenienc can onli
come from the prosecutor or the court the examin might truthfulli tell the inform
that hi cooper will be made known to the author and that peopl who cooper
ar gener treat better
for reason previous discuss it is best not to us sourc and inform in ongo
crime as doubl agent such action is inher riski and place the examin in the
posit of have to defend the action of the sourc or inform action that in most
case the examin cannot control thi leav the case open to attack dure legal
proceed if it appear critic that the sourc be us as an agent get the approv of the
prosecutor andor attornei befor proceed
promis of confidenti
fraud examin ar not in a posit to offer unqualifi confidenti therefor ani
promis made to an inform or sourc should be qualifi in the case of an examin
who is emploi by a government agenc there might be an absolut duti not to hold
sourc and inform in confid in mani law enforc agenc an investig
might not have inform or sourc who ar unknown to the agenc government
agenc also regularli share inform on crimin investig with prosecutor
includ the ident of the sourc of inform the same regul and consider
could govern busi entiti
exampl
dure the examin of collin you contact roger mcguir a cowork of collinss
mcguir will talk to you onli in confid you know bailei polici es ar to prosecut all
crimin offens mcguir seem to be the kei to make a case against collin you believ
you can independ verifi the alleg mcguir furnish but you will not be certain until
you talk to him it might be necessari to call mcguir to testifi against collin in order to
make the case
wrong
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell anyon about your talk to me
investig covert examin
2011 fraud examin manual 3319
right
mr mcguir i promis i will not tell ms collin about your talk to me
the second is a condit promis the examin will not directli tell collin but that
doesnt mean someon els wont at some point inform and sourc often becom
wit under no circumst should an examin promis a sourc or inform that
hi ident will not becom known
us of oper
oper ar subject to greater control than inform in a typic scenario a sourc or
inform advis that inform exist or that a crime is current be commit the
inform motiv might or might not be altruist for exampl a warehous worker
approach the fraud examin and sai that collin is steal inventori the inform
want monei for her assist in apprehend collin the examin doe not know
whether the inform is tell the truth or whether she is try to divert attent from
herself
the inform suggest that she secretli record a convers with collin get collin
to admit to the theft if an inform conduct the investig under the examin
direct he then becom an oper to demonstr a worstcas scenario consid the
follow exampl without the examin k nowledg or consent the inform plant a
tape record in the break room at the warehous and record convers to which he is
not a parti thi is a violat of the law regard intercept of commun although
the record wa made without the examin knowledg or consent the case is
nonetheless compromis the inform might insist that he record the convers at
the examin request therebi place the examin in the unenvi posit of have to
defend himself
most oper lack the train to conduct an investig and thei cannot in mani
instanc be trust it is vital that oper be properli monitor and supervis obtain
background inform on the oper to ensur hi degre of culpabl in the offens if
ani make certain that the oper clearli understand the object of the covert
oper and ensur that he is regularli debrief befor and after critic meet with the
target be care that the oper doe not take ani action without proper author
covert examin investig
3320 2011 fraud examin manual
sourc for satellit imageri and relat materi
spot imag corpor
sell imageri from the french spot satellit
wwwspotcom
703 7153100
14595 avion parkwai suit 500
chantilli va 20151
us geograph survei
sell aerial photograph some radar imag and photograph from us space mission
wwwusgsgov
800 2338081 or 650 3295555
us geolog survei custom servic
345 middlefield road
menlo park ca 94025
the orthoshop
make map and correct satellit imageri
wwworthoshopcom
800 5631740 or 403 2507830
172327th avenu ne
calgari alberta t2e 7e1
satellit and civil liberti
in the 1980 the suprem court made sever rule that establish the legal basi for
satellit surveil some of these kei rule ar list below
california v ciraolo 106 sct 1809 1810 1986 the court rule that aerial photograph did
not interfer with a person expect of privaci
unit state v dunn 55 uslw 4251 4253 1987 the court held that open area ar not
protect by fourth amend right
dow chemic compani v unit state 106 sct 1819 1986 the court enunci standard
regard the legal of aerial photographi it express concern about satellit surveil
but did not establish ani legal distinct between aerial photographi and satellit
surveil
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3401
sourc of inform
when extern document ar need fraud examin should consid access public and
nonpubl record commerci databas the internet and other valuabl sourc
there is a surpris amount of inform about both individu and busi that can
be access without a subpoena or other legal process for instanc there is an enorm
amount of inform contain in public record
thi chapter explain the differ between public and nonpubl record and summar
some import rule govern the avail of certain type of inform it also
explain some of the differ type of inform avail and how each type of
inform can be us in a fraud examin moreov thi chapter outlin where to
find popular type of record kept by local state and feder sourc
the fraud examin must be certain that inform obtain is done so legal record
from confidenti sourc gener cannot be introduc as evid in crimin case
illeg obtain documentari evid fall under the exclusionari rule see the law
section of the fraud examin manual in civil case us illeg obtain document
might give rise to tort action or other sanction against the fraud examin follow is a
list of inform avail from citi counti state and feder agenc
public versu nonpubl record
public record
public record ar document that a government agenc is requir to keep by law or that ar
necessari to discharg the duti impos by law each agenc or government unit is
respons for mani differ function that mai requir them to maintain uniqu
inform
public record which ar avail to anyon who wish to us them can be us for a
number of reason thei can suppli invalu background inform on employe
suspect and wit public record can also be us to corrobor or refut wit
statement can help investig track the flow of stolen cash or other asset and can be
extrem import in a compani effort to recov loss
sourc of inform investig
3402 2011 fraud examin manual
public record can be search manual or onlin through government agenc websit
and onlin public databas there also ar mani commerci search firm that will search
public record and otherwis conduct an asset search for a fee busi and commerci
index such as db formerli dun bradstreet and dow jone busi inform
servic also can be search for busi credit and other inform but access
public record through a thirdparti servic can trigger certain notic requir under the
fair credit report act fcra the impact of the fcra is discuss below
examin should be prepar to answer the who what where and how of public record
research to conduct the investig the follow item ar essenti to a record
investig of an individu
name
date of birth
social secur number
last known address
the better inform you ar about the subject you ar investig the easier your search
will be for investig individu some of the issu at the outset includ
what is the person full name
do you have a last name onli is that na me so common that your search will return
thousand of possibl 14000 smith what ar some wai of narrow possibl
first name for the individu
what is the person approxim ag or date of birth
doe the person have crimin background
ha the person been su or su someon
ha the person own a busi
doe the person have tax lien
doe the person have a profession licens contractor account
for investig busi some of the issu at the outset includ
is the busi incorpor
where doe the compani do busi
what type of busi is it
ha the busi su or been su
doe the busi have real properti
doe the compani financ equip
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3403
doe the compani charg sale tax
how long ha the compani been in busi
nonpubl record
in addit to public record nonpubl recordsfinanci or otherwisemight be need
to prove fraud or to provid lead in a fraud examin nonpubl record includ
inform about a person or busi consid to be privat and confidenti becaus
fraud examin do not have an absolut right to see these person record such
inform might be difficult or imposs to obtain unless it is voluntarili turn over or a
subpoena is issu
some of the most valuabl person record includ
bank record
tax return and relat document
credit record
telephon record
credit card account record
law govern access to inform
despit the public broad right of access to public record there ar numer law that
limit access to certain type of inform and a number of risk to privaci ar rais by
the collect of inform therefor fraud examin must be certain that ani
inform obtain is done so legal
freedom of inform act
the freedom of inform act foia is the primari act that govern the avail of
government record to the gener public the act set veri specif guidelin regard
what government record ar and ar not open to the public the record that ar avail
ar known as public record raw record of inform that ar compil and maintain
by government agenc the variou record ar maintain at on of the three
government level feder state or counti local although the foia is a feder act
most state have adopt veri similar version of the foia to cover the state and local
jurisdict while these version ar similar to the origin foia the individu pass
state act mai differ slightli in specif legal area from state to state
sourc of inform investig
3404 2011 fraud examin manual
the foia and it individu state counterpart regul
the type of record that a government agenc mai maintain about a person
the condit under which such inform mai be disclos to anoth government
agenc
the circumst and method under which an individu mai obtain copi of agenc
record that pertain to him
gener speak government record about an individu ar prohibit from releas
the disclosur of these record constitut an invas of privaci a person mai obtain
copi of hi own record by request them in write from the agenc that maintain
them such request often ar deni in whole or in part becaus of numer except
to the disclosur requir some of these except includ the pendenc of an
ongo investig or concern about nation secur a person deni access to record
mai appeal through that agenc or through the court
most record ar maintain at the counti or local level a fact that can serious hamper ani
fraud investig it can be veri difficult for the fraud examin to catch up with a
fraudster who understand the counti file procedur and choos to oper in differ
counti howev the follow record ar avail at differ level of govern
the foia provid for public access to the follow inform
tax roll
voter registr
assum name
real properti record
divorceprob suit
inform not deem to be public under the foia includ
bank record
trust record
telephon record
passeng list
stock ownership
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3405
fair credit report act
on of the primari statut limit access to inform is the feder fair credit
report act fcra thi statut regul the dissemin of consum inform to
third parti by consum report agenc histor the fcra onli appli to
consum credit report but due to amend in 1997 the fcra now appli to the
gather of mani other type of inform about an individu through third parti
the fcra appli in the employ context when an employ contract with a consum
report agenc cra to collect consum report on employe or potenti employe a
cra is defin as anyon who sell inform about peopl eg a privat investig or
an onlin public record servic a consum report is defin as ani written oral or other
commun by a consum report agenc bear on a custom credit worthi
credit stand charact gener reput person characterist or mode of live
the fcra howev doe not appli if the person or organ seek the inform
gather it directli from the sourc
if the fcra doe appli it gener mean that an examin cannot us a third parti to
obtain certain inform about a person unless that person ha receiv certain notic and
sign a consent form the failur to do so can mean civil penalti
compli with the fcra
befor an employ can obtain consum inform about a current or prospect
employe from a third parti it must compli with all of the follow requir
provid the individu with a clear and conspicu separ written disclosur that
the employ might obtain a report
obtain the individu written author
inform the third parti that the employ ha compli with the fcra notic
requir
inform the third parti that the employ will not us the inform to violat ani equal
employ law
the disclosur and the author can be contain in the same document as long as the
document contain noth els
sourc of inform investig
3406 2011 fraud examin manual
if the employ reli on a consum report for an advers action eg deni a job
applic reassign or termin an employe or deni a promot then it must
provid the individu with a preadvers action disclosur befor take the advers action
thi disclosur must includ a copi of the individu consum report and a copi of a
summari of your right under the fair credit report act which is avail from
the ftc
after advers action is taken the employ must notifi the individu via an advers action
notic that the action ha been taken that notic must includ the follow
name address and phone number of the consum report agenc cra that
suppli the report
a statement that the cra did not make the advers action decis and cannot explain
why the advers action wa taken and
a notic of the individu right to di spute the accuraci or complet of the
inform furnish and hi right to an addit free consum report from the
agenc upon request within 60 dai
if howev the employ is gather the consum inform in connect with a
workplac investig of misconduct howev it mai be exclud from the fcra see
the section workplac investig of fraud and misconduct below
workplac investig of fraud and misconduct
the fair and accur credit transact act of 2003 amend the fair credit report
act fcra to exempt certain report involv employe misconduct investig
as a result of these amend an employ who us a third parti to conduct a workplac
investig no longer ha to obtain the prior consent of an employe if the investig
involv suspect misconduct violat of law or regul or violat of ani
preexist polici of the employ
to qualifi for thi except the report from the third parti must not be commun to
anyon other than the employ an agent of the employ or the govern
but if advers action is taken against the employe base on the result of the
investig the fcra still requir the employ to provid the employe with a summari
of the report advers action is broadli defin as ani employ decis that advers
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3407
affect the employe the summari must contain the natur and substanc of the
commun upon which the advers action is base it doe not howev have to
identifi the individu interview or the sourc of the inform
investig consum report
under the fcra an investig consum report is a report contain inform about
an individu charact gener reput person characterist or mode of live that
is obtain through person interview with neighbor friend or associ if such a
report is made then other notic and consent mai need to be obtain from the
individu for exampl a separ disclosur must be us to inform the employe that an
investig consum report is be obtain the form must also state what sort of
inform will be collect
also the compani must disclos to the individu the natur and scope of the investig
if he request if ani advers action is to be taken against the person he can ask to receiv
a copi of the report befor such action is taken further the report given to the individu
must not be redact mean that if the report contain name of the peopl provid the
inform and what thei report such inform cannot be delet from the report
the person must also be given an opportun to disput the find in the report
contact your attornei
unfortun for fraud examin the fcra ha creat sever more hoop that
examin must jump through befor thei can obtain certain type of inform the
fcra is not clearli written but the feder trade commiss ha publish sever letter
give it interpret of the statut these letter and the text of the fcra can be
obtain through it websit at wwwftcgov
the most import thing for the fraud examin to rememb is to consult hi inhous or
outsid counsel your attornei will help you determin what procedur you need to
institut to compli with the fcra
grammleachblilei act
the grammleachblilei act glb wa pass in 1999 and rule implement the act
becam final in 2001 glb wa origin enac ted to allow bank and other compani to
offer previous forbidden servic such as insur and secur brokerag servic
congress wa worri that these super bank would share custom financi data with
sourc of inform investig
3408 2011 fraud examin manual
affili and other compani to hawk their product therefor congress ad a
provis requir financi intuit to te ll custom about their privaci polici to
notifi custom of privat inform thei intend to share and to give custom the
chanc to block such inform share
to implement the law congress order regul to defin financi institut in the
broadest possibl term thu financi institut includ not just bank but also
insur compani account tax prepar and real estat settlement servic and
invest advisor the text of the rule can be found at 16 cfr part 313 addit
inform about the rule can be found at the feder trade commiss websit
wwwftcgov
glb is import for fraud examin becaus the privaci rule implement as part of the
act have been interpret to prevent the sell of credit header inform and under the
ftc interpret of the rule credit header inform cannot be sold except for the
veri limit purpos allow under the fair credit report act the agenc reach thi
decis by conclud that such basic person inform such as name and address is
financi inform and therefor must be protect under the glb act therefor the
glb prevent credit bureau from sell credit header inform includ name
address phone number and social secur number to privat investig direct
market or other inform broker
as a gener rule financi inform can be obtain onli by subpoena
the grammleachblilei act also made it a crimin offens to engag in pretext
some individu us pretext as a mean to gather financi inform about a subject
pretext would contact a financi institut and pretend to be the custom or someon
els author to obtain financi inform and basic trick the financi institut
into provid inform about the subject
section 6821 of titl 15 of the us code ad by glb make it an offens to
us fals fictiti or fraudul statement or document to get custom inform
from a financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut
us forg counterfeit lost or stolen document to get custom inform from a
financi institut or directli from a custom of a financi institut or
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3409
ask anoth person to get someon els custom er inform us fals fictiti or
fraudul statement or document or us forg counterfeit lost or stolen
document
violat can under certain circumst be fine andor imprison up to 10 year
pretext is not alwai illeg but it should be us with extrem caution for exampl if a
fraud examin is try to locat a wit or a suspect he might call the person rel
and pretend to be an old high school friend who is look for a phone number thi type of
pretext gener is not illeg howev it is illeg to obtain certain type of inform
such as financi record and phone record
fraud examin should never imperson a member of law enforc and should never
imperson an actual person particularli the individu be investig to do so mai
lead to charg of ident theft in 2006 investig hire by hewlettpackard were
charg with ident theft conspiraci and wire fraud for acquir the phone record of
sever member of their board of director who were suspect of leak confidenti
inform as a result congress pass the telephon record and privaci protect
act which is codifi at 18 us code section 1039 thi law make it a feder crime to
obtain confidenti phone record without author includ pose as anoth
individu
befor engag in ani type of pretext activ investig should consult with an
attornei to determin whether the inform sought is protect by state or feder law as
well as whether the plan imperson method is legal accept
privaci act of 1974
the privaci act of 1974 restrict inform about individu includ employe and
nonemploye that might be gather by government agenc under the act an agenc
mai maintain record about a person contain inform that is relev and necessari
to accomplish a purpos of the agenc thi inform mai includ a person educ
financ medic histori crimin histori employ histori and identifi inform
fingerprint voic print or photograph the person mai have access to hi inform
unless it is investigatori materi compil for law enforc purpos statist record
or materi compil sole for determin suitabl elig or qualif for feder
servic or promot
sourc of inform investig
3410 2011 fraud examin manual
right to financi privaci act
the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut from disclos financi
inform about individu custom to government agenc without the custom
consent a court order a subpoena a search warrant or other formal demand there ar
howev limit except to thi rule
although the statut appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and
other financi institut also will not releas such inform to privat parti absent
legal process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
driver privaci protect act
in 1999 congress made signific chang to the driver privaci protect act of 1994
18 usc 2721 the law bar state from releas driver social secur number
photograph or certain other inform unless thei obtain the express consent of each
person in advanc befor the 1999 amend driver could opt out and ask that their
inform not be releas under the law howev driver ar under an opt in system
that requir their express author of the releas of inform although the law wa
challeng the us suprem court in januari 2000 upheld the constitution of the
amend
these amend make it extrem difficult to obtain uptod inform from state
motor vehicl depart such inform can onli be obtain if the driver ha
expressli consent to it releas therefor compani mai wish to consid have
employe sign a consent form as earli as the employ applic stage for exampl
the driver privaci protect act doe not prohibit the us of motor vehicl record
mvr for preemploy screen but the state can onli releas the record with the
driver consent
health insur portabl and account act
the health insur portabl and account act hipaa institut sever
addit privaci rule concern person health inform while most of the rule do
not directli affect fraud investig fraud examin should be awar of the rule becaus
thei mai have an impact on the type of inform that can be legal gather on
employe
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3411
the hipaa privaci rule place restrict on the avail and us of protect health
inform the definit of thi term is extrem broad and cover ani inform
relat to an individu past present or futur physic or mental health payment for
servic or health care oper
if inform about the health of an individu or payment for servic becom an issu
dure an investig fraud examin should immedi contact the human resourc
hr depart the hr depart should have inform about whether the entiti is
subject to hipaa rule and can assist you in complianc with those rule
the most import thing to note is that if hipaa rule do appli you ar restrict as to
the type of health inform you can access without specif written author you
should never contact the health care provid the healthplan administr or a medic
bill servic for copi of employe record without first consult the employ legal
counsel or the hr depart
citi govern record
the follow item ar basic type of public record that can be access at the citi level of
govern
build inspector record
health and fire depart record
citi personnel depart record
public school record
regulatori agenc record
citi tax assessorcollector record
util compani record
build inspector record
the follow inform gener is avail through a citi build inspector offic
build permit show the name of applic address of construct estim
cost and the name of builder or contractor
blueprint and plan show construct detail that often ar submit with
applic for build permit
build inspector report contain inform regard complianc with
construct specif
sourc of inform investig
3412 2011 fraud examin manual
health and fire depart record
most local health or fire depart conduct routin inspect of busi for health
and safeti code or fire code violat these inspector might have valuabl inform
about the busi it oper the employe and the owner
death certif usual can be found at citi counti or state health depart a death
certif provid the name of the deceas address sex ag race birthplac birth date
death place date and time of death social secur number medic certif and
coron certif addition a death certi ficat gener provid inform about
the deceas parent and their occup
citi personnel depart record
the citi personnel depart maintain personalhistori statement from citi employe
and polit leader as well as employ record effici report and record of salari
lien on citi employe
public school record
citi school system maintain teacher bi ographi show person background
educ and former employ and stud ent record show biographi in some
school district grade and disciplinari action
regulatori agenc record
applic for busi licens contain in the file of citi regulatori agenc often
have valuabl inform on certain type of enterpris in mani citi the follow
busi would have to appli for licens to oper
busi seek liquor licens
profession includ certifi public account dentist doctor plumber
electrician and optometrist
restaur bar and night club which ar frequent inspect by health and fire
depart
busi oper under name other than the owner name such busi must
regist under assum name and ar includ in the citi dba do busi as
file
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3413
citi tax assessorcollector record
a citi tax assessor offic maintain map of real properti in the citi includ a
properti dimens address owner taxabl valu and improv a tax collector
offic maintain the follow inform
name and address of payer of properti tax even if the tax were paid by
individu other than the appar owner
legal descript of properti
amount of tax paid on real and person properti
delinqu statu of tax
name of former properti owner
util compani record
mani util compani ar nonprofit corpor or municip although the recent
trend ha been to restrict access to util compani record check with the util compani
in the subject area to see what if ani inform is avail util record might contain
the phone number of the custom even if that number is unlist in addit be sure to
check the name of friend or rel
counti govern record
the follow item ar basic type of public record that can be access at the counti level
of govern
counti court record
counti coron regist
counti personnel depart record
build permit record
public school record
voter registr record
counti record offic record
sheriffcounti prosecutor record
counti fire marshal record
regulatori agenc record
welfar commiss record
sourc of inform investig
3414 2011 fraud examin manual
counti court record
the great major of an individu civil record can be found at the counti courthous in
the jurisdict where the subject doe busi or resid
court ar gener divid into jurisdict that encompass a singl counti in a singl
state in each singl court there ar usual three level trial court appel court and
suprem court
most of the paper file in civil suit ar acc ssibl as public record howev crimin and
juvenil action mai not be as open to review in addit crimin convict record ar
gener avail to the public
a great deal of litig occur each year and mani peopl might be subject to judici
action voluntarili or not research civil and crimin suit can provid invalu
inform assist in
the locat of individu
identifi pend action
uncov close case
insight into marit statu famili
trace sourc of fund probat
identifi financi condit bankruptci
litig histori
outstand judgment
although a wealth of inform is avail in court file civil or crimin action might
not be readili known and the research must be abl to identifi the jurisdict counti or
court involv
a research typic will have access to microfich list of case or parti within the
individu court system through the clerk offic some court ar set up to provid
computer access to thi inform normal on must be abl to provid a case
number in order to access the actual court file the parti name index will provid the
case number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3415
court clerk maintain file on all activ and close lawsuit in their jurisdict inform
regard these suit is public record and can be search by scan the index for
subject name as a plaintiff or defend
for exampl the subject data field of court record will contain
the complaint for or against the subject direct and revers index
the subject last known address either through the lawsuit plead or the court
offic citat and subpoena return
other person inform on the subject depend on the type of suit
court level vari by jurisdict as do the name of the level differ case type ar file
at differ level and in differ court
differ level of court ar assign jurisdict over ani given case base on court issu
and the natur of the claim to determin the full extent of the litig histori against a
compani or individu the examin must search each of the variou type of local court
record
civil court record
the kei to locat civil court record is know the correct spell of your subject name
where the person current live and where he live in the past
depend on the type of suit civil court record will provid potenti valuabl
inform
person injuri suit record
record for a person injuri suit for exampl will often contain an accid report injuri
histori statement of the involv parti and the financi settlement of the case
financi suit record
financi suit record will disclos an individu debtor and creditor and thei will present
an outsid view of a businesss histori or abil to perform
divorc record
divorc record search will return marriag partner name address locat of marriag
divorc file date and file number in addit divorc record frequent contain the
sourc of inform investig
3416 2011 fraud examin manual
subject financi inventori which is submit at the time of the divorc or separ and
should also includ the partit of asset to each parti in the settlement
crimin court record
when conduct a crimin record search certain type of inform ar critic like
civil court crimin court across the countri ar divid into jurisdict that gener
encompass a singl counti in a singl state
although most state have their crimin court divid by counti some state offer index
with crimin convict for the entir state
crimin convict should not be confus with crimin file when you search for
crimin record at the counti level you will find all case file by the district attornei even
if the person wa not found guilti of a crime when search a statewid convict
databas you will find onli case that result in convict
the counti crimin court clerk maintain crimin court file that might contain a wealth of
inform these file might provid inform describ the offens and the count
these file also might contain the complain signatur exemplar a transcript of the
preliminari hear the name of the prosecut and defens attornei the probat
offic report with a background investig of the defend and the subpoena issu
in the case
probat court record
probat court record ar document file to show the dispers of asset after a subject
death the probat court conduct an investig to verifi ani debt ow by an individu
estat and see to the dispers of asset accord to the deceas will or if there is no
will by state law after all debt ar paid
the debt left in an individu estat will give the investig inform on the follow
name of individu with an interest in the deceas estat
the subject financi posit at the time of death
the dispers of asset will reveal
the name and address of heir to the deceas
some indic of the valu of the properti will to them
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3417
counti coron regist
a counti coron regist gener contain the name or a descript of the deceas
date of inquest if ani properti found on the de ceas and it disposit and the caus
of death
counti personnel depart record
a counti personnel depart maintain inform similar to that maintain by a citi
personnel depart
build permit record
if a busi or individu construct a new build or make improv to an exist
build there should be a build permit on file with the local build author in
addit befor most busi can open their door the citi or counti mai requir that
thei possess certain permit the local fire depart mai requir permit ensur that the
busi compli with the fire code the citi health depart will requir permit for
restaur or other busi that serv food plan and zone depart enforc
regul regard the type of busi and their locat
public school
counti public school system maintain inform similar to that found in citi public
school system
voter registr record
to be elig to vote us citizen must be regist in their respect precinct to
regist citizen must fill out a registr applic the inform requir to process
the applic includ name address date of birth signatur and social secur number
voter registr record routin ar verifi by the counti and old address ar delet
as new on appear
counti record offic record
a counti record is a govern offic respons for maintain public record and
document especi record relat to real estat ownership a counti record offic
maintain the follow inform
sourc of inform investig
3418 2011 fraud examin manual
document pertain to real estat transact includ deed grant transfer and
mortgag of real estat releas of mortgag power of attornei and leas that have
been acknowledg or approv
mortgag on person properti
marriag licens record and applic includ inform on previou marriag
maiden name address and date of birth
will admit to probat
offici bond
notic of mechan lien
transcript of judgment that ar made lien on real estat
notic of attach on real estat
paper in connect with bankruptci
certifi copi of decre and judgment of court of record
other document permit by law to be record such as the depart of defens
dod 214 form record by some veteran as evid of veteran statu particularli
in those state where veteran ar grant reduc properti tax rate
real estat transact record ar extrem import thei ar rel easi to access and
contain a vast amount of inform real estat record usual ar found in the counti in
which the land is locat when an individu purchas real estat he becom a taxpay
and a registr in the follow counti record real properti record properti tax record
and tax assessor record
real properti record
each real estat transact will list a deed verifi the transfer of the properti if an
individu either bui or sell a hous or piec of properti or hi real properti becom
subject to a state or feder lien the transact will be reflect in the counti real properti
index if improv ar made to the properti such as the addit of a new room or
the instal of a pool then a mechan lien or other notic mai be on file in the counti
properti record
commerci search
mani compani provid access to real properti record a search for a busi or
individu in these databas can return real properti ownership inform recent properti
sale and transfer refin construct loan and seller carryback transact
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3419
in addit you can conduct a singl search of all avail onlin state in the same amount
of time and for the same price as an individu counti or state search typic respons will
includ the properti owner name properti address mail address parcel number lot
size land properti valu tax amount purchas amount properti descript and more on
refin construct loan and seller carryback and sale transact the date and
amount of each transact usual appear thi is especi us for determin an
individu equiti in a specif properti or for identifi individu that mai be receiv
monthli incom as a result of provid financ
noncommerci search
although examin can us commerci servic to obtain real properti inform eg
identifi the ownership of a piec of real properti some jurisdict ar not avail
depend on how local jurisdict and state compil properti inform search mai
be conduct by busi or person name address or name of the put owner
search of the real properti record mai reveal
resid and address of buyer and seller refer to respect as grantor and
grante
price of the properti see tax stamp if list
mortgag compani and amount origin financ
real estat ownership
who financ the transact if applic
titl compani involv
improv to the properti along with the name and address of the contractor
us
properti tax record
in addit to the properti record themselv counti charg new landown properti
tax for upkeep of their school courthous polic and other public build these
record can provid
an idea of the estim valu for tax purpos of the properti list
the ident of the owner of a vacant piec of land or a piec of properti if ownership is
unknown
the name of the last person to pai tax on the properti
when search real properti and tax record the fraud examin should alwai look for ani
addit name list on the document frequent the name of the attornei or notari
sourc of inform investig
3420 2011 fraud examin manual
public who verifi the document is list provid anoth potenti sourc of further
inform
tax assessorcollector record
counti tax assessor and collector offic maintain inform similar to that held by citi
tax assessor offic
sheriffcounti prosecutor record
the counti sheriff or the counti prosecutor mai maintain gener incid file relat to
the busi within the counti incid file can provid lead on manag or owner of
the busi or third parti who have made complaint against the busi
counti fire marshal record
the counti fire marshal should have a record of ani fire that have occur at specif
properti these record mai contain inform about a properti insur as well as
inform about ani previous conduct investig
regulatori agenc record
counti regulatori agenc maintain inform similar to that held by citi regulatori
agenc
welfar commiss record
file of a counti welfar commiss ar base on inform gather by social worker
psychologist and physician frequent the recipi of benefit provid the inform
which is gener not verifi file contain such inform as the recipi address
previou employ how much the recipi earn properti the recipi or the
recipi rel might own the state of the famili health and crimin record
state govern record
the follow item ar basic type of public record that can be access at the state level
of govern
busi fling
state court record
uniform commerci code file
employeelabor depart record
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3421
state tax file
profession associ and licens board
state attornei gener record
worker compens record
depart of motor vehicl record
bureau of vital statist
other state regulatori agenc
busi file
if an individu want to conduct busi in a name other than hi own the law requir
that he file document to claim ownership of that name these document can includ
articl of incorpor
foreign corpor registr
dbafictiti name registr
tax relat file
articl of incorpor
corpor ar form by file articl of incorpor with the secretari of state or
state corpor bureau or corpor registri offic in the state of which the compani doe
busi these corpor record ar public record and will includ
corpor name
ownership inform
stock valu
initi sharehold
name of the director and offic
regist agent
locat of the princip offic
date of incorpor
standingstatu
thi inform will permit the investig to review a corpor structur identifi the
regist agent and trace incorpor date the record will often includ limit
partnership inform as well the examin can also us these record to verifi the
state in which a compani is regist as a corpor
sourc of inform investig
3422 2011 fraud examin manual
foreign corpor registr record
some state but not all requir foreign corpor ie corpor that were
incorpor in anoth state to regist with the state corpor offic if the foreign
corpor transact busi in that state for exampl if a corpor charter in
delawar wish to transact busi in texa it must file an applic for certif of
author the applic is file with the secretari of state and must includ the date of
incorpor the princip offic the address of the regist agent and the name of the
offic and director
fictiti busi namesdo busi as inform
do busi as dba inform is typic file at the counti level though mani
state requir file with at the state level as well most state also requir limit
partnership trust and joint ventur to file dba inform at the state or counti level
thi inform will provid insight into the true busi ventur behind the name dba
inform is veri similar to corpor file with the secretari of state and thei allow
examin to trace the corpor root or prove ownership in sole proprietorship
partnership limit partnership joint ventur and trust
tax relat file
some state revenu depart requir certain busi to obtain licens or permit
such as a sale tax permit the licens and the applic ar gener public record if the
busi is delinqu in the payment of it tax the local or state tax investig or
collector might be abl to provid insid inform concern the busi
law enforc offici might be abl to gain access to corpor busi and person
state tax inform these record might unwittingli reveal hidden asset or invest
loan to or from offic stockhold or relat entiti should be examin close also
mortgag note and bond shown as liabil on a corpor return should be
investig tax return might also disclos the ident of the account or attornei
prepar the return
state court record
state civil court record
state civil court record search ar conduct by court by counti and ar divid between
upper and lower court gener a monetari divis where applic search of state
civil court record mai return the ident of the plaintiff and defend case number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3423
file date caus of action and disposit or current statu depend on the court
divorc domest famili law child support name chang or probat matter mai also be
includ
state crimin court record
state crimin court record search ar conduct by court or by counti for feloni
misdemeanor or a combin of both search of state civil court record mai return the
ident of the defend a physic descript of the conduct the arrest date arrest
agenc case number file date charg and disposit or current statu an index search
is avail for some state and counti and most state have some type of releas
requir for obtain thi inform
uniform commerci code file
a search of uniform commerci code ucc file can help you identifi person
properti that an individu or busi ha financ thi is becaus a lender must file ucc
statement with the secretari of state or with the counti level unit to perfect it secur
interest in person properti
bank financ compani and other lender will gener record or record file of
financi transact conduct with individu and busi such as purchas of
household furnitur applianc boat and yacht automobil aircraft and busi
equip
these file produc as the result of the transact will identifi
name of the debtor or joint debtor
current address of the debtor
name of the financi lender
type of collater pledg as secur
date of file and continu
ucc file can also disclos when and where a person obtain person loan the type of
properti pledg to the lender to secur the loan and the current address of the debtor
these document provid item list of person properti held by the debtor
addition ucc file and support document can help examin uncov hidden
ownership or relationship between parti by view the name of all list debtor and
sourc of inform investig
3424 2011 fraud examin manual
their address the examin mai find inform link individu to the compani
thei own or discov inform about a compani subsidiari branch offic or parent
compani
these document can be readili retriev from the secretari of state offic through servic
compani or through onlin public record servic on compani that provid access to
thi inform is experian experian ucc onlin databas provid inform from
statelevel ucc1 financ statement as well as inform on amend assign
termin and so on most onlin respons will includ debtor and secur parti
name and address file date and file number for each origin file amend date
and assign inform when applic
employeelabor depart record
some state under their labor depart requir the file of period list of employe
reveal their name social secur number and salari in addit by examin
previou file an investig can locat former employe
profession associ and licens board
mani state and local agenc or bodi main tain record identifi individu hold
special licens or membership these can includ
medic practition such as doctor dentist and nurs
social worker
attornei
certifi public account
real estat license
notari
law enforc personnel
firefight
secur guard
stockbrok
teacher
insur agent
privat investig
bail bond agent
travel agent
barber and cosmetologist
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3425
contractor engin electrician and architect
the licens and applic grant by the state might be public record although some
applic contain no more than a name and address other applic contain lengthi
person inform such as previou residenti address previou employ educ
and train and financi statement some agenc ar requir to conduct a background
investig befor issuanc of a licens
also the state regulatori or licens agenc might have the author to suspend or revok
the licens necessari for the busi to oper
mani profession organ maintain their own list of member or license thei
might be reluct to provid inform beyond the person name and current stand in
the associ
state attornei gener record
state attornei gener ar good sourc of inform on whether a particular entiti or
individu wa the subject of an enforc action by a particular state for link to the
attornei gener websit for ani of the 50 state consult the nation associ of
attornei gener at httpwwwnaagorg
worker compens record
record of worker compens claim ar av ailabl in most state howev the breadth
of coverag will vari from state to state some state requir some type of author
from the target of the search worker comp ensat search mai return the subject
name social secur number date of birth employ name date and type of accid and
natur and extent of inquiri
the american with disabl act howev purport to prevent prospect employ
from us worker compens record to deni employ to otherwis qualifi job
applic
depart of motor vehicl record
the depart of motor vehicl dmv maintain inform on driver licens
vehicl registr titl car dealer car salespeopl wreck yard tow compani
smog inspect facil and in some state auto repair busi
sourc of inform investig
3426 2011 fraud examin manual
dmv record were onc thought to be good locat tool but recent restrict on the us
of such data ha reduc the effect of such search moreov the updat qualiti of
individu state record suppli by state author mai not be adequ to locat peopl
in a transient fastpac societi still search such as driver identif can be us on
a spot basi
vehicl ownership inform will identifi ve hicl regist to a specif person or
busi these record includ trailer motor home or motor vessel inform on
disabl placard mai also be avail current ownership of a particular vehicl can be
obtain through the us of a plate number or a vehicl identif number vin
inform return will includ plate number vin expir date make model model
year regist owner nameaddress and legal owner nameaddress
in 1999 congress made signific chang to the driver privaci protect act of 1994
18 usc 2721 the amend law bar sta te from releas driver social secur
number photograph or certain other inform unless thei obtain the express
consent of each person in advanc befor the 1999 amend driver could opt out
and ask that their inform not be releas under the new law howev driver ar
under an opt in system that requir their express author of the releas of
inform although the law wa challeng the us suprem court upheld the
constitution of the new amend in januari 2000
these amend make it extrem difficult to obtain almost ani uptod inform
from state motor vehicl depart such inform can onli be obtain if the driver
ha expressli consent to it releas therefor compani mai wish to consid have
employe sign a consent form as earli as the employ applic stage becaus even
though the driver privaci protect act doe not prohibit the us of motor vehicl
record for preemploy screen the state can onli releas the record with the
driver consent
bureau of vital statist
a state bureau of vital statist where birth certif ar gener file is an excel
sourc of inform birth certif can provid a child name sex date of birth and
place of birth the name of the attend phy sician midwif andor other assist the
parent name ag address race place of birth and occup the mother maiden
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3427
name and the number of sibl in some state birth certif might be found at the
citi or counti level
other state regulatori agenc
at the state level the follow addit record can be found
auto licens auto transfer and sale of vehicl
civil servic applic
driver licens
health depart record
inherit and gift tax return
name chang
occup and busi licens
parol offic and probat depart file
person properti tax return
school and voter registr
state incom tax return
welfar agenc record
the follow state depart and agenc might also maintain inform valuabl to
fraud examin
bureau of profession and vocat standard or depart of licens especi
profession associ partnership and corpor
controllertreasur
depart of agricultur
depart of industri relat
depart of natur resourc
horserac boardgambl commiss
secretari of state corpor divis
state board of equal
state polic or highwai patrol
state secur commiss
state util commiss
sourc of inform investig
3428 2011 fraud examin manual
feder govern record
a huge amount of inform is avail to the public through the variou feder agenc
a list of a number of feder agenc and their websit address will be provid later in
thi workbook and inform about variou feder agenc can be obtain through the
follow refer guid
congression staff directori and feder staff directori prepar annual by cq
press
congression directori prepar by the us govern print offic
the unit state govern manual prepar by the us govern print offic
howev the follow record ar of particular note
feder court record
civil and crimin court record
feder civil and crimin court record can provid valuabl inform includ the
plaintiff and defend name the case number the file date the caus of action and the
case disposit of current statu
bankruptci court record
bankruptci proceed ar conduct in feder bankruptci court in these court all
document file with the court ar public record and can be examin by anyon without
charg these onsit feder court record mai includ the case number debtor name
social secur number address file date chapter design and closur date the
search is avail for all feder jurisdict usual cover a sevenyear span that start
from the present and move backward
bankruptci document ar usual locat in the feder bankruptci court for the district
where the debtor resid or had hi princip place of busi when check bankruptci
court record the examin should rememb to check not onli the individu or busi
file for bankruptci but also ani relat busi princip employe or rel
a bankruptci is initi by the file of a bankruptci petit the petit can be either
voluntari or involuntari three or more creditor who have outstand claim that have not
been paid can file an involuntari petit
specif a bankruptci file typic contain the follow document
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3429
bankruptci petit the bankruptci petit contain type of bankruptci
voluntaryinvoluntari chapter 7 chapter 11 etc social secur number or tax id
number street address and primari place of busi locat of princip asset of
busi type of busi name of attornei estim amount of asset estim
number of creditor liabil and employe financi data and a list of sharehold
proof of claim form proof of claim form ar file by creditor list the amount thei ar
ow by the debtor
truste final report the final report is file by a truste when a case is conclud it
show which claim were paid
truste final account truste must also file a final a ccount of the administr of the
estat thi account will also show which claim were paid
schedul a thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor real
properti
schedul b thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor person
properti includ tangibl properti eg jewelri and vehicl and intang properti
eg invest and account receiv
schedul c thi form is file by the debtor and it describ the properti that the debtor
is claim as exempt from be us to satisfi claim
schedul d thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the secur debt the
debtor ow eg mortgag
schedul e thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all of the debtor prioriti
debt the bankruptci code give certain unsecur creditor prioriti such as those
ow wage contribut to pension plan tax ow to government entiti etc
schedul f file by the debtor thi form describ unsecur nonprior claim ow
by the debtor
schedul g file by the debtor thi form describ ani leas and executori contract
ie contract that have not been fulli perform to which the debtor is a parti
schedul h thi form is file by the debtor and it describ all codebtor that might be
affect by the debtor bankruptci
schedul i file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current incom
schedul j file by the debtor thi form describ the debtor current monthli
expenditur
statement of financi affair thi form is file by the debt or and it describ the debtor
legal econom and busi transact prior to file it is a list of all recent
sourc of incom payment to creditor lawsuit repossess or foreclosur
sourc of inform investig
3430 2011 fraud examin manual
assign gift loss financi account safe deposit box es prior address financi
statement inventori and current and former offic director and sharehold
bankruptci plan the bankruptci plan is a detail account of how the creditor claim
will be resolv
the bankruptci file mai also contain transcript of deposit or interview if fraud wa
suspect the truste mai have conduct a fraud investig check with the truste to
find out if ani investig were conduct
inspector gener
inspector gener can provid valuabl inform especi to offici law enforc
personnel about busi thei have investig or audit and thei ar good guid to
other inform sourc in their depart or agenc most offic of inspector
gener maintain central index and case file system congress establish inspector
gener to combat government fraud wast and abus in feder depart agenc
and design the entiti list below
feder entiti websit address
agenc for intern develop wwwusaidgov
agricultur depart of wwwusdagov
amtrak wwwamtrakoigcom
appalachian region commiss wwwarcgov
central intellig agenc wwwciagov
commerc depart of wwwcommercegov
commod futur trade commiss wwwcftcgov
consum product safeti commiss wwwcpscgov
corpor for nation and commun servic wwwnationalserviceorg
corpor for public broadcast wwwcpborg
council of the inspector gener wwwignetgov
defens depart of wwwdefensegov
educ depart of wwwedgov
energi depart of wwwdoegov
environment protect agenc wwwepagov
equal employ opportun commiss wwweeocgov
farm credit administr wwwfcagov
feder commun commiss wwwfccgov
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3431
feder deposit insur corpor wwwfdicoiggov
feder elect commiss wwwfecgov
feder emerg manag agenc wwwfemagov
feder hous financ board wwwfhfagov
feder labor relat author wwwflragov
feder maritim commiss wwwfmcgov
feder reserv board wwwfederalreservegov
feder trade commiss wwwftcgov
gener servic administr oiggsagov
govern print offic wwwgpogov
health and human servic depart of wwwhhsgov
homeland secur depart of wwwdhsgov
hous and urban develop depart of wwwhudgov
interior depart of the wwwdoigov
intern trade commiss us wwwusitcgov
justic depart of wwwusdojgov
labor depart of wwwdolgov
legal servic corpor wwwlscgov
nation aeronaut and space administr wwwnasagov
nation archiv and record administr wwwarchivesgov
nation credit union administr wwwncuagov
nation endow for the art wwwneagov
nation endow for the human wwwnehgov
nation labor relat board wwwnlrbgov
nation scienc foundat wwwnsfgov
nuclear regulatori commiss wwwnrcgov
offic of personnel manag wwwopmgov
peac corp wwwpeacecorpsgov
pension benefit guaranti corpor wwwpbgcgov
postal servic us wwwuspscom
railroad retir board wwwrrbgov
secur and exchang commiss wwwsecgov
small busi administr wwwsbagov
social secur administr wwwssagov
state depart of wwwstategov
tennesse vallei author wwwtvagov
sourc of inform investig
3432 2011 fraud examin manual
transport depart of wwwdotgov
treasuri depart of the wwwustreasgov
treasuri inspector gener for tax administr wwwustreasgovtigta
veteran affair depart of wwwvagov
commod futur trade commiss
the commod futur trade commiss act of 1974 creat the commod futur
trade commiss cftc and it empow the cftc to regul all futur trade in
the unit state the cftc impos specul posit limit on futur contract as
need to elimin decreas or deter the burden on interst commerc that mai result
from excess specul moreov the cftc through it affili with the nation
futur associ nfa provid a disputeresolut program for custom and
member
thi cftc maintain the follow inform
registr inform concern firm and individu
administr and injunct action file by the cftc against firm and individu
financi report file by cftc registr
custom complaint file against cftc registr
nation futur associ
the nation futur associ is an industrywid selfregulatori organ
author by the commod exchang act it oper under the supervis of the cftc
the nfa is a onestop inform sourc for all type of registr and disciplinari
inform regard firm and individu in the futur industri thi inform
includ registr statu and employ histori disciplinari action file by the nfa
the cftc and the commod exchang and c ustom complaint file under the cftc
repar program
the nfa inform center can be contact at 800 6213570 or within illinoi at 312
7811410 or access on their websit at wwwcftcgov
depart of agricultur
some us depart of agricultur usda agenc maintain or have access to financi
record concern contract with the agenc recipi of variou benefit such as food
stamp and free or reducedpric school lunch farmland improv and feder crop
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3433
insur coverag variou usda agenc maintain inform about gain access to
record concern the follow
meat or poultri compani
feedlot owner or oper livestock broker meat packer or canneri
ownership manag or the oper ofor certain financi data concern
farm or ranch particip in usda program
retail groceri store author to accept food stamp
rural electr or telephon cooper
applic for and receipt of loan loan guarante grant or contract with or from
usda agenc
applic for and indemn paid by feder crop insur
log tree harvest compani that remov timber from nation forest
certain improv to farm land
the import or export of agricultur commod anim or plant
personnel data on current or former usda employe
the usda headquart ar at 1400 independ avenu sw washington dc 20250
and can be call at 202 7206858 the usda websit is wwwusdagov
depart of commerc
the depart of commerc is focus on promot econom growth and it maintain
inform on intern trade social and econom condit trend patent
trademark ocean studi domest econom develop and minor busi it ha
foreign countri expert who can direct examin to sourc of busi inform on ani
countri in the world
the bureau of industri and secur bi a divis of the depart of commerc
maintain list of person and entiti who have been deni the right to export or import
good the biss websit is wwwbisdocgov
the depart of commerc is locat at 1401 constitut avenu nw washington
dc 20230 and can be call at 202 4822000 their websit is wwwcommercegov
social secur administr record
the social secur administr retain origin applic for social secur number
applic list an applic name maiden and marri name for women date of birth
sourc of inform investig
3434 2011 fraud examin manual
place of birth sex race parent name and address at time of applic if a social
secur number is known it might lead to help inform regard the locat where
the card wa issu becaus mani peopl appli for a social secur number at a young ag
these record can help to locat an individu place of birth
there ar nine digit in the social secur number with the except of the 700 seri the
first three digit reflect the state of issu some state and puerto rico have more than on
seri of number the last six digit ar individu identifi here is a list of the state
of issu of the first three digit
social secur number chart
initi number state of issuanc
001003 new hampshir
004007 main
008009 vermont
010034 massachusett
035039 rhode island
040049 connecticut
050134 new york
135158 new jersei
159211 pennsylvania
212220 maryland
221222 delawar
223231 691699 virginia
232236 west virginia
237246 232 681690 north carolina
247251 654658 south carolina
252260 667675 georgia
261267 589595 766772 florida
268302 ohio
303317 indiana
318361 illinoi
362386 michigan
387399 wisconsin
400407 kentucki
408415 756763 tennesse
416424 alabama
425428 587 588 752755 mississippi
429432 676679 arkansa
433439 659665 louisiana
440448 oklahoma
449467 627645 texa
468477 minnesota
478485 iowa
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3435
486500 missouri
501502 north dakota
503504 south dakota
505508 nebraska
509515 kansa
516517 montana
518519 idaho
520 wyom
521524 650653 colorado
525 585 648 649 new mexico
526527 600601 arizona
525529 646647 utah
530 680 nevada
531539 washington
540544 oregon
545573 602626 california
574 alaska
575576 750751 hawaii
577579 district of columbia
580 group 0118 group 20 abov pr virgin island
580584 596599 puerto rico
586 guam american samoa northern
mariana island philippin island
700728 railroad employe under the
special retir act
729733 enumer at entri
new area alloc but not yet issu
issuanc of these number to railroad em ploye wa discontinu juli 1 1963
depart of defens
the depart of defens dod maintain inform concern militari pai
depend allot deposit and other financi inform is maintain by the
entiti list below
armi
defens financ and account servic
indianapoli center
indianapoli in 462490001
888 3327366
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsarmycontactshtml
sourc of inform investig
3436 2011 fraud examin manual
air forc
defens financ and account servic
denver center lowri air forc base
denver co 802795000
888 3327411
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsairforcecontactshtm
navi
defens financ and account servic
cleveland center
1240 east ninth street
cleveland oh 441992055
888 3327411 or 216 5225096
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsnavycontactshtml
marin corp
defens financ and account servic
kansa citi center
kansa citi mo 641970001
800 7564571 or 614 6938507
wwwdfasmilaboutcontactsmarinecorpshtml
depart of educ
the depart of educ inspector ge neral maintain financi and earn
statement from parent of student appli for pell grant formerli call basic
educ opportun grant
depart of hous and urban develop
the depart of hous and urban develop hud complianc divis
conduct investig of alleg hud violat thi divis handl investig of
fals statement on credit applic for feder hous administr fha loan
mortgag certif of no outstand oblig cost certif and other area of
fraud hud maintain central index file in washington dc contain inform
regard hud program and particip includ such individu and busi as
mortgag compani develop and borrow
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3437
depart of justic
the depart of justic us nation central bureau of the intern crimin
polic organ usncbinterpol ha direct contact with law enforc
author in more than 185 interpol memb er countri the usncb therefor can
request inform regard ownership previou investig and ani other materi
legal releas the inform avail is determin by the law of the countri from
which the materi is request
the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf is a princip law
enforc agenc within the unit state depart of justic that is dedic to
prevent terror reduc violent crime and protect the unit state the
atf retain
data on distilleri wineri breweri ma nufactur of tobacco product wholesal
and retail dealer of alcohol beverag and certain other manufactur dealer and
user of alcohol
investig report of alleg violat under it jurisdict
a list of feder licens firearm manufactur import and dealer
a complet list of all feder licens explos manufactur import and dealer
data on firearm licens given also conduct firearm license qualif and
complianc inspect
depart of labor
the depart of labor dol ha inform about the feder employe
compens act the job partnership train act the occup safeti health act
and the mine safeti health act the depart retain substanti data on busi that
have special work program affili with it
under the employ standard administr of the dol the offic of labormanag
standard olm administ and enforc most of the provis of the
labormanag report and disclosur act of 1959 lmrda the lmrda ha
report requir for certain labor organ union offic and employe
employ labor relat consult and sureti compani the lmrda requir cover
labor organ to annual file report with the olm the inform requir
includ name and titl of offic rate of due and fee loan receiv other
invest other asset other liabil fix asset loan payabl sale of invest
sourc of inform investig
3438 2011 fraud examin manual
and fix asset disburs to offic disburs to employe purchas of
invest and fix asset benefit and contribut gift and grant
in addit sureti compani that issu bond requir by lmrda or the employe
retir incom secur act of 1974 erisa ar requir to report premium receiv
and claim paid
depart of state
the depart of state maintain data on import and export licens the state
depart bureau of diplomat secur ha inform relat to previou
investig conduct by that offic the bureau of diplomat secur is a world leader
in intern investig threat analysi cyber secur counterterror secur
technolog and protect of peopl properti and inform
depart of the treasuri
the depart of the treasuri includ sever statutori inspector gener law
enforc agenc
within the intern revenu servic ir the crimin investig ci divis
conduct investig of tax fraud relat to incom tax excis tax occup tax and
violat of currencytransact report enforc effort includ tax violat monei
launder currenc crime and asset forfeitur the releas of taxpay inform to
other than ir personnel requir special procedur the ir inspect servic maintain
inform on subject of investig and their relationship to ir employe eg
threat made against collus with and briberi of ir employe
the financi crime enforc network fincen safeguard the financi system from
the abus of financi crime includ terrorist financ monei launder and other illicit
activ fincen work to maxim inform share among law enforc agenc
and it other partner in the regulatori and financi commun through cooper and
partnership fincen network approach encourag costeffect and effici measur
to combat monei launder domest and internation the usa patriot act
section 314b permit financi institut upon provid notic to the unit state
depart of the treasuri to share inform with on anoth in order to identifi and
report to the feder government activ that mai involv monei launder or terrorist
activ howev access to these record by outsid parti is extrem limit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3439
depart of homeland secur
under the border and transport director of the depart of homeland secur
the us custom and border protect servic retain data on busi that ar involv
in import and export includ list and record of import export custom hous
broker and trucker the offic of investig look into alleg violat of import
and export practic the custom and border protect servic is also involv in the
nation narcot border interdict system and special agent from the offic of
investig have been particip in the organ crime drug enforc task
forc custom might provid inform rel to busi that violat the statut
it enforc
the us secret servic maintain record on forger counterfeit and busi that
have contact the servic concern forg or counterfeit oblig of the unit state
such as treasuri note in addit the treasur of the unit state can provid copi of
cancel check paid by the us treasuri the secret servic also investig counterfeit
and other financi crime includ financi institut fraud ident theft comput
fraud and computerbas attack on our nation financi bank and
telecommun infrastructur
depart of veteran affair
record of loan tuition payment insur payment and nonrestrict medic data
relat to disabl pension ar maintain at va region offic locat in sever
metropolitan area throughout the countri
drug enforc administr
the drug enforc administr dea maintain inform on licens handler
of narcot and the crimin record of user pusher and supplier of narcot
feder aviat administr
the feder aviat administr faa maintain record reflect the chain of
ownership of all civil aircraft in the unit state these record includ document about
the manufactur sale transfer inspect and modif of an aircraft includ the bill
of sale sale contract mortgag and lien
sourc of inform investig
3440 2011 fraud examin manual
the faa also maintain record on pilot aircraft mechan flight engin and other
individu whom it certifi for flight safeti posit these record includ inform on
certif held medic and law enforc histori
feder bureau of investig
an agenc within the depart of justic the feder bureau of investig fbi
provid inform on crimin record and fingerprint as well as nonrestrict
inform pertain to crimin offens and subvers activ it also provid
inform about want miss and unidentifi peopl and foreign fugit the fbi
current investig case involv counterterror counterintellig cyber crime
public corrupt civil right whitecollar crime organ crime major theft and
violent crime
the integr autom fingerprint identif system more commonli known as
iafi is a nation fingerprint and criminalhistori system maintain by the feder
bureau of investig crimin justic inform servic cji divis the iafi
provid autom fingerprint search capabl latent search capabl electron
imag storag and electron exchang of fingerprint and respons 24 hour a dai 365
dai a year as a result of submit fingerprint electron agenc receiv electron
respons to crimin 10print fingerprint submiss within two hour and within 24
hour for civil fingerprint submiss
the iafi maintain the largest biometr databas in the world contain the fingerprint
and correspond crimin histori inform for more than 55 million subject in the
crimin master file the fingerprint and correspond crimin histori inform ar
submit voluntarili by state local and feder law enforc agenc
feder commun commiss
the feder commun commiss fcc licens all radio oper in the unit
state individu or corpor bodi appli for author to construct new broadcast
station or to chang exist station also must file with the fcc inform contain in
the file includ detail on program technic aspect of the propos facil
ownership and financi statu
feder energi regulatori commiss
electr util and natur ga compani ar requir to file annual report with the feder
energi regulatori commiss the report provid excel financi pictur of the
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3441
compani and provid inform about offic director and stockhold who own
more than 10 percent of the compani
feder highwai administr
the feder highwai administr licens regul inspect and regist all motor
carrier oper in interst commerc it keep record of it inspect of motor
carrier and a histori of violat of each carrier
feder maritim commiss
the feder maritim commiss investig applic for licens to engag in
oceango freightforward activ applic provid inform to the commiss
cover most aspect of their histori includ name resid date and place of birth
and citizenship of all corpor offic and director name of partnership member of
individu proprietor and name of direct holder of 5 percent or more of compani stock
financi industri regulatori author
in 2007 the financi industri regulatori author finra wa creat through the
consolid of nasd and the member regul enforc and arbitr function
of the new york stock exchang finra is dedic to investor protect and market
integr through effect and effici regul and complementari complianc and
technologybas servic
finra touch virtual everi aspect of the secur businessfrom regist and
educ industri particip to examin secur firm write rule enforc those
rule and the feder secur law inform and educ the invest public provid
trade report and other industri util and administ the largest disput resolut
forum for investor and regist firm it also perform market regul under contract
for the nasdaq stock market the american stock exchang the intern secur
exchang and the chicago climat exchang
secur brokerdeal must regist with the sec and in those state where thei plan to
do busi if thei plan to do busi with the public thei must also becom finra
member typic registr requir for the sec state and nasd includ busi
financi disciplinari inform and disclosur of crimin convict
sourc of inform investig
3442 2011 fraud examin manual
gener servic administr
the gener servic administr gsa ha consider inform on architect
engin person properti auction real estat apprais construct contractor
sale broker and busi that contract with the gsa the agenc also maintain the
gsa consolid list a computer roster of suspend and debar bidder
the gsa is also respons for the exclud parti list system epl which is an
electron webbas system that identifi parti that exclud from receiv feder
contract certain subcontract and certain type of feder financi and nonfinanci
assist and benefit the epl keep it user commun awar of suspect terrorist
individu bar from enter the unit state and those subject to administr and
statutori exclus the user is abl to search view and download both current and
archiv exclus
nation aeronaut and space administr
the nation aeronaut and space administr nasa is respons for the nation
public space program and longterm aerospac research more than 90 percent of nasa
multibilliondollar budget goe to nasa contractor file maintain by it offic of
procur contain inform about a contractor and it employe nasa requir that
contract firm submit the follow data with their propos name and qualif of
the contractor and resum of the personnel who will be directli assign to the project the
resum should includ educ background work experi length of servic with the
firm and project on which these individu have work
nation archiv and record administr
the nation archiv and record administr oper feder record center
throughout the countri includ the nation personnel record center in st loui mo
and the feder regist and the nation archiv build in washington dc it also is
respons for region archiv and the presidenti librari the nation personnel
record center in st loui store the personnel record of former member of the arm
forc and former feder civilian employe procedur for investig inquiri into these
record ar avail from the center for inform call 1 314 8010800
the feder regist is the medium for notifi the public of offici agenc action all
feder regul must be publish in it the offic of the feder regist provid a
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3443
period workshop on the us of the feder regist as an inform sourc a handbook
on the us of the feder regist is also avail for inform call 1 202 7416000
nation railroad passeng corpor
the nation railroad passeng corpor amtrak maintain inform on
passeng includ reserv histori method of payment and date of travel the
railroad industri railroad contractor subcontractor vendor and train rout and
schedul
nuclear regulatori commiss
the nuclear regulatori commiss nrc maintain applic and licens of peopl
and compani that export nuclear materi and equip from the unit state the
nrc determin whether propos export would be inim to our defens and secur
and for certain export whether thei come under the term of an agreement that establish
the ground rule for nuclear cooper and trade between the unit state and the
countri of destin
offic of foreign asset control
the offic of foreign asset control ofac is an offic within the depart of the
treasuri charg with administ and enforc us sanction polici against target
foreign organ and individu who sponsor terror and intern narcot
traffick ofac maintain a list of individu al government entiti compani and
merchant vessel around the world that ar known or suspect to engag in illeg activ
person or entiti on the list known as special design nation and block person
sdn includ foreign agent front organ terrorist and terrorist organ
and drug traffick the list contain thousand of variat on name of individu
government entiti compani and merchant vessel and is updat on a regular basi
current inform on licens issu with regard to sdn and other block person mai
be obtain or verifi by call ofac licens at 202 6222480
secur and exchang commiss record
the secur and exchang commiss sec maintain public record of corpor
with stock and secur sold to the public these record includ the follow
inform
financi statement
identif of offic and director
sourc of inform investig
3444 2011 fraud examin manual
identif of owner of more than 10 percent of a businesss stock
a descript of the registr properti and busi
a descript of the signific provis of the secur to be offer for sale and it
relationship to the registr other capit secur
identif of event of interest to investor
identif of account and attornei
a histori of the busi
the sec also maintain file on individu and firm report to it for violat feder or
state secur law the inform in these file pertain to offici action taken against
such peopl and firm includ denial refus suspens and revoc of
registr injunct fraud order stop order and ceaseanddesist order and arrest
indict convict sentenc and other offici action
moreov chang in benefici ownership by offic director and princip stockhold
of secur list and regist on a nation secur exchang or of secur of public
util compani and certain closedend invest compani can be access through the
sec edgar system on the sec websit also as of septemb 2008 thi inform
can also be access on the sec new idea interact data electron applic
system idea will at first supplement and then eventu replac the edgar system
which will becom an archiv of sec file made prior to the introduct of the idea
system
most of a compani inform file with edgar and idea can be obtain in
electron form by us the onlin sec search featur at wwwsecgov to obtain paper
copi of sec record and document histor sec file special report and studi
speech and testimoni contact the offic of investor educ and advocaci at 202
5518090 or through email at publicinfosecgov
some import corpor file with the sec ar discuss below
annual report of publicli trade compani form 10k
form 10k is an annual report requir by the sec it contain the compani incom
statement and balanc sheet inform on it debt structur foreign ownership properti
own subsidiari industri descript depreci dilut and other kei busi
inform if the file compani ha file for bankruptci been the target of a sharehold
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3445
lawsuit or been su for patent infring such inform mai also show up in the 10
k excerpt or complet report ar avail via lexisnexi or dialog databas
quarterli report of publicli trade compani form 10q
form 10q is same as the form 10k but it must file quarterli instead of annual
special event in publicli trade compani form 8k
form 8k which is on of the most common type of form file with the sec is file to
notifi investor of ani unschedul materi corpor event
registr of secur form 8a
form 8a is on of the form us to regist secur for offer to the public it contain
inform regard the type of secur detail of the issuanc and inform about the
issuer
registr of secur by successor form 8b
form 8b is a file with the sec that concern the registr of secur of certain
successor issuer it contain the name of issuer and the relationship to the primari
registrantissu
special event in foreign secur form 6k
foreign privat issuer must submit a form 6k the inform contain in a form 6k
is similar to that contain in a form 10k and a form 8k
report of acquisit of benefici ownership of 5 percent or more of capit stock of public compani form 13d
form 13d must be file when an investor acquir five percent of ani public compani
thi form contain a descript of the secur ani agreement or other undertak by
the report entiti the sourc of fund for the acquisit the purpos of the acquisit
and the relationship of the parti also if acquisit result in chang of control it
contain background inform on each person report
feder trade commiss file
the feder trade commiss ftc which is the feder agenc respons for
enforc of the fair credit report act archiv inform on action taken against
compani and individu as well as consent decre ie judici recognit of an agreement
sourc of inform investig
3446 2011 fraud examin manual
between parti to a suit and judgment against compani and individu detail
inform on particular compani or action is avail through a request under the
freedom of inform act
occup safeti and health administr record
the occup safeti and health administr osha is charg with the
enforc of legisl design to protect employe who rais complaint about the
health and safeti of their workplac osha inform includ the name address
countycountri number of employe and sic code of ani busi subject to a health and
safeti inspect purpos and scope of the in spection offic and offic conduct the
inspect hour spent and total number of vi olat and penalti assess as a result of
the inspect a search of osha inform also encompass all parallel state agenc
interst commerc commiss
the interst commerc commiss icc identifi liabil and car insur carrier for
all surfac transport compani engag in interst and foreign commerc
inform kept by the icc includ the identif and address of the insur carrier
the limit of the insur polici the polici number and the statu
us small busi administr
the us small busi administr sba is a feder agenc that provid support to
small busi the sba guarante loan made by privat lender and make direct loan
for busi construct expans or convers for purchas of machineri equip
facil suppli or materi and for work ing capit a loan applic sole owner
partnership corpor or other must complet sba form provid inform about
the busi and it princip owner offic and director
addition the sba arrang contract and guarante loan for qualifi small minor
own busi for some of these busi the sba might be the onli sourc for
financi and other inform about the busi their princip their asset and other
data becaus their stock is not publicli held these busi ar not subject to public
disclosur law
the sba also connect small firm own by social and econom disadvantag
american with contract set asid by other feder agenc for the purpos of increas
opportun for small busi gener
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3447
unit state state depart
the unit state state depart known as the state depart is respons for the
countri intern relat it maintain the intern traffic in arm regul
itar debar list which contain a list of parti bar from particip in the
export of defens articl eg technic data or in the furnish of defens servic
for which a licens or approv is requir under the intern traffic in arm
regul 22 cfr sec 1277
treasuri direct
treasuri direct is a financi servic websit that allow individu to bui and redeem
secur from the depart of the treasuri in electron form it maintain inform
on purchas and redeem us save bond regist bond market secur and
special secur specif the inform includ the seri of bond involv and the
surnam given name middl name or initi and address of each person in whose name
bond were purchas
us citizenship and immigr servic
formerli the immigr and natur servic the us citizenship and immigr
servic usci is a bureau of the depart of homeland secur the usci is
charg with overse law immigr in the unit state and it retain a number of
record includ alien registr record issu after august 27 1940 from juli 1 1920
to august 27 1940 each immigr wa given an immigr identif card list of
passeng and crew on vessel from foreign port passeng manifest and declar
ship date and point of entri natur record name of wit to natur
proceed and acquaint of the individu deport proceed and financi
statement of alien and peopl sponsor an immigr entri
us coast guard
the coast guard is a branch of the arm forc that carri out three basic role maritim
safeti maritim secur and maritim stewardship it maintain name of merchant
marin on us vessel and investig record pertain to them record relat to
maritim drug smuggl record on crimin investig and record on document
us vessel
sourc of inform investig
3448 2011 fraud examin manual
us govern account offic
the govern account offic gao is the audit evalu and investig
agenc of the unit state congress gao internet home page provid access to recent
gao audit product and comptrol gener decis as well as inform on how to
order paper copi of both recent and older gao product in addit gao audit
product from fiscal year 1995 forward and recent decis ar avail in electron form
at the govern print offic websit gao product includ those not avail
on the internet mai also be order by call 202 5126000 or tdd 301 4130006
us postal servic
the postal servic which is respons for provid postal servic in the unit state
maintain valuabl inform includ the name and address of post offic box
holder check with the local post offic to learn the ident of the inspector who can
furnish the inform photocopi of postal monei order and request for copi of
postal monei order ar made through the local us postal inspect servic offic usual
by subpoena
feder procur data system
the feder procur data system fpd collect develop and dissemin feder
contract inform mani feder agenc report their contract and purchas to the
fpd which catalog the inform for govern and public us contract agre
upon as long ago as 1978 ar searchabl the fpd is best sourc for feder procur
inform and it websit wwwfpdsgov is also fairli explanatori and easi to navig
fedworld inform network
establish by the nation technic inform servic fedworld provid access to a
comprehens inventori of inform dissemin by the feder govern
essenti it is a onestop shop spot for feder government inform includ a
govern locat databas us custom rule suprem court decis and a foreign
new alert servic it websit is wwwfedworldgov
nation motor vehicl titl inform system
establish by the anticar theft act of 1992 the nation motor vehicl titl
inform system nmvti is an electron databas us to authent and exchang
kei vehicl histori data such as titl inform and certain theft data the primari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3449
reason for creat the nmvti wa to address the lack of conform among state vehicl
document law which is on of the kei factor contribut to titl fraud
the new databas effect on januari 1 2010 is design to prevent titl wash which
occur when a vehicl brand ie a perman design indic that the vehicl ha
incur damag through collus flood fire or other incid requir repair is remov
by retitl the vehicl in a state that doesnt carri forward ani brand on the new titl
nonpubl record
type of nonpubl record
as previous state nonpubl recordsinform about a person or busi that is
consid to be privat and confidentialmig ht be need in some fraud examin
some of the most valuabl person record includ
bank record
tax return and relat document
credit record
telephon record
credit card account record
bank record
bank record ar perhap the singl most import extern financi sourc avail to a
fraud examin in addit to their us as evid for fraud bank record might provid
lead on sourc of fund expenditur and person affair these record help the
examin construct a paper trail to prove the fraud
some of the record that should be review if avail ar
account open document
monthli account statement
check written on the account
loan file
safe deposit box record
currenc transact report
bank collect depart record
mortgag loan file
sourc of inform investig
3450 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return and relat document
person tax return if avail mai provid indirect evid of illicit payment such as
profit or loss from previous undisclos busi ventur or interest and dividend on
hidden certif of deposit and bank account the return mai also show deduct and
expens such as real estat tax which mai lead to previous unknown fund or asset
credit record
practic all line of busi have special creditreport associ that can provid
credit inform on individu and busi includ trade inform design of
lender and creditor type of busi date account were open term of payment
agre upon highest credit balanc ow and pai habit some credit report also give
the name of the bank the subject doe busi with and the size of the subject account
in the unit state most consum credit inform is collect and maintain by the
three nation creditreport agenc equifax experian and transunion gener a
subscript is requir to obtain inform from these sourc and their dissemin is
govern by the fair credit report act fcra the fcra place restrict on when a
consum credit report can be obtain and us in mani case the consum must be
notifi or must consent to the us of the report for employ purpos pleas consult
the inform on the fcra present previous in thi chapter for more inform
about the legal of obtain and us consum credit report
credit report ar provid by credit report agenc also known as credit bureau credit
report agenc ar local or nation institut that collect data from variou sourc on
individu consum creditworthi and report that data to their member or subscrib
there ar essenti two type of credit report agenc the first is known as a filebas
credit report agenc which develop it inform from credit file and public record the
other type is known as an investig credit report agenc which gather most of it
inform through interview
credit report agenc typic maintain the follow inform
consum inform such as address ag famili member employ incom level
length of employ the extent of other oblig and the like
account inform such as payment schedul item purchas default if ani and
bui habit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3451
market inform such as custom brok en down by ag sex incom level and
other classif
inform on current and former employ
inform on the creditworthi of a busi organ mai also be obtain from
credit report agenc the respons for such search mai includ payment trend from
creditor public record such as ucc file and tax lien bank inform and kei
fact as to the type of busi and ownership but unlik consum credit inform
busi credit inform is not restrict by the fair credit report act
gener credit report agenc obtain their inform from the follow sourc
consum primarili from fill out applic form for credit
public record which provid inform on bankruptci court judgment
foreclosur divorc crimin convict regist chattel mortgag and regist
agreement
the major credit grantor and collect agenc which as subscrib regularli send
their credit file electron to the credit bureau result in file that includ the
account number outstand balanc and a ninepoint scale indic whether a
payment wa made on time
mani credit grantor and collect agenc onli report payment inform to on of
the three nation creditreport agenc but larger creditor mai report to more than
on bureau some creditor like util compani onli report delinqu activ sinc
the big three agenc do not share data among themselv there will be differ
between the credit report from each credit bureau
in a typic credit inform request the potenti creditor call the credit bureau or
make an onlin request for inform and the creditor receiv detail regard other
credit histori of the individu such as payment schedul and delinqu
inform maintain by credit report agenc is regularli updat at the request of the
consum or by request of the credit grantor
telephon record
like other type of nonpubl inform telephon record can provid valuabl insight
into fraud examin for exampl telephon record mai provid contact with real
sourc of inform investig
3452 2011 fraud examin manual
estat broker or seller identifi charg call from vacat spot or contact with co
conspir or provid other lead to asset and expenditur
credit card account record
credit card account record can be help when conduct a fraud examin credit
card receipt will track the travel of the defend and of cours record expenditur an
extrem high balanc on a credit card mai indic a motiv for the crime or provid
circumstanti evid of hidden incom even modest credit card charg mai provid
lead to identifi hidden asset eg charg for boat suppli purchas at a marina
might indic a need for further investig to determin whether the subject own an
expens boat
gain access to nonpubl record
nonpubl record ar not avail to the public and therefor mai be difficult to obtain
despit the limit on obtain person record fraud examin mai be abl to obtain
nonpubl record by us on or more of the method discuss below
request the record
the simplest wai to obtain relev document is to request them thi usual work for
examin repres larg organ that ar import custom to the parti with
the inform vendor and other custom of the compani conduct the investig
mai cooper voluntarili if thei have noth to hide or think that incrimin evid
cannot be found and ar anxiou to maintain good relat with the compani
subpoena
subpoena and other legal process such as deposit interrog and document
request ar avail if a civil action is file for exampl a wrong organ mai file a
civil or administr action or make a crimin referr so that record can be subpoena
in a civil case record such as bank account brokerag account travel credit card credit
agenc and telephon toll record mai be obtain by subpoena
convers record subpoena in a crimin case usual ar avail onli to the
govern dure the investig and perhap thereaft if not disclos at trial in
addit law enforc agenc mai also subpoena record of cours but usual will
not disclos them to the victim or third parti
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3453
demand as a condit of continu busi
similarli an organ mai demand that a supplier vendor or agent turn over relev
document as a condit of continu busi take thi action is legal in appropri
circumst of cours manag and counsel should be consult befor such
demand ar made particularli if the other parti ha a contractu relationship with the
compani
exercis audit claus right
an audit claus allow the parti to access the book of the other parti thu absent
subpoena power examin mai need to us audit claus right to access contractor and
subcontractor record and financi account
unfortun most audit claus ar too narrow to provid us inform howev if
properli construct an audit claus can be a power method by which onbook
inform can be obtain
negoti
anoth method to obtain relev document is to negoti with a parti to the
investig as part of a deal to cooper in exchang for lenienc in some case third
parti facilit or other margin involv in the wrongdo mai agre to produc
record and cooper in exchang for a releas of liabil indemn or commit to
continu the busi relationship counsel and manag must of cours be involv in
such decis as well as the fidel bond carrier if a claim is to be made under the bond
consent
although unlik a target execut mai voluntarili produc certain record if he is
blameless think he is blameless or think the investig will not find the smoke
gun or execut a consent to obtain such record from bank credit agenc or the ir
commerci sourc of inform
associ and lobbi group
associ and lobbi group have inform about their member firm two of the best
sourc ar the better busi bureau and a citi chamber of commerc
sourc of inform investig
3454 2011 fraud examin manual
better busi bureau
a number of better busi bureau ar locat throughout the countri thei ar
sponsor by local busi and offer a varieti of servic includ background
inform on local busi and organ the bureau gener keep inform
about crimin racket and con and their oper and can provid inform about the
busi reput of local group
chamber of commerc
chamber of commerc gener have citi directori and often keep back issu of the
directori thei also have inform regard reput of busi and oper in
the area
abstract and titl compani
in addit to record of individu transact abstract and titl compani often publish
and distribut paper to attornei real estat broker insur compani and financi
institut these paper contain inform about transfer of properti locat
mortgag amount and releas of mortgag
bond compani
bond compani provid bond servic includ sureti bond licens bond permit
bond bid bond and so on to get bond an entiti will have to submit an applic for
a bond at a bond compani the applic for a bond contain the applic person or
firm financi statement and data the inform contain in a bond applic is
essenti the same inform that is requir in loan applic though in greater
detail
credit card record
credit card record often contain valuabl inform concern the individu debtor but
law and regul must be check befor obtain these record inform on
expenditur can be obtain from firm such as mastercard american express diner
club discov and visa thi inform usual requir a subpoena
stockbrok
stockbrok maintain inform which is similar to that which is maintain by financi
institut on mani of their client especi those who have margin account and thei
maintain record of transact for all client
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3455
western union
western union is a nonbank monei transfer provid and it store record for paid monei
order these record contain the origin telegram by purchas or sender and bank draft
by western union western union retain order for less than 1000 for two year and
order of 1000 or more for six year
carfax
carfax is a privat servic that provid vehicl histori inform it determin whether
there is an odomet discrep or evid of prior salvag or titl wash carfax
uniqu databas contain more than five billion record thei receiv inform from
thousand of sourc includ all depart of motor vehicl dmv in the unit
state and canada as well as mani vehicl inspect station auto auction fleet
manag and rental agenc automobil manufactur and fire and
polic depart
intern air transport associ
the intern air transport associ is an intern industri trade group of the
lead airlin and it ha inform on all intern matter deal with aviat
secur includ counterterror effort worldwid it also monitor and attempt to
prevent fraud against airlin such as ticket fraud
intern foundat for art research
the intern foundat for art research ifar is a nonprofit organ
establish in 1969 to help prevent the circul of forg and misattribut work of art
ifar offer an authent servic to help resolv controversi concern the
authent of work of art ifar also publish quarterli journal on authent
research art law theft and recoveri and an extens list of recent report stolen and
miss art and antiqu the ifar websit is wwwifarorg
nation associ of insur commission
the nation associ of insur commission naic is an organ of
insur regul from the 50 state the district of columbia and the us territori it
provid a forum for the develop of polici when uniform is appropri a state
regul primari respons is to protect the interest of insur consum and the
associ help regul fulfil that oblig
sourc of inform investig
3456 2011 fraud examin manual
the naic websit is a particularli effecti ve resourc for consum protect becaus
potenti investor can visit their site to verifi if an insur promot is licens to sell the
invest the naic websit can be access at wwwnaicorg
public record databas vendor
type of public record databas vendor
although there ar mani categori of public record profession thi section focus on
three commerci databas vendor search firm and document retriev
commerci databas vendor
commerci databas vendor provid user access to veri power archiv of data that
compil variou public record in on searchabl databas unlik public databas
commerci databas gener contain a broad rang of inform and allow the user to
search million of record simultan becaus these databas contain divers type of
inform fraud examin can us them for mani differ type of job
although gener commerci databas vendor do not provid ani more inform than
can be access from other sourc thei have two distinct advantagessearch speed and
constant access
gener commerci databas vendor ar avail onlin and allow user to retriev
request inform through a comput that is connect to the internet for such
databas there mai be an initi access fee monthli membership fee or a onetim access
fee
search firm
search firm special in locat asset and retriev public document thei us a varieti
of resourc includ onlin servic databas public record privat inform
sourc and privat investig
document retriev
document retriev ar research for hire thei obtain inform by visit govern
agenc in person
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3457
type of inform avail
the type of inform avail from public record servic includ
credit report
drive record
counti and state crimin convict
worker compens record
educ record
profession licens record
social secur record
address
telephon number
counti and state real properti record
feder crimin and civil record
consum public file
militari record
name and address of neighbor
state and counti civil record
busi public file
busi credit report
corpor record by state
faa registr
pleasur craft registr
vehicl registr by licens number or name of person or compani
feder bankruptci court record
grantor and grante record
abstract of judgment
tax lien
us for public record profession
fraud examin can us public record profession to
obtain us background inform on subject and wit contractor and
vendor such as crimin and civil litig bankruptci manag or sale
inform
assist in the compil of financi profil s and net worth analys to show that
the subject is live beyond hi or her mean or ha financi problem through real
properti motor vehicl ucc and other record of asset and expenditur
sourc of inform investig
3458 2011 fraud examin manual
identifi undisclos outsid busi or incom by subject employe
show that shell compani or phantom vendor do not exist
identifi asset that might be seiz or recov
help locat wit
public record databas vendor
there ar a number of compani that offer wide access to public record credit report
and newspap and period some of the more commonli us sourc ar
asset locat and busi background check by knowx
us datalink
infousa
csc diligenz
dialog
lexisnexi
dc inform system
ga public record servic
a complet descript of these servic and other inform avail through the
comput is discuss in the next chapter access inform onlin
directori
directori provid data on nation trade busi and commerci associ some of
the more frequent us directori ar discuss below
db directori
db is a busi and financi inform servic compani and it is the leader in
busi credit report db provid access to a varieti of resourc and is renown for
product like america corpor famili and the million dollar databas
america corpor famili
thi threevolum print directori publish by db provid complet detail
inform on us famili member of foreign parent compani and foreign subsidiari of
us corpor it includ data on more than 13000 us subsidiari 1900 us
ultim and 31000 foreign subsidiari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3459
db million dollar databas
db million dollar databas provid access to inform on approxim 23 million
busi in over 200 countri worldwid inform avail includ annual sale
corpor offic locat phone number type of busi and number of employe
american medic associ directori of physician
avail in four hardbound volum thi directori which is publish by the american
medic associ list physician alphabetica lly and geograph each physician list
contain inform on state and citi of practic year of birth medic school and year of
graduat year of licens resid and offic address specialti and membership in
associ medic organ the directori also contain a name index of all doctor in
the unit state
best insur report
best insur report present comprehens statist report of the financi posit
histori and oper result of thousand of propertycasualti or lifehealth insur
compani oper in the unit state and canada the individu report on each
institut includ a review of it histori manag and oper invest
oper result and other statist compil the report ar avail onlin in print
or in cd
citi directori
citi directori usual contain the name resid occup and sometim the place of
employ of a citi influenti peopl such directori can usual be found at public
librari chamber of commerc and secondhand bookstor
congression directori
the congression directori is the offici directori of the us congress it present short
biographi on each member of the senat and hous list by state or district and
addit data such as committe membership term of servic administr assist
andor secretari and room and telephon number it also list offici of the court
militari establish and other feder depart and agenc includ washington
dc government offici governor of state and territori foreign diplomat and
member of the press radio and televis galleri the directori is compil by the joint
committe on print washington dc and is avail through the govern
print offic
sourc of inform investig
3460 2011 fraud examin manual
gale
gale part of cengag learn is an educ publish compani it is known for it
onlin databas and multivolum refer work some of it resourc includ gale gale
directori librari gale directori of databas directori in print gale directori of public and
broadcast media encyclopedia of associ and encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
gale directori librari
the gale directori librari provid onlin access to some of gale most popular
directori on compani publish associ and so on it includ onlin access to
gale directori of databas gale directori in print gale directori of public and broadcast
media encyclopedia of associ encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
with gale directori librari user can us stateoftheart function to perform a rang
of data sort filter and export user can us the librari to find contact
compani individu or public by search with a name or keyword gener list
and analyz trend by export data to word or excel and search across a grow number
of directori titl each directori can be search individu by it own uniqu data field
or the entir directori collect can be search
gale directori of databas
thi twovolum directori provid detail descript of nearli 20000 publicli avail
databas databas product onlin servic and databas vendor and distributor
worldwid in a varieti of format entri includ produc name and contact inform
descript cost and more
detail list provid complet inform on databas produc and vendor
databas list includ content and subject coverag type languag time span updat
frequenc geograph coverag produc contact inform and vendor avail
produc and vendor entri featur full contact inform includ address phone fax
websit address email address former name branch offic locat and a list of
avail databas and product for onlin vendor or host entri cover condit of
access network us and gatewai access for portabl vendor entri includ a list of
distributor the directori of databas is also avail on the gale directori librari
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3461
directori in print
thi public publish by gale thoroughli describ and index about 16000
directori of all kind includ busi and industri directori profession and
scientif roster foreign directori and other list and guid directori in print cover a
wide rang of subject includ gener busi manufactur industri and commerci
servic bank insur and financi servic advertis market and public
relat health care servic law militari and govern and associ philanthropi
ethnic group and religion directori in print is avail onlin on gale directori librari
gale directori of public and broadcast media
thi threevolum directori contain inform on 57000 radio and televis station
cabl compani and printmedia publish entri provid address phone and fax
number email address websit address kei personnel owner inform hour of
oper and much more provid access to inform on us canadian and
intern media outlet gale directori of public and broadcast media also includ ad
rate circul statist local program inform and other essenti data the
directori of public and broadcast media is avail onlin on the gale directori librari
encyclopedia of associ
gale publish a seri of encyclopedia of associ in region nation and
intern edit it publish the encyclopedia of associ nation organ of the
us which list each charter public and privat associ in the unit state and
provid valuabl inform about each associ offic and purpos in addit
publish the encyclopedia of associ intern organ and the enci clopedia of
associ region state and local these encyclopedia can be found onlin on gale
directori librari
encyclopedia of busi inform sourc
publish by gale thi comprehens directori is a bibliograph guid to more than
35000 live print and electron sourc of inform cover more than 1100 subject
of particular interest to busi profession citat cover abstract and index
almanac and yearbook bibliographi cdrom and onlin databas directori
encyclopedia and dictionari period and newspap research center and institut
statist sourc trade and profession societi and mani other sourc of busi
inform the encyclopedia of busi inform sourc is avail onlin on gale
directori librari
sourc of inform investig
3462 2011 fraud examin manual
sec file
edgar
edgar electron data gather analysi and retriev is a system that collect
document submit by compani and other who ar requir by law to file with the
secur and exchang commiss sec edgar perform autom collect
valid index accept and forward of sec file it primari purpos is to
increas the effici and fair of the secur market to benefit investor
corpor and the economi by acceler the receipt accept dissemin and
analysi of timesensit corpor inform file with the sec
not all document that public compani file with the sec howev will be avail on
edgar even so sever import document such as form 10k or 10ksb ar
requir to be file on the edgar system for more inform visit
wwwsecgovedgarshtml
interact data electron applic
in august 2008 the sec unveil the successor to the agenc edgar databas which
will give investor far faster and easier access to kei financi inform about public
compani and mutual fund the new system is call idea short for interact data
electron applic base on a complet new architectur be built from the
ground up it will at first supplement and then eventu replac the edgar system
current most sec file ar avail onli in governmentprescrib form through
edgar investor look for inform must sift through on form at a time and then
rekeyboard the inform a painstak task with idea investor will be abl to
instantli collat inform from thousand of compani and form and creat report
and analysi on the fly in ani wai thei choos
in 2009 howev casewar intern the develop of idea data analysi
softwar file suit against the sec over the us of the idea name that same year the
sec agre to discontinu it us of the mark idea at thi point it is not clear what the
sec will call it new system
egovern and web directori us feder govern onlin
the egovern and web directori is a guidebook for anyon look for offici us
government resourc on the internet the directori contain more than 2000 websit
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3463
record that provid descript and url for each site us govern organ
chart ar supplement with url for the 16 cabinetlevel depart and agenc the
hous of repres and the senat and the feder judici branch it also provid
great detail on the hous and senat in two appendic appendix a provid a roster of
congression member with their websit and appendix b provid a list of hous and
senat committe with committe url and the name of chairperson and rank
minor member thi print public can be purchas at wwwbernancom
factiva
factiva from dow jone is a busi inform and research tool it is tailor for
busi and financi new search maintain a catalog of more than 28000 of the
world lead new and busi sourc from 157 countri 350 geograph region and
in 23 languag factiva allow user to pai for onli the articl download and doe not
requir an annual subscript
carrol publish
carrol publish is a govern inform resourc it provid access to govern
inform for all level of govern and it offer a line of inform product
includ the feder directori and the feder organ chart
feder directori
carrol publish feder directori combin all three branch of the govern into
on volum it contain nearli 38000 name titl telephon number and email address
of senior and midlevel government offici in the execut offic of the presid all 15
cabinetlevel feder depart independ agenc us congress and the feder court
system thi directori featur a keyword index to help user quickli find program and
regulatori offic and it is updat four time a year
feder organ chart
thi looseleaf chart produc by carrol publish provid name address and
telephon number of staff member in the white hous execut depart
independ agenc quasigovernment organ and congression support offic
it ha name and kei word index and is updat monthli due to the high cost of
maintain thi directori it gener avail at select feder government librari
sourc of inform investig
3464 2011 fraud examin manual
foreign repres in the us yellow book
thi directori ha name and titl of more than 19000 intern busi and
government leader and section on corpor financi institut foreign nation
intergovernment organ foreign press and law firm it includ offici titl
address and telephon and fax number thi yellow book is broken down into
six section
corpor list more than 1000 lead foreignbas corpor with more than
2000 us offic and subsidiari
financi institut list more than 230 lead foreignbas financi institut
and more than 600 us repres offic
foreign nation list embassi and consul in 191 countri with perman
mission to the unit nation
intergovernment organ list the us offic in entiti such as the unit
nation european union and the world bank group
foreign press list more than 210 intern media outlet with bureau in the us
law firm list foreign law firm with a us presenc
index to legal period
publish by h w wilson the index to legal period offer intern coverag and
access to scholarli articl symposia jurisdict survei court decis legisl
book book review and more thi sourc index more than 1025 legal journal law
review yearbook institut statut bar associ public univers public
and government public with the full text of nearli 325 select period avail
inmat locat
inmat locat is a feder bureau of prison on line databas it contain inform on all
feder prison incarcer sinc 1982 the inform includ physic descript
inmat profil inmat locat or releas locat numer identifi person histori
secur design past and present institut assign custodi classif and
sentenc inform to locat an inmat visit the feder bureau of prison inmat
locat at wwwbopgov
ih fairplai
ih fairplai formerli lloyd registerfairplai suppli a rang of comprehens
ship databas regist onlin inform and a tailor research and systemdevelop
servic for custom specif need
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3465
magazin for librari
publish by bowker magazin for librari list almost everi magazin gener technic
and scholarli that a librari might wish to stock and describ the format in which the
magazin ar avail
martindalehubbel law directori
the martindalehubbel law directori contain biograph inform on most lawyer
and law firm practic in the unit state and canada
mergent
mergent public ar similar to db mergent report can provid inform
about firm list on the new york and american stock exchang as well as compani
list on region american exchang mergent also provid mergent onlin which
provid onlin access to mergent comprehens global compani databas
mergent bank and financ manual and new report
mergent bank and financ manual and new report is a busi and financi inform
resourc contain inform on nearli 2000 corpor it cover the field of financ
repres by bank insur compani invest compani unit invest trust
and miscellan financi enterpris it also includ inform on real estat compani
and real estat invest trust addition it provid other relev fact and figur
includ inform on corpor auditor gener counsel exchang and symbol
number of employe number of sharehold address telephon and fax number
shareholderrel contact stockpric rang dividend report of independ auditor
transfer agent stock split and annual meet date
mergent bank and financ new report ar publish each month in print and each week
onlin and contain materi that updat mergent bank and financ manual the report
includ new item interim financi statement personnel chang new compani
descript merger propos detail about new debt and stock issu secur offer
announc of new financ and call notic
nation insur crime bureau
the nation insur crime bureau nicb is a lead notforprofit organ
dedic to prevent detect and defeat insur fraud and vehicl theft through
sourc of inform investig
3466 2011 fraud examin manual
inform analysi investig train and public awar the nicb combat auto
theft by investig case refer to it by insur and through it onlin databas
the nicb publish the passeng vehicl identif manual annual thi manual contain
the structur and decod of vehicl identif number vin from the last three
model year for most us and canadian passeng vehicl includ lightduti truck
and motorcycl
the nicb publish the commerci vehicl and offroad equip identif manual everi
five year thi manual contain the structur of vehicl identif number for
commerci vehicl and the structur of product identif number pin for offroad
equip from the last five model year
these manual also includ
summari of the feder motor vehicl theft prevent standard which requir vin
mark on major part of passeng vehicl that ar part of hightheft line
gener inform on vin structur and decod of truck tractor and trailer
along with pin structur and decod for offroad equip
glossari of vehiclerel terminolog
vincheck is anoth servic avail from the nation insur crime bureau nicb
vincheck is a servic provid to the public to assist in determin if a vehicl ha been
report as stolen nicb vincheck databas contain vehicl that have been report
stolen by cooper nicb member but not recov a vehicl identif number
vin is requir to perform a search thi inform is made avail free of charg as
a public servic to help consum determin whether a specif vehicl ha been report as
stolen and to assist nicb and law enforc in locat stolen vehicl a maximum of
five vincheck search can be conduct within a 24hour period
in the 1980 state and region experienc high level of auto theft began to form anti
car theft act group fund by voluntari grant from coalit of law enforc
group state fund insur and consum to promot public awar of vehicl theft
and lobbi for the passag of state legisl aim at combat theft a few state have
enact automobil theft prevent author atpa which ar nonprofit
organ dedic to prevent motor vehicl theft state that have activ atpa
includ arizona colorado florida louisian a maryland michigan ohio pennsylvania
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3467
texa and washington state atpa ar mostli fund by a small surcharg on driver
licens or registr fee or on auto insur polici sold in the state
nation motor vehicl titl inform system
establish by the anticar theft act of 1992 the nation motor vehicl titl
inform system nmvti is an electron databas us to authent and exchang
kei vehicl histori data such as titl inform and certain theft data the primari
reason for creat the nmvti wa to address the lack of conform among state vehicl
document law which is on of the kei factor contribut to titl fraud
the new databas which went into full effect on januari 1 2010 is design in part to
prevent titl wash which occur when a vehicl brand ie a perman design
indic that the vehicl ha incur damag through collus flood fire or other
incid that requir repair is remov by retitl the vehicl in anoth state that doe
not carri forward ani brand on the new titl
the nation directori of law enforc administr
thi annual updat databas contain inform on more than 40000 list which
includ the name address telephon number and fax number of highwai patrol
offic prosecut attornei municip counti campu state correct feder militari
airport and harbor law enforc agenc
nation trade and profession associ directori
the nation trade and profession associ list more than 7800 activ nation trade
associ profession associ technic organ and labor union and the
20363 execut who run them each list in thi directori contain an address telephon
and fax number email address nametitl of top execut purpos of the organ
histori membership size and composit annual budget staff size public and
annual meet it also provid a list of firm that provid administr and
manag servic to associ on a contract basi includ a list of their fulltim
client associ other featur includ cont act inform serial public upcom
convent schedul membership and staff size budget figur and background
inform the 2010 edit of the nation trade and profession associ directori
can be purchas onlin through columbia book and inform servic and it is
avail onlin at wwwassociationexecscom
sourc of inform investig
3468 2011 fraud examin manual
the new york time articl archiv
the new york time articl archiv contain the complet back file of the new york time
it contain more than 13million articl in all and it can be search at
wwwnytimescom the archiv is divid in to two section 1851 to 1980 and 1981 to
present
pubm
pubm is a databas servic that provid free access to more than 20 million citat
from medlin and other life scienc journal for biomed articl date back to the
1950 pubm includ link to fullt xt articl and other relat resourc
reader guid to period literatur
the reader guid is a refer guid to articl publish in period and scholarli
journal the guid contain a full dictionari catalog of all articl by author subject and
titl where possibl the entri refer to the volum number of the period start and
inclus page of the articl date of public and graphic materi in the articl such as
portrait there is an electron retrospect version of the guid avail for 1890 to 1982
standard poor netadvantag
netadvantag is a subscriptionbas servic provid by standard poor it is a
comprehens sourc of busi and invest inform offer onlin access to
standard poor independ research da ta and commentari on stock bond fund
and industri thi servic also includ export tool to enabl research to download data
into spreadsheet program for further analysi some of netadvantag premium
public ar discuss below
corpor record
thi directori ha inform on more than 10000 public compani each descript
includ compani background stock and bond descript balanc sheet and earn
inform offic and director capit expenditur subsidiari and more
compani profil
netadvantag also publish a comprehens compani profil for more than 10500
publicli trade compani each profil includ a busi descript an interact
chart tool statist analyst rate valuat and financi inform as well as the
latest stock price quot compani new and inform on competitor
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3469
regist of corpor director and execut
the regist of corpor director and execut give short summari about
corpor execut and director includ their titl the name of the compani thei work
for their academ credenti membership in fratern organ and avail busi
and residenti contact inform
regist of public compani
thi regist provid brief descript of publicli trade compani includ stock
symbol total annual sale number of employe offic name and north american
industri classif system naic assign
regist of privat compani
the regist of privat compani provid hard to find inform on approxim
85000 privat compani includ when avail their address telephon number
offic and director total annual sale number of employe line of busi primari and
secondari naic classif princip bank law firm account firm and more
secur dealer of north america
the secur dealer of north america is a list of north american secur dealer
provid a brief descript of each dealer busi a list of the state in which it is
regist to do busi the locat of it ma in offic the name of it offic clear
firm associ and membership and the number of employe and regist
repres it emploi
the global bank resourc
the global bank resourc tgbr is a comprehens databas of financi institut
and it provid data on financi institut contact correspond subsidiari affili
financi inform payment inform and much more
yellow book seri
associ yellow book
the associ yellow book which is publish by leadership directori provid access to
inform on major trade and profession associ semiannu edit provid
current inform on chief staff execut turnov chang in staff and govern
board merger and name chang it featur 1 more than 32000 offic execut and
staff with the titl affili educ and telephon and fax number of more than
sourc of inform investig
3470 2011 fraud examin manual
1000 associ with budget exceed 2 million 2 the address email address
internet address telephon number and fax number of the associ headquart and
branch 3 the associ board member and outsid affili 4 the associ
committe and chairpeopl washington repres polit action committe and
foundat 5 the associ public includ editor and 6 the associ
annual budget tax statu number of employe and number of member
corpor yellow book
the corpor yellow book is a directori of the peopl who manag direct and shape the
largest public and privat held compani in the unit state publish quarterli it
enabl subscrib to access corpor leader includ board member who ar take
increas respons for corpor decisionmak and administrativeservic
profession the directori featur 1 the name and titl of more than 26000 execut
includ more than 7000 corpor board member and their outsid affili 2 the
directdi telephon number of execut and more than 10000 email address for
offic manag and administrativeservic profession 3 the address telephon
and fax number and internet address of each entiti corpor headquart foreign
subsidiari and divis 5 the contact for each entiti administr servic such as
benefit corpor contribut foundat government affair inform system
librari and inform center purchas real estat and facil recruit and
sharehold relat and 6 four index organ industri geograph and
individu name
judici yellow book
the judici yellow book provid detail biograph inform for state and feder
judg and give inform on each judg staff includ law clerk it featur
inform on more than 2200 feder judg and more than 1300 state judg provid
depth and detail on each judg chamber
law firm yellow book
the law firm yellow book ha inform on more than 700 of the largest law firm in the
unit state it provid uptod inform on chang in firm manag and
structur it is also the onli personnel directori that clearli identifi the partner who make
a firm busi decis and supervis it practic area and the administr that
manag it oper it focus on the administr and attornei in these firm and it is
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3471
index by practic area law school geographi name and organ includ affili
and subsidiari it is publish semiannu
municip yellow book
the municip yellow book provid inform on citi and counti govern and local
author in the unit state it contain data on more than 38000 elect and
administr offici includ their name address and telephon and fax number it
also contain section on citi and counti which featur complex hierarchi of municip
offici thi directori also ha list for local depart agenc subdivis and
branch
new media yellow book
the new media yellow book is a directori contain inform on the lead new media
organ in the unit state it contain list of more than 38000 report writer
editor and produc it featur 10 section on newspap new servic network
televis station radio station program period nonu media publish and
biograph index thi directori is fulli updat on a quarterli basi
state yellow book
the state yellow book provid inform on member of the execut and legisl
branch of the 50 state govern as well as american samoa guam puerto rico and
the virgin island it ha a subject and a personnel index and it includ inform on
govern offici depart agenc and legisl committe inform
profil of all state and territori ar also provid thi directori is fulli updat on a
quarterli basi
feder region yellow book
the feder region yellow book is releas semiannu and it describ feder region
offic locat outsid washington dc it contain inform on more than 40000
region director and administr staff member at feder depart and agenc it
also ha inform on administr and profession staff at feder laboratori research
center militari instal and servic academi
financi yellow book
the financi yellow book is a semiannu directori that list the name and titl of more
than 26000 execut includ more than 4000 board member at more than 560 lead
sourc of inform investig
3472 2011 fraud examin manual
financi institut the directori also ha complet contact inform includ address
telephon and fax number and email for execut and outsid board member the
directori ha four index on organ geograph locat individu name and
industri
govern affair yellow book
the govern affair yellow book contain inform on corpor financi
institut trade and profession associ labor union interest group includ
coalit public interest group government agenc and government affair
organ it contain a section on feder state and municip govern that includ
the governmentalaffair staff for feder agenc state govern and lead citi
counti and author it govern affair repres section list more than
1200 lobbi firm law firm and public relat firm it detail the issu that lobbyist
contest as well as the coalit thei form to advanc their legisl agenda four index
ar includedon subject geograph locat personnel and master
bank and financi institut
the relationship between bank and their custom is confidenti and there ar numer
law and regul that protect consum person financi inform held by financi
institut
law limit access to bank record
the primari law protect the privaci of consum inform held by financi
institut is the grammleachblilei act which wa sign into law in 1999 the act
requir the feder govern to adopt regul requir financi institut to
ensur the secur and confidenti of custom record and inform
the grammleachblilei act also made it a crime for certain institutionsbank stock
brokerag firm insur compani loan compani credit card issuer and credit
bureausto obtain disclos or provid document under fals pretens pertain to a
custom financi inform
the grammleachblilei act appli not onli to peopl who us fals pretens but also to
ani third parti request the inform when it is known or should be known that fals
pretens will be us but certain parti ar exempt from thi rule exempt parti
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3473
includ law enforc agenc and insur compani conduct relat claim
investig it also exempt statelicens privat investig who ar attempt to
collect delinqu child support
under the grammleachblilei act fraud examin should be extrem care about
obtain financi inform from financi institut
in addit to the grammleachblilei act the right to financi privaci act 12 usc
34013422 also limit access to consum in format held by financi institut in
gener the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut from releas a
custom financi inform to government agenc without the custom consent a
court order a subpoena a search warrant or other formal demand thu if the govern
is request inform it must also compli with the right to financi privaci act and
even though the law appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and
other financi institut will not releas such inform to privat parti absent legal
process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
type of financi record
as a gener rule of thumb financi inform can be obtain onli by subpoena if you
ar abl to obtain a subpoena the follow financi inform should be request
master file of custom
the master file of custom eg depositor debtor and safe deposit box holder that
ar maintain by the bank should detail where all of it import record ar store
safedeposit box record
valuabl inform can be obtain from a safedeposit box record these record usual
provid the name of the person rent the box how often a person visit it the date
he visit it and the time he visit it the time and frequenc of visit can be valuabl if
thei correspond to time and date of deposit or withdraw from other account
the content of a safedeposit box howev ar not known by bank offici and thei ar
never record on the box holder file more over bank usual requir the custom
consent a search warrant or a court order befor an author bank offici can open a safe
deposit box
sourc of inform investig
3474 2011 fraud examin manual
account open record
record requir to open account at financi institut can also be valuabl save
account applic can provid handwrit sampl and certain person inform
about custom vari from on bank to anoth likewis applic for check
account should provid handwrit sampl and certain person inform vari
from on bank to anoth
record of deposit
record of account deposit reflect the date of deposit amount of currenc and check
and the drawe bank of check also check account deposit slip might identifi the
account holder financi associ
record of withdraw
withdraw record should reflect the date of withdraw the amount of currenc and
check and the drawe bank of check
addition for larg withdraw some bank will request that the custom give a reason
for withdraw the monei the custom is not requir to give such inform and the
bank cannot refus to honor the withdraw similarli some save and loan associ
might demand notic on larg withdraw
feder regulatori agenc
exportimport bank of the unit state
the exportimport bank is the offici export credit agenc of the unit state feder
govern it loan fund to foreign countri and busi to bui good from us
compani borrow can obtain up to 50 percent of the purchas price of the good be
acquir sell compani must submit a supplier certif to the bank thi certif
must includ a statement regard commiss paid especi in a foreign countri to
foreign sale repres ativ or agent
farm credit administr
the farm credit administr overse and regul entiti within the farm credit
system which is a network of borrowerown lend institut and relat servic
organ serv all 50 state and puerto rico some of the entiti regul ar the
feder farm credit bank fund corpor which market the secur the bank sell
to rais loan fund the farm credit system financi assist corpor which
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3475
provid capit through the purchas of prefer stock issu by institut that receiv
financi assist from the farm credit system assist board and the feder
agricultur mortgag corpor which provid a secondari market for agricultur real
estat and rural hous mortgag
feder deposit insur corpor
the feder deposit insur corpor fdic is an independ agenc of the feder
govern that insur deposit in bank and save associ
feder or state bank or save associ that appli to be insur by the fdic must
submit an applic that cover financi histori financi condit capit structur
manag futur earn prospect conveni to and need of the commun and
consist of corpor power
fdic insur bank ar examin annual by fdic insur examin fdic save
associ ar examin period by fdic examin each examin includ an
apprais of manag director offic and staff
the examin report contain white and pink sheet the white sheet provid
examin find a copi is given to the bank board of director the examin
howev retain the pink sheet which contain confidenti inform includ an
alphabet list of all director offic and princip employe their titl and comment
on everi individu to the fullest extent possibl the examin also comment on the
capabl of each individu give hi approxim ag and cite other busi affili
addition the examin complet a form for each individu set forth hi estim
net worth par valu of stock own and salari
inquiri regard type of fdic record avail to the public includ record avail
under the freedom of inform act should be direct to the appropri fdic
region offic or to the offic of the execut secretari
feder hous financ board
the feder hous financ board financ board is an independ regulatori agenc in
the execut branch it succeed the feder home loan bank board and is respons
for administ and enforc the feder home loan bank act
sourc of inform investig
3476 2011 fraud examin manual
the financ board supervis the 12 feder home loan bank fhlb which were creat
by the feder home loan bank act and issu regul and order for carri out the
act purpos save associ that make longterm home mortgag loan ar elig
to becom member of an fhlb
in addit the financ board implement communityori mortgag lend and
afford hous program prescrib rule and condit under which bank ar
author to borrow issu consolid fh lb bond note or debentur that ar the
oblig of all fhlb and ensur that the fhlb remain adequ capit and
oper in a sound manner
the fhlb system provid a flexibl credit re serv for member save institut engag
in home mortgag lend and includ 12 region fhlb that ar feder charter
privat capit and independ manag the 12 fhlb help their member
financi institut meet their commun divers housingfin and econom
develop need
each fhlb is capit by the capitalstock invest of it member financi
institut and it retain earn the proce of these stock invest ar us to
issu and sell consolid oblig which ar sold to investor eg commerci bank
foreign central bank mutual fund corpor govern agenc and individu
in addit the fhlb provid loan to their member financi institut
feder reserv system
the feder reserv system which serv as the nation central bank is a valuabl sourc
of inform on bank that it ha charter
the feder reserv system board of gover nor regul statechart bank that ar
member of the feder reserv system their subsidiari and hold compani as well as
the activ of foreign bank that oper within the unit state
on an annual basi reserv system examin er visit and report on charter bank their
examin report contain two part the open part a copi of which is given to the bank
and the confidenti part which is kept by the reserv system and contain qualif of
manag list of offic and director and background data on the offic
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3477
a bank must file a registr statement for it secur the registr statement must
be follow by an annual report that provid consider data on the secur issu as
well as employ inform on all director and those who own more than 10 percent
of ani class of the bank secur the feder reserv system maintain these statement
nation credit union administr
the nation credit union administr regul insur and supervis all feder credit
union as well as statechart credit union that appli for it insur
offic of the comptrol of the currenc
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which is within the us depart
of the treasuri regul nation bank and maintain inform concern them the
occ conduct examin of the nation bank to determin their financi posit and
to evalu their asset the bank examin report contain inform about bank
record loan and oper in view of their purpos and the basi on which thei ar
obtain report of nation bank examin as well as relat correspond and
paper ar consid confidenti request for these document should includ the
subject name and address the inform desir the reason it is need and the
intend us
investig and law enforc inform center and databas
nation law enforc telecommun system
the nation law enforc telecommun system nlet is the intern
justic and public safeti inform share network which is a sophist
commun network that link all law enforc and crimin justic agenc in the
unit state puerto rico and through a computer link to interpol canada
nlet provid two basic capabl to it user first it is an intern computerbas
messageswitch system that link togeth state local and feder law enforc
and justic agenc for the purpos of inform exchang second it provid
informationservic support for a grow number of justicerel applic to
accomplish thi nlet support datacommuni cation link to state network us a
commerci framerelai servic all agenc within each state ar servic through thi state
interfac feder and intern system oper in much the same manner the primari
sourc of inform investig
3478 2011 fraud examin manual
nlet oper site is locat in the arizona depart of public safeti facil and
a disasterrecoveri site that enabl full resumpt of oper in fewer than 30 minut
wa develop with the idaho state polic
the user popul is compos of feder agenc with a justic compon select
intern agenc and all state and territori all of which ar cooper exchang
data agenc includ state and local law enforc group motor vehicl and licens
depart and a varieti of feder enforc offic such as the us custom servic
feder bureau of investig depart of justic us secret servic us marshal
servic naval investig servic air forc offic of special investig depart
of state depart of the armi and depart of the interior the nation auto
theft bureau also is link to nlet nlet user can send freeform messag to other
user either individu or via a broadcast messag
a great deal of inform is avail to law enforc through the network includ
vehicl registr by licens plate or vehicl identif number
driver licens and histori by name and date of birth or driver licens number some
state support driver licens queri by name onli
crimin record by name and date of birth state identif number or fbi number
boat registr by hull number registr number or name
snowmobil registr by registr number vehicl identif number or
owner name and date of birth
hazard materi file by un number which is an internation recogn code for
hazard materi
privat aircraft track data by registr number or date rang
aircraft registr by registr number serial number or name of registr
directori of particip agenc by origin agenc identifi
registr inform on diplomat licens plate
index to paroleprob and correct inform
sex offend registr inform
the royal canadian mount polic canadian polic inform centr provid mani
addit file includ
want peopl by name and date of birth
crimin histori by name or fp canadian nation identif number
stolen vehicl by licens number or vehicl identif number
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3479
stolen articl by serial number
stolen gun by serial number
stolen secur by serial number corpor name issuer or name of owner
stolen boat and motor by licens number hull number registr number or name
of owner
defens clearanc and investig index
the defens clearanc and investig index dcii is part of the defens secur
servic dss that is overseen by the depart of defens dod
the dcii is an autom index of dod investig and secur decis regard
personnel that have been made by dod adju dicat normal the dss limit the dcii
access to the depart of defens and other feder agenc
el paso intellig center
the el paso intellig center epic mission is to provid time and expediti
support to feder state local tribal and intern law enforc agenc prior to
2001 epic provid entiti a complet and accur intellig pictur of worldwid
movement of transport drug weapon and illeg alien into the unit state it
analyz raw data and provid tactic and oper intellig to agenc involv in
the antidrug effort epic also provid strateg assess of drug movement and
conceal techniqu after septemb 11th 2001 epic wa call upon to support
investig to find those respons for the terrorist attack and it mission expand to
includ counterterror effort
epic member agenc includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos
coast guard depart of defens depart of homeland secur custom and
border protect depart of homeland secur immigr and custom
enforc depart of the interior drug enforc administr feder
bureau of investig intern revenu servic marshal servic nation drug
intellig center secret servic and tr ansport secur administr
initi epic focus on the unit statesmexico border with an emphasi on mexico
heroin traffick and illeg alien smuggler but with the increas us of aircraft seago
vessel and global network to facilit drug traffick epic focu broaden and
becam intern in scope epic serv feder agenc all 50 state the district of
sourc of inform investig
3480 2011 fraud examin manual
columbia canada puerto rico the us virg in island and guam and it support law
enforc effort conduct by it foreign counterpart throughout the world it current
ha memoranda of understand mou with canada australia and the netherland
member agenc have direct access to all epic inform with appropri safeguard to
provid for the protect and the secur commun of highli sensit or classifi
inform state and local law enforc entiti have access to epic data through a
design group within the respect organ or through a member agenc
financi crime enforc network
the financi crime enforc network fincenan organ establish by the
us depart of the treasurycollect analyz and dissemin intellig on
financi crime it mission is to provid a governmentwid multisourc intellig and
analyt network to support law enforc agenc in the detect investig and
prosecut of financi crime the particip agenc ar the bureau of alcohol
tobacco firearm and explos us custom servic and border protect drug
enforc administr feder bureau of investig intern revenu servic
us marshal servic postal inspecti on servic and us secret servic
fincen financi databas c ontain inform from report requir under the bank
secreci act includ the currenc transact report report of intern
transport of currenc or monetari in strument currenc transact report by
casino and card club and by depositori institut report of foreign bank and
financi account registr of monei servic busi design of exempt
person and suspici activ report by depositori institut secur and futur
industri insur industri casino and card club and monei servic busi
furthermor fincen ha access to data from ir form 8300 report of cash payment
over 10000 receiv in a trade or busi
fincen produc two type of product tactic support document and strateg analys
the tactic support product either provid inform and lead on crimin organ
and activ that ar under investig by law enforc or proactiv identifi
previous undetect crimin organ and activ so that investig can be
initi the fincen work product can also assist in identifi asset for seizur and
forfeitur purpos and support ongo investig it strateg analys look at
financi crime and monei launder with an emphasi on the futur fincen collect
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3481
process analyz and develop intellig on emerg trend pattern and issu
relat to the proce of illicit activ
fincen us the major of it resourc to assist agenc in investig of the financi
aspect of the illeg narcot trade fincen then priorit investig of such non
narcot crime as monei launder bank secreci act violat corrupt treason
bankruptci fraud financi institut fraud and govern contract fraud in both the
narcot and nonnarcot area fincen concentr on investig of nation or
intern crimin organ
interag border inspect system
the interag border inspect system ibi wa initi in 1989 by us custom and
border protect to improv border enforc and to facilit inspect of individu
appli for admiss to the unit state at port of entri and preinspect facil
ibi is consid a presidenti prioriti and receiv white hous guidanc regard
polici coordin and control us custom and border protect law enforc
and regulatori personnel from 20 other feder agenc or bureau us ibi some of these
agenc ar the feder bureau of investig interpol the drug enforc
administr the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos the intern
revenu servic the coast guard the feder aviat administr and the secret
servic inform from ibi is also share with the depart of state for us by
consular offic at us embassi and consul ibi strive to provid travel with
expediti clearanc at port of entri while allow border enforc agenc to focu
their limit resourc on potenti noncompli travel ibi provid the law
enforc commun with access to computerbas enforc file on suspect
individu busi vehicl aircraft and vessel it also provid access to nation
crime inform center ncic record on want person stolen vehicl vessel or
firearm licens inform crimin histori and previou feder inspect ibi
user can also interfac with all 50 state via the nation law enforc
telecommun system
intern chamber of commerc commerci crime bureau
the intern chamber of commerc icc establish the commerci crime bureau
ccb in januari 1992 to act as a focal point for fraud prevent and to encourag
cooper between commerc and law enforc agenc the ccb maintain an
sourc of inform investig
3482 2011 fraud examin manual
extens databas on all aspect of commerci fraud the cc also oper fraudnet a
uniqu global network of law firm that special in tackl busi crime
intern crimin polic organ
the intern crimin polic organizati on better known by it radio design
interpol is a network of nation central bureau in more than 186 member countri
that share inform with each other to assist law enforc agenc in the detect
and deterr of intern crime each bureau is an agenc of the member countri
govern and serv as the liaison between that countri law enforc agenc and
the interpol network in the unit sta te the nation central bureau usncb is
under the direct and control of the depart of justic and comanag by the
depart of homeland secur
to support ongo investig that requir intern assist interpol
provid inform regard
locat of suspectsfugitiveswit
intern want circular
crimin histori check
terror prevent
stolen art
trace of weapon and motor vehicl abroad
licens plate driver licens check and vehicl registr data
intern crimin polic organ case track system
the intern crimin polic organ interpol case track system
ict locat at the us nation central bureau usncb in washington dc contain
inform about peopl properti and organ involv in intern crimin
activ the usncb can determin the histori of an intern connect in an
investig or the exist of ani previou intern crimin activ the usncb
oper to provid intern support for us law enforc
sixteen feder and state law enforc agenc ar repres at the usncb and all 50
state have establish interpol liaison offic agenc repres at the usncb
includ the bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos environment
protect agenc drug enforc administ ration feder bureau of investig
us immigr and custom enforc transport secur administr us
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3483
coast guard bureau of custom and border protect us marshal servic us
depart of defens us depart of state us f ood and drug administr
us postal inspect servic and us secret servic
interst identif index
the interst identif index iii is an indexpoint system for the interst
exchang of crimin record under the iii the fbi maintain an index of peopl arrest
for feloni or seriou misdemeanor under state or feder law the index includ
identif data name birth date race sex etc and the fbi and state identif
number sid from all state that have inform about an individu
search queri from justic agenc nationwid ar transmit via state telecommun
network and the fbi nation crime inform center ncic line search ar made
by name and other identifi the iii held the crimin histori of more than 649 million
individu as of septemb 2008 fortyeight state particip in the iii as of that date
ten also particip in the nation fingerprint file nff the nff state have assum
respons for crimin and noncrimin request
joint maritim inform element
the joint maritim inform element jmie a consortium of 15 us govern
agenc in the law enforc and intellig commun provid access to
repositori of format data at the secret level on worldwid merchant vessel locat
characterist registriesownership commerci cargo import and export through us
port and commerci cargo import and export in select foreign countri and
worldwid port consortium member ar the offic of naval intellig militari sealift
command drug enforc administr depart of state execut offic of
the presid offic of nation drug control polici us custom servic central
intellig agenc us coast guard maritim administr depart of energi
defens intellig agenc us citizenship and immigr servic interpol
bureau of censu and nation secur agenc
the system provid inform on maritimerel law enforc and nation foreign
intellig data to aid member oper target such as narcot interdict
smuggl sea and defensezon surveil border control petroleumtraff monitor
and emerg sealift manag thirtyf site ar oper allow access to data
sourc that provid atsea and inport locat inform and characterist on
sourc of inform investig
3484 2011 fraud examin manual
commerci and privat vessel and vessel registr file for florida california delawar
puerto rico and the virgin island
law enforc support center
us immigr and custom enforc law enforc su pport center lesc
serv as a nation oper center by provid time immigr statu and ident
inform to local state and feder law enforc agenc on alien suspect
arrest or convict of crimin activ the lesc oper 24 hour a dai seven dai a
week respond to request from feder state and local law enforc agenc with
inform gather from eight dh databas the nation crime inform center
ncic the interst identif index iii and other state crimin histori indic
in addit to provid realtim assist to law enforc agenc that ar
investig or have arrest foreignborn individu involv in crimin activ the
lesc also perform the follow investig function administ and control
immigrationrel case for immigr and custom enforc ic provid
support to a host of ongo multiag investig initi act as the central point of
contact for the fbi nation instant crimin background check system nic program
handl queri and field respons relat to nation secur employ issu provid
the law enforc commun with ncic hit confirm inform and offer ic
special agent and deport offic afterhour support via digit record duti line
confirm with person identif number
exclud parti list system
the exclud parti list system epl is a webbas databas maintain by the
gener servic administr that identifi those parti exclud throughout the us
govern unless otherwis note from receiv feder contract or certain
subcontract and from certain type of feder financi and nonfinanci assist and
benefit
nation trace center
the nation trace center ntc a branch of the firearm enforc divis of the
bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf is the countri onli crime
gun trace facil it provid 24hour assist to duli author law enforc
agenc in the unit state and those in mani foreign countri us the atf firearm
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3485
trace system the ntc systemat track firearm us to commit crime from their
place of manufactur to the place of sale
nation whitecollar crime center
the nation whitecollar crime center nw3c seek to provid a nationwid support
system for agenc involv in the prevent investig and prosecut of econom
and hightech crime and to support and partner with other appropri entiti in
address homeland secur initi as thei relat to econom and hightech crime the
nw3c ha a databas system that contain inform on individu and busi
suspect of econom crimin activ includ advancefe loan scheme credit card
fraud comput fraud and secur and invest fraud
narcot and danger drug inform system
the narcot and danger drug inform system naddi is a central
autom file of summari of report on subject of interest to the drug enforc
administr dea consist of more than 59 million record on individu
busi vessel aircraft and select airfield identifi through the dea investig
report system and relat investig record inquiri should be limit to narcot
relat case or file andor smuggler of fund other contraband and alien naddi is
access through the el paso intellig center epic and the dea
nation autom immigr lookout system
the nation autom immigr lookout system nail is a bureau of immigr
and custom enforc system the system provid an index of the name of all
individu who might be deni entri into the unit state name in nail ar pass
to the treasuri enforc commun system tec therefor a search of
nail is not necessari if tec ha been search
nation crime inform center
the nation crime inform center ncic locat at the fbi headquart in
washington is a wide us law enforc comput system most major law
enforc agenc have ncic connect
an ncic file often contain inform about
stolen miss or recov gun
stolen articl that have a serial number
sourc of inform investig
3486 2011 fraud examin manual
want peopl for question or arrest
stolenw vehicl auto aircraft motorcycl
stolen licens plate
stolen embezzl or miss secur stock bond and currenc
stolenw boat
miss peopl
index to state and feder crimin histori record
unidentifi peopl
foreign fugit
atf violent felon file
us secret servic protect file
gang and terrorist organ file
deport felon file
origin agenc identifi file
protect order file
ncic is a computer index of crimin justic inform eg crimin record histori
inform fugit stolen properti and miss person it is avail to feder state
and local law enforc and other crimin justic agenc and is oper 24 hour a
dai 365 dai a year
the purpos of maintain the ncic system is to provid a computer databas for
readi access by a crimin justic agenc make an inquiri and for prompt disclosur of
inform in the system from other crimin justic agenc thi inform assist
author agenc in crimin justic and relat law enforc object such as
apprehend fugit locat miss person locat and return stolen properti as
well as in the protect of the law enforc offic encount the individu
describ in the system
region inform share system
the region inform share system riss program consist of six multist project
that facilit region crimin inform exchang and provid other relat support
servic to feder state and local law enforc agenc throughout all 50 state canada
the district of columbia australia us territori and england
middl atlanticgreat lake organ crime law enforc network magloclen
magloclen includ law enforc agenc in indiana michigan ohio
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3487
pennsylvania new york new jersei delawa re maryland and washington dc the
center also ha member agenc in canada england and australia magloclen is
locat at 140 terri drive suit 100 newtown pennsylvania 18940 or can be reach
at 215 5044910 or 800 3451322
midstat organ crime in format center mocic mocic includ law enforc
agenc in north dakota south dakota nebraska kansa minnesota iowa missouri
wisconsin and illinoi the center also ha member agenc in canada mocic is
locat 1610 east sunshin street 110 springfield missouri 65804 or can be reach
at 800 8466242 or 417 8834383
new england state polic in format network nespin nespin incorpor law
enforc agenc in main new hampshir vermont massachusett connecticut
and rhode island the center also ha member agenc in canada nespin is locat
at 124 grove street suit 105 franklin ma 02038 or can be reach at 800 3435682
or 508 5288200
region organ crime inform center rocic rocic serv 800 law enforc
agenc in texa oklahoma louisiana arkansa mississippi alabama tennesse
kentucki west virginia virginia north caro lina south carolina georgia and florida
as well as puerto rico and the us virgin island rocic is locat at 545 marriott
drive suit 850 nashvil tennesse 37214 or can be reach at 800 2387985
rocki mountain inform network rmin the rmin ha 13000 member in more
than 1000 agenc in arizona new mexico colorado utah nevada idaho wyom
and montana the center also ha member agenc in canada the rmin is locat at
2828 north central avenu suit 1000 phoenix arizona 85004 or can be reach at
602 3512320
western state inform network wsin the wsin provid narcot intellig and
relat servic to it member law enforc agenc in california oregon
washington alaska and hawaii the center also ha member in canada australia and
guam the wsin address is po box 90 3198 sacramento california 942031980
and it can be call at 800 8247902 outsid of california and 800 952 5258
in california
treasuri enforc commun system
the treasuri enforc commun system tec is a depart of the
treasuri system manag by the intern revenu servic tec is a computer
inform system design to identifi individu and busi suspect of or involv
in a violat of feder law tec is also a commun system that transmit messag
sourc of inform investig
3488 2011 fraud examin manual
among treasuri law enforc offic and other feder nation state and local law
enforc agenc
tec provid access to the fbi nation crime inform center ncic and the
nation law enforc telecommun system nlet with the capabl of
commun directli with state and local enforc agenc the nlet provid
direct access to state motor vehicl depart
particip includ the us custom servic bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and
explos drug enforc administr us citizenship and immigr servic
depart of state us coast guard fe deral bureau of investig ncic section
us marshal servic intern revenu servic epic interpol nation central
bureau and depart of agricultur
tec work on a soundextyp system if an inquiri is made regard a certain name then
all similar sound name on record ar provid to the inquir inquiri on tec might
be made by name alon even if no identifi numbersuch as date of birth fbi number
or social secur numberi avail
when tec provid a list of similar sound name the subject sex race and date of
birth also ar includ the inquir then can determin which subject if ani is of interest
if a name is select tec can provid addit inform includ special
instruct such as arm and danger full name race sex height weight hair color
ey color date of birth fugit which agenc background inform miscellan
number such as fbi where and by whom a warrant is held date of offens alia case
number and ncic number
unit nation crime and justic inform network
the unit nation crime and justic inform network uncjin is fund in part by
the us bureau of justic statist the goal of the uncjin is to establish a worldwid
network to enhanc the dissemin and exchang of inform concern crimin
justic and crime prevent issu
world crimin justic librari network
the world crimin justic librari network wcjln is a network that is us to share
servic and inform concern crimin justic the group ha develop an
investig sourc of inform
2011 fraud examin manual 3489
intern network to dissemin nation and intern crime statist and crimin
justic profil
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3501
access inform onlin
fraud examin now have a number of onlin investig resourc avail through their
person comput but not so long ago examin had to travel to the counti courthous
or state capit to search for public record fraud examin todai howev have enough
inform avail through differ onlin sourc to conduct entir inquiri without
leav their seat
investig with the internet
a great deal of inform can be access through the internet for littl or no cost thi
section explain some internet basic as well as how to us it servic to obtain inform
about peopl busi and fraud in gener
the internet is a decentr global network of million of divers comput and
comput network these network can all talk to each other becaus thei have agre to
us a common commun protocol call tcpip which is name after it two most
import protocol transmiss control protocol tcp and internet protocol ip
essenti the internet is a tool for commun between peopl and busi in
gener the internet is a giant network link togeth million of comput worldwid
the internet is not organ by ani uniform system such as librari dewei decim
system instead it remain a freefloat looselystrung gold mine of inform avail
to those who understand how to us it unless you know the exact address of the internet
site you ar look for it is necessari to learn how to find the inform
an internet site or page is a singl web address gener introduc by a person or a
compani to post inform on a topic or to gener or promot busi there ar a
number of websit that will be of us to a fraud examin and some ar list and
discuss at the end of thi chapter
tradit method for find inform on the internet
the most basic wai to find inform on the internet is to execut search us search
engin or metasearch engin or to locat inform us websit directori
access inform onlin investig
3502 2011 fraud examin manual
search engin
search engin ar websit tool that allow you to type in keyword describ the subject in
which you ar interest the search engin will then scour the page of the internet and
attempt to locat page that mai have pertin inform for instanc in a search for the
keyword fraud the search engin will like bring back a number of page that have some
relev link to fraud such as the associ of certifi fraud examin websit locat
at wwwacfecom there ar sever promin search engin on the internet and each
function in a differ wai an extens list of search engin is provid at the end of the
chapter howev a few of the more popular engin ar describ below
googl
googl is the mostus search engin in the unit state and ha advanc search
capabl individu web page ar rank by the engin softwar accord to how
often the page is link to by other determin the page import by the number of
link and the ident of the link page googl is a good sourc for find target
inform on a particular topic addition learn googlespecif search oper will
provid the investig with an extrem power tool for onlin investig
for exampl googl group is a searchabl usenet archiv it scan thousand of post
of usenet group which ar electron bulletin board classifi by subject see
newsgroup below a search us googl group will reveal instanc in which the
term you specifi appear in a post on the internet you can search by the name or email
address of user who have post to newsgroup or by subject keyword attach and
so on
bing
bing formerli live search window live search and msn search is the current web
search engin from microsoft bing automat group search result in differ
categori depend on the type of search user ar conduct bing also provid the
abil to save and share search histori via window live skydriv facebook and email
in addit to provid mani of the same search resourc found in other popular engin
eg it provid search specif to travel video pictur and map bing ha sever
us featur for exampl bing maintain an ongo histori of search give
research a wai to identifi what thei look up and in what order and bing imag
search is easier to manag than other becaus it displai more imag on the result screen
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3503
altavista
altavista is a detailori search engin becaus it read the individu text of everi page
list on the internet altavista is veri us for find random inform if you ar
simpli cast your line to see what inform might be avail on a topic thi is a
good engin to us howev altavista search ar so thorough you will encount everi
page that contain your keyword end with as mani as 200000 hit success altavista
search requir you to construct your search carefulli
yahoo
yahoo is a multifacet websit contain a firstrat directori see below for more
inform about directori but it is also equip with a search engin in 2009
howev yahoo announc that it search engin would be power by bing and as of
juli 2010 up to 25 percent of the search result provid by yahoo search ar power by
bing
excit
excit search engin is good for broad gener topic becaus it a simultan search of
the web new headlin sport score and compani inform result ar group on a
singl page weed through the result can sometim be a chore
lyco
lyco provid advanc search capabl includ the abil to search for specif
media it lyco pro featur allow user to finetun search lycoss index of web page
is smaller than those of some other servic
askcom
formerli askjeev askcom is a good site for beginn and for gener queri the
engin lead user through question to help narrow the search and also search six other
search site for similar servic see metasearch engin below askcom abil to
interpret natur languag make it easi to us though construct precis queri can be
difficult for the same reason
metasearch engin
metasearch engin send user request to sever other search engin and displai the
result some of the more common metasearch engin ar describ below
access inform onlin investig
3504 2011 fraud examin manual
metacrawl
metacrawl us metasearch technolog to search the internet top search engin
includ googl yahoo search bing askcom and more it search the best result from
the combin pool of the world lead search engin instead of result from onli on
search engin
dogpil
own by infospac thi engin send a queri to a customiz list of search engin
directori and specialti search site eg googl yahoo search bing askcom and then
displai the result from each search engin individu onc the result ar retriev the
innov metasearch technolog us by dogpil goe to work remov duplic and
analyz the result to help ensur that the best result top the list the comparison view
featur let user compar result from the lead engin with the click of a button
mamma
mamma is a smart metasearch engin everi time user type in a queri mamma
simultan search a varieti of engin directori and content site properli format
the word and syntax for each compil their result in a virtual databas elimin
duplic and displai them in a uniform manner accord to relev
surfwax
surfwax claim to provid the best us of relev search result from the open internet it
us a cohes matrix to search sort extract and relat inform from both the internet
and enterpris intranet surfwax offer multipl search tool includ focusword
searchset sitesnap and contextzoom
directori
the road to mine inform on the internet doe not alwai go through search engin
some of the best investig tool an examin ha onlin ar directori as the name
suggest directori ar special websit that collect the name of numer other relat
websit allow the user to brows through a complet list of possibl site to visit
directori contain link to page that have a common some allinclus directori
cover a plethora of differ topic and other ar more focus on particular subject or
disciplin these includ sever account and audit directori that fraud examin
mai find veri us
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3505
the upsid to us directori is that you can logic navig a search eas through the
differ categori until you find what you ar look for howev directori contain
onli a portion of the site and page avail on the internet therefor the fraud examin
should us directori in concert with a search engin and not instead of on
yahoo
in addit to it search engin yahoo ha an intric directori possibl the most
comprehens and allinclus on the internet the directori is built and maintain by
yahoo employe with input from user yahoo function much like a pyramid it begin
with sever larg pool of categori such as entertain and govern and then
allow the user to select more specif option from each broad categori for instanc an
examin could select educ then univers then univers librari until
final encount a direct link to the main librari catalog for the univers of texa by
pare down your select to increasingli narrow topic you can gener find sever
us websit
virtual librari
the virtual librari vl is the oldest catalog of the web start by tim bernersle the
creator of the html that make the internet possibl unlik commerci catalog it is run
by a loos confeder of volunt who compil page of kei link for particular area in
which thei have expertis while not the biggest index of the web the vl page ar wide
prais as guid to particular section of the internet
internet public librari
run by librarian thi servic index web page by topic the internet public librari also
contain an arrai of guid such as onlin magazin and newspap associ and tip
for conduct research
open directori project
found in 1998 open directori project dmozorg is the largest humanedit directori
on the internet dmozorg provid noncommerci moder of regist site and is
maintain by a commun of volunt editor it provid site list group into
categori and subcategori
access inform onlin investig
3506 2011 fraud examin manual
best of the web directori
the best of the web directori is a commerci directori that provid site list
categor by topic and region
businesscom
businesscom is an internet search engin and web directori that provid site list in
more than 65000 busi categori
nontradit method for find inform on the internet
move beyond the us of googl and other tr adit method of search the internet is
import for individu conduct fraud examin thi section will examin how to
us the follow websit to obtain inform on the internet
ebai
whoi
craigslist
archiv
zoominfo
guidestar
noza
in addit to the abov site thi section will also discuss how an examin can find
valuabl inform us social network site
the websit address in thi discuss ar tri and true resourc that fraud examin
should be comfort with us but befor us these site establish an undercov email
account to us when search the email account should be set up through a webbas
servic like hotmail yahoo or gmail examin should not us ani of the follow
inform when creat the email account
person name
geograph region
favorit sport team
hobbi
in addit a discreet email account should have certain characterist such as a genderneutr
name the handl should be compris of number and letter that appear to be for
a purpos give it ad credibl and authent
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3507
exampl
ls1942183yahoocom
ebai
the onlin auction websit ebaycom can be a valuabl resourc for fraud examin it
maintain lengthi detail log for each transact but thi highlevel inform should
be obtain with a subpoena to conduct a more gener search us a person name or email
address on ebai
go to advanc search in the upperright corner of ebai home page
choos find a member from the left column
type in the first half of the person person email address eg for
crazybirdgmailcom type crazybird
after find a match the examin should visit the user ebai profil and read everyth
avail on the page an examin can gain insight into a fraud examin by examin
ani item the subject bought or sold and by review ani comment the subject ha made
onc the examin ha read the user comment he should click the user feedback
profil along the right side of the page will be a few select item under member
quick link the investig should select view id histori to see if the member ha
chang hi id over the past ten year in addit the examin can make the suspect on
of hi favorit seller to receiv alert when the subject place new item for sale on
ebai
the whoi protocol
whoi is a queri respons protocol that is us to search databas that store domain
registr record includ domain name server address technic contact and
address these databas can be queri at the follow site
networksolutionscom will provid the ownership and registr inform for a
websit
arinnet is a whoi server that search for the registr and ip address rang of a
particular ip address
allwhoiscom will find the whoi databas for a particular domain name
whatismyipaddresscom provid a collect of tool for locat inform about an
ip address
tracerouteorglik whatismyipaddresscom can be us to trace ip address
access inform onlin investig
3508 2011 fraud examin manual
craigslist
craigslistorg is a network of onlin commun featur free classifi advertis
with section dedic to job hous person item for sale servic rsum and so
on
the kei to search craigslist is get past the geograph restrict for exampl if the
examin is look for item in the silicon vallei he cannot search other area at the same
time to expand the search the examin must specifi anoth area or us
searchtempestcom a tool that allow user to search multipl craigslist site at onc
archiv
archiveorg offer research and historian a view of other websit captur by the
wayback machin on a specif date to access archiv site enter a web address in the
search box and the engin will return a list of archiv date avail for exampl a search
of wwwdata2knowcom return a list of archiv page start on august 18 2000
zoominfo
anoth great resourc on the internet is zoominfocom zoominfo collat inform
from websit and then softwar bot also known as intellig agent captur and match to
particular individu or compani
zoominfo search ar conduct by compani person or industri although zoominfo
search can return a larg amount of inform examin must understand that thi
inform is gener from other websit and should be verifi
zoominfo search result look rsum and includ inform like busi experi
associ connect educ credenti and so on
guidestar
guidestar is a great start point to find data about nonprofit guidestar gather and
public inform about more than 850000 nonprofit organ it obtain
inform from a varieti of sourc includ the irss form 990 datathi provid
inform on the file organ mission program and financesand from
individu organ
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3509
noza
nozasearchcom is a webbas databas of charit give design as a research tool for
nonprofit organ it gather data about privat foundat activ that might be of
interest to grantseek philanthrop organ and individu donor
socialnetwork websit
socialnetwork site can be search like tradit websit although a lot of the
inform avail on socialnetwork site can be found us tradit search
engin there is an evergrow number of resourc that an examin can us to search
these site for exampl each social network ha a search engin for locat member by
name phone number or email address in gener user can search for member without
log in eg myspac default set allow nonmemb to view member
inform and search can be done anonym
if howev a member profil is privat the research will onli see a snapshot of the
member inform for exampl to view a member profil in facebook or linkedin
the research must connect with the other member if an examin want to view a privat
profil he should creat a compel attract and simpl profil for himself and ask to be
invit into the subject network it is not necessari to creat a fals ident and examin
should not us someon els ident but if the examin is interest enough good
look enough or just savvi enough he will probabl be accept into the network
an entir separ categori of search engin ha been design specif to find
inform within social network these search engin us social network to order
priorit or refin search result some popular socialnetwork search engin includ
spokeo yonam technorati icerocket and friendfe thi section discuss these search
engin along with how to search photoshar site
spokeo
spokeo is a socialnetwork aggreg site that gather inform about peopl by
search for their email address on variou socialnetwork site essenti it is
design to locat and track onlin profil within social network thi site allow user to
search by a person name email address or phone number thi can be help if an
examin know about the subject profil in facebook and myspac but is not awar that
the subject is also a member of hi5 and xanga
access inform onlin investig
3510 2011 fraud examin manual
for investig and research thi is an incred tool that gather subject inform
in a wai that other research tool cannot on of spokeo best featur is it abil to track
activ on member profil if the subject post someth on on of the popular socialnetwork
site such as myspac or facebook the post will appear in spokeo search
result and that person will be track for futur updat
spokeo allow a user to search and track a limit number of email address or name for
free but requir a fee after a certain number of search
yonam
yonam is similar to spokeo but it search mani social network that spokeo doe not
yonam is a free servic but the result can be random spokeo ha a better return rate on
it search it is import to note that if an examin search by a user email address
yonam will send the user an email sai that someon wa look up yo name in
yonam although the email doe not contain the searcher inform it could be
enough to alert a suspici fraudster
technorati
technorati is a search engin for websit like youtub myspac blog xanga and so
forth the engin search blog with a varieti of filter a user can search by enter a
topic into the technorati search field or he can us some of the site search categori
includ photo video and blog us technorati advanc search option the
examin can narrow down a search to a particular blog and search by tag to site that ar
link to a particular blog although get start with technorati can be difficult it can
be a veri us resourc
icerocket
icerocket offer a uniqu arrai of tool back by mark cuban owner of the dalla
maverick icerocket wa design to track what peopl were search for it focus
primarili on blog us metatag to categor and index the content contain within
blog as a result a user can search by keyword which captur ani relev match found
on a websit and priorit match mark as tag search
like technorati icerocket also allow user to narrow down blog search with an advanc
search link or by us search oper such as titl author and tag for exampl a search
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3511
for titlepubl record would find page with public record in their titl similarli a
search for titlepubl record authorjohn doe will return blog post by john doe that
have public record in their titl
in addit to search blog icerocket search through imag directori twitter and
myspac even though an examin can search myspac directli the icerocket search
engin tool for myspac present a more tradit search environ
friendfe
friendfe is a realtim feed aggreg that consolid the updat from socialnetwork
site socialbookmark site blog and other type of rss feed friendfe
facilit track user socialmedia activ eg post on blog or twitter across a
broad rang of differ social network accord to friendfe websit it goal is to
make internet content more applic and help by us socialnetwork site as tool for
discov intrigu inform
a guid to success internet search
run search
the internet is not so much a servic as a tool to tap it rich inform sourc you have
to learn how to construct proper queri that is you have to learn how to ask for what you
want search engin all have their limit but the most seriou impedi to locat
good inform is the user lack of search skill
most search us keyword for instanc when hunt for the latest statist on check
fraud the logic keyword ar check and fraud howev if you type in those word the
search engin would return numer site that have noth to do with check fraud by
place both word insid quotat mark ie check fraud you will get better result
still the list of hit will be in the thousand so you might want to further narrow the search
us the techniqu below
boolean oper
the best wai to util a search engin is to us two or possibl three keyword that best
describ the topic if the word succe on anoth as in the case of check fraud then it mai
be benefici to us boolean oper to aid on search boolean oper ar symbol that
access inform onlin investig
3512 2011 fraud examin manual
help the search engin to better understand exactli what it is search for put the
symbol between checkfraud for exampl will indic to the search engin that it is to
search onli for page that have the word fraud immedi follow check if you insert the
word and so that the search read check and fraud the search engin will understand to search
for websit and page that contain both the word check and fraud but not necessarili right
next to each other
some of the more common boolean oper symbol or connector ar shown below
reserv word and nois word
the connector word and or not and near ar consid reserv word and ar therefor
ignor when thei appear in a search phrase similarli nois word ar common word with
veri littl mean eg in of and the such word ar also ignor unless the user put the
entir phrase in parenthes see the specif search oper section below for more
direct on reserv and nois word
the follow ar some of the common nois word ignor by most search engin and
and or ar mark with an asterisk becaus thei ar both nois word and reserv word
boolean oper
design word that must appear right next to each other
design word that should not appear on a web page
design a list of word that must appear togeth in an exact order
such as holi cow
and design two or more word that must both appear on a page but not
necessarili next to each other
or design two connect word on of which must appear on a page
not design word that should not appear on the page much like the minu
sign
near design word that should appear within a certain number of word of
each other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3513
the and of
hi my there
when is ar
so or it
specif search oper
onlin research reli on search engin to search web page for specifi keyword and
return a list of the web page contain the keyword although these engin return
result instantli and with littl effort the simplic of these tool often remov the benefit
of more complex search techniqu to determin a search engin or databas abil
consult the servic faq or search help page
thi section examin the advanc search featur of the googl and bing becaus thei
provid some of the most robust and us tool for expert conduct search
googl oper
in addit to the basic boolean oper discuss abov sever oper can smarten
up a googl search and return the right link faster
oper search result exampl
search for synonym of a given
word
automobil glossari will
find page with automobil as well
as word like dictionari glossari
encyclopedia etc
defin return definit from websit for
the particular term
definefraud will show
definit for fraud
site return search result from onli on
websit
sitevirtuallibrariancom fraud
will find all fraudrel page on
virtuallibrariancom
filetyp search for item with a particular
filetyp
filetypedoc will restrict the
result to ms word file match
specifi search term
link return page that link to a particular
websit
linkvirtuallibrariancom will
return page with link to
virtuallibrariancom
access inform onlin investig
3514 2011 fraud examin manual
allintitl restrict result to those contain
all the search term specifi in the
titl
allintitl mortgag fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word mortgag and
fraud in the titl
allintext return document contain all the
search term in their text
allintext fraud skim
materi will return onli page
in which the word fraud skim
and materi appear in the text of
the page
treat as a placehold for on or
more word
fraud alert tell googl to
find page contain a phrase that
start with fraud follow by on or
more word follow by alert
in addit googl oper can be combin for exampl the queri sitehpcom
filetypepdf 5010 laserjet printer faq will search for an adob acrobat pdf file of
frequent ask question regard the 5010 laserjet printer locat on the hewlett
packard websit
there ar numer other oper and search techniqu that work with each googl
search servic a good resourc for lessknown googl oper and search tip is
wwwgoogleguidecom
bing oper
although bing and googl share some of the same search resourc bing ha search
oper that ar uniqu to it search engin
oper search result exampl
contain search for page where there a
hyperlink to a file with the extens
swim dolphin
containswmv will find wmv
clip of dolphin swim
inanchor return page that contain the specifi
term in the link anchor of web page
inanchor us fraud site
search for page that ar call
us fraud site by other
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3515
inbodi restrict result to those contain all
the search term specifi in the bodi
inbodi secur fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word secur and
fraud in their bodi
intitl restrict result to those contain all
the search term specifi in the titl
intitl secur fraud will
return onli document that
contain the word secur and
fraud in their titl
ip find websit host by a specif ip
address
ip198463422 find
websit host by the specifi
ip address
prefer add emphasi to a search term to help
focu the search result
fraud preferponzi specifi the
type of fraud that the user want
to find
onlin public databas search
onlin public record databas ar anoth sourc of inform that can be access
onlin these databas ar numer and vari thei compil record from the feder
state and countyloc level and most can be readili access from a home comput after
subscrib to their servic the cost associ with these databas can be equal vari
there ar sever access option avail and an examin should be prepar to us ani
and all separ or in combin keep in mind howev that it mai be necessari to
spend time examin the actual document to get the whole pictur
a public record databas will tell the research whether a particular record or some of the
inform contain in that record exist howev note that such databas will not
provid a copi of the actual document for exampl an examin can conduct a properti
record search to find out that john doe own the properti at 121 main street in peoria il
howev if he need a copi of the actual deed he will have to retriev it from the counti
clerk offic
addition there is a wealth of inform now avail on the internet as a caveat
howev rememb that onlin record compani have to get their inform from
somewher often it come directli from the counti but if the inform in the counti
record wa enter into the databas incorrectli then the report you will receiv from the
access inform onlin investig
3516 2011 fraud examin manual
databas compani will also be incorrect therefor it is import to rememb that
access inform onlin is never a full substitut for an examin of the public
record itself
rememb howev that if an examin access certain type of inform through an
onlin servic he mai be subject to the fair credit report act fcra as discuss in
the previou chapter again the fcra prohibit consum report agenc from releas
person inform about an individu eg inform about the consum charact
gener reput person characterist or mode of live to third parti without
author and it limit disclosur of consum credit inform such as a subject
credit histori to third parti thu befor access such inform you should alwai
contact your attornei
limit of onlin public databas search
there ar howev limit to onlin public databas search includ
onlin coverag vari wide from state to state the fraud examin should determin
whether specif inform is avail for each investig
search ar limit in the area thei cover fortun for the crook most of hi public
record evid is gener file at the counti level if he is smart enough to know
how to conduct transact outsid hi normal local then he can be tough to track
without us multijurisdict onlin sourc make sure you ar look in the right
counti is import you can be off by on counti and miss pertin land hold
divorc record lien and so forth
all onlin public record ar brief abstract of the origin public record
the sourc of the inform compil in a vendor databas must be reliabl
inform must be check to determin if it is accur and current
the record or public that have been compil in an electron format mai not go
back veri far
also internet search engin ar notori errat in their retriev
onlin search through databas vendor
ani public record search should begin with a commerci databas vendor there ar
sever compani that provid vari level of public record inform to subscrib a
descript of some of these compani and the record thei can provid ar discuss later
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3517
these compani provid access to a wide rang of inform that is store in a central
databas allow a subscrib to access it from hi comput some inform is actual
retriev in hard copi and mail or fax to the subscrib even though the request wa
made through the onlin servic
some compani requir a yearli or monthli subscript fee in addit to the fee for each
search other oper on a pai as you go principl that allow you to pai onli for the
search you conduct therefor it is import to shop around to get the best deal for your
level of usag
for some practition it mai be more econom to enlist the aid of servic compani
inform broker and profession onlin investig these compani will conduct
research for examin typic us onlin servic and manual document retriev from
local sourc although the cost of these servic is higher than do it yourself it mai be
the best choic for occasion record search
us an onlin databas to find inform
in the past investig hot on the heel of an assethid or suspect were hamstrung by the
avail investig resourc in attempt to uncov unreport incom the
investig wa forc to travel to the courthous for the counti in which the suspect
conduct busi request the counti file avail and take a number these trek to
the middleofnowher were rare costeffect and were often fruitless in the search for
pertin inform
thi ha all chang howev and now mayb the flatfoot feet wont be so flat thank to
the advent of onlin investig servic such as lexisnexi inquiri to the farflung
reach of the unit state can be conduct from a person comput these servic
have packag a varieti of invalu investig sourc at veri reason price
access to these servic is accomplish in either on of two wai some servic allow
user to log in through an internet site other provid access to their databas through a
softwar program and a modem each user ha a user id and password to gain access
the follow is a descript of how onlin search can be us to conduct background
check and locat peopl asset and legal record
access inform onlin investig
3518 2011 fraud examin manual
locat peopl us onlin record
the first step to maxim search result is to discov a past address of the suspect search
activ should begin from that point second the user should know the most power and
us type of search which ar identifi below third it is import to keep in mind
the cost effect of the search activ and avoid order onlin search that yield
unnecessari or impract inform
the search methodolog us by most onlin servic is known as textstr match
which mean that all inform enter in the data inquiri field will seek an exact match in
the databas typic you mai us truncat techniqu partial or abbrevi entri
such as the first initi of the first name onli with first name and busi name
some common type of search us to locat peopl us onlin record ar discuss
below
credit header search
credit header search ar among the most power locat tool these search return
inform from credit report on individu thei ar a valuabl sourc becaus almost all
peopl have been involv in some credit activ either under their true name or an
assum or known as name it is appropri to keep in mind that for common name it
mai be necessari to us the social secur number or date of birth to differenti the
subject from other peopl with the same name the credit bureau header offer two search
mechan first the examin can discov a current address an address histori and
social secur number associ with the target by us a past address up to seven year
old second onc the social secur number is in hand the header can be search for
match becaus the social secur number is a nation ident number although social
secur number ar protect from disclosur by the privaci act it ha becom practic
imposs for individu to avoid disclos them on public record
current occupantnew address search
a current occupantnew address search mai be us to identifi the occup of an address
to confirm occup to uncov a forward address or to develop a list of neighbor
who mai know the suspect current whereabout
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3519
last name search
last name search can be us if the past address is unknown thi search produc better
result if the name is not common howev if the last name is common differenti
inform should be includ in the search it should also be note that some search will
return the ident of neighbor who can be contact for addit inform about the
suspect
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment
bankruptci file tax lien and court judgment have emerg in recent year as locat
tool becaus such record contain valid social secur number the dramat increas in
individu bankruptci claim ha also particularli prompt their emerg as locat tool
depart of motor vehicl record search
depart of motor vehicl dmv record us to be good locat tool but recent
restrict on them have reduc the effect of such search befor congress
amend the driver privaci protect act in 1999 driver could opt out and ask that
their person inform eg social secur number photograph etc not be releas
under the amend law howev driver ar no longer requir to opt out instead the
amend law impos an opt in system requir that driver provid express
author for the releas of inform moreov individu state mai not updat
their record frequent enough to provid the examin with us inform search
such as driver identif can be us on a spot basi howev
voter registr record search
in a few state voter registr record ar avail but as with dmv record thei mai
not be updat frequent howev to the extent that date of birth inform is avail
such record can augment other search also note ani legal restrict attach to the us
of voter inform
busi file search
fictiti busi namedo busi as file includ owner name busi name
file date and file number as note in the previou chapter in most state individu and
corpor ar requir to file a do busi as or an assum or fictiti busi
name statement with the counti where thei conduct their busi the record of sole
proprietorship busi howev mai not be avail in the corporatelimit
partnership record that ar found at the state level nevertheless the fraud examin mai be
access inform onlin investig
3520 2011 fraud examin manual
abl to locat these record by conduct an onlin search by search an individu or
busi name the examin can gather inform from fictiti busi name file
includ owner name busi name file date and file number some counti provid
busi address inform and in these counti the examin can also conduct search
us the busi address
feder tax id search
busi can us the ir websit wwwirsgov to enter both the name and feder tax
id of a vendor or other busi to confirm that the two match
obtain financi inform and locat asset
discov whether asset exist where thei exist and whether thei ar recover can be
accomplish with a search of feder state local and proprietari record these record
can be further divid into those identifi hard asset and those regard the potenti
for asset credit capac or credit worthi
search for hard asset
the ownership of real properti mai be discover through the us of properti
search to the extent that thei ar avail at the local or counti level within individu
state
the ownership of vehicl can be infer through the us of the dmv vehicl name
index to the extent that the record within the control state agenc reflect vehicl
regist to a specif person or organ at a particular address convers the
ownership of a particular vehicl mai be infer from the dmv vehicl registr
search
an assum busi name search mai be help in identifi a sole proprietorship
busi in which attach asset ar avail
the uniform commerci code ucc is extraordinari in that it can be us in a wide
varieti of busi situat a search of ucc file can help identifi person
properti that an individu or busi ha financ ucc file can also disclos when
and where a debtor obtain person loan the type of properti that he pledg to the
lender to secur the loan and the debtor current address
the ownership of an aircraft can be determin by search the aircraft ownership
databas by busi name person name or wing number
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3521
search for asset potenti
the question of whether it is realist possibl to recov known asset mai be
partial answer by search bankruptci file tax lien and tax judgment
again the versatil of a ucc file search is seen through the identif of asset
that mai have been pledg in whole or in part to secur a loan for exampl in a case
where a bank lender ha secur a loan through some type of chattel as collater and ha
sought to perfect it lien on the chattel through a ucc file at the state level it can be
fairli assum that the debtor ha a bank account with the secur parti thu a bank
account asset mai be identifi as a recover asset
consum credit report and busi credit report search mai help develop a clearer
pictur of the target potenti for asset recoveri in term of credit capac and
creditworthi although access to consum credit report is restrict by the fair
credit report act fcra busi credit report ar not govern by the fcra
busi credit report often contain inform that is us in verifi inform
understand busi relationship and develop basic financi inform about
an organ
find legal record
the search avail to find these record can be group in three broad categori on
site court search index or broad coverag search and public file
onsit court search
onsit court record search ar perform by individu who travel to counti and municip
courthous to search for record that match the search criteria that have been provid to
them
these search ar direct by court by counti or as is the case with feder record by the
district court for the particular area accordingli the examin must carefulli consid the
potenti locat of court record such consider should take into account the
locat of the suspect current and past resid nce and hi current and past busi or
employ the result will includ ani litig in which the individu wa involv
includ civil action crimin action divorc and judgment howev it will not return
inform concern litig that ha been seal by the court or inform
concern juvenil offend
access inform onlin investig
3522 2011 fraud examin manual
the coverag for these search vari accord to the servic us addition each court
ha vari rule regard how the search is conduct the time when search mai be
conduct the repositori locat and the search method if the subscrib is interest in
a particular type of record such as a divorc record it mai be necessari to call the
compani customersupport unit to adjust the search queri type of record avail
includ
feder civil court record includ bankruptci record ar avail for all type of
civil litig conduct in feder court
feder crimin court record ar avail for feloni charg
state civil court record ar avail base on a divis of upper and lower court
record the divis is a function of the differ within each state concern the
amount in controversi
state crimin court record can be obtain on a ten or sevenyear search basi for
feloni misdemeanor or a combin of both
indexbroad coverag search
these search ar us when an examin need a search strategi broader than the by
courtbi counti method us with onsit court record search or that make us of an
index of basic inform in court record
search of defend suit ar avail in all state but provid coverag limit to
specif counti and court when search a specif state databas the examin
should review the help menu to determin the scope of the search abil
search of statewid crimin convict ar avail in some jurisdict review the
help menu for special releas requir the number of year avail if the record is
for convict onli and if the search encompass both feloni and misdemeanor
search of marriagedivorc index ar avail in some state
public file
in the unit state public compani nonprofit and some privat compani must
submit financi file and form to differ govern entiti public compani for
exampl submit variou file to the secur and exchang commiss eg the annual
report and the 10k these public file provid a wealth of inform about the file
compani includ the natur of it busi it histori it organiz structur it
auditor it balanc sheet and it incom statement similarli public file ar avail for
nonprofit which must file the form 990 to the intern revenu servic
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3523
public file ar avail for free as well as through feebas servic
conduct background check
thi type of search activ gener involv two broad area discov what the public
record reveal with respect to individu and busi with whom the subscrib mai wish
to do busi and discov inform about prospect employe in gener onlin
public record databas ar gener the best sourc of background inform
but befor conduct ani background check consult with legal counsel
due dilig
as busi organ seek to identifi vendor client or strateg partner or seek to
loan or collect monei thei frequent conduct public record inquiri focus on other
busi or individu who ar princip of busi organ thi type of public
record inquiri involv such issu as verif of applic inform debt burden
advers financi inform credit capac or worthi busi relationship the socal
famili tree litig histori and crimin background us search includ the
follow
corporatelimit partnership search ar avail in all state to verifi inform
identifi princip and develop other busi relationship
bankruptci file tax lien and judgment search respond to issu of advers
financi inform and credit capacityworthi
ucc file answer question of debt burden thi search will be help to identifi
hidden ownership or partnership interest and it will be help to locat address
inform on debtor
state and feder civil court record provid answer to question concern litig
histori past busi relationship and the potenti for debt burden either as a function
of an advers judgment or as a function of financ expens litig
state and feder crimin court record identifi the possibl of a crimin background
the us of consum credit report and busi credit report help resolv question
concern credit capac and creditworthi in addit the busi report is us
in verifi inform understand busi relationship and develop basic
financi inform about an organ
occup safeti and health administr osha search mai be us in
develop advers inform or verifi inform given by a prospect vendor
client or strateg partner
access inform onlin investig
3524 2011 fraud examin manual
aircraft mechan airmen medic licens dea control substanc and other
licens mai serv to verifi that basic profession and occup standard ar met by
a prospect vendor client or strateg partner
employ background
onlin record inquiri regard employ histori have increas significantli over the
past few year corpor downsiz ha disaffect an increas number of worker to the
point that it is easier for them to ration employe defalc fraud or embezzl
the same econom phenomenon of downsiz combin with busi pressur to
increas product and the friction of modern life have appar produc an increas
in workplac violenc liabil for employ and busi have expand through
neglig standard and the respondeat superior doctrin for such tortiou conduct as vehicl
oper assault batteri fals imprison sexual harass and discrimin
final the potenti to be held liabl for neg refer ha deter past employ
from respond to prospect employ inquiri about an employe therefor
prospect employ must increasingli reli on public inform
some of the search us in develop background inform ar list below where
permit by law
credit header search ar us in confirm address and social secur number
inform
state and feder crimin court record and statewid crimin convict mai be us
to uncov past crimin problem presag similar difficulti inde crimin
background check mai be mandat by law for exampl the violent crime control
and law enforc act of 1994 make it a feloni for insur compani as well as
person emploi anyon to conduct the busi of insur to hire ani individu
convict of a feloni involv dishonesti or a breach of trust
aircraft mechan airmen medic licens and other licens ar avail to ensur
that basic job requir ar met in the appropri circumst
consum credit report mai be obtain for purpos of employe select retent
and promot
public file such as bankruptci file tax lien and judgment mai be obtain to
identifi advers financi matter that can serv as potenti motiv for fraud
defam and embezzl
where a prospect or current employe drive a person own vehicl or an
employerown vehicl in further the interest of the employ such activ mai
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3525
expos the employ to liabil for damag therefor dmv drive record must be
check
basic inform concern job qualif can be verifi through educ
verif and employ verif search note these ar verif tool
onli thei ar not definit in term of discov past or current employ
although worker compens search mai return the subject name social secur
number date of birth employ name date and type of accid and natur and extent
of inquiri the american with disabl act mai limit usag of the search result the
act purport to prevent prospect employ from us worker compens
record in deni employ to otherwis qualifi applic
public record databas vendor
list below is inform about some of the larger commerci databas vendor you can
shop variou servic to find the on that meet your need in the most costeffect
manner and the on that fit your current case in some instanc it mai be necessari to us
more than on servic to get an accur and complet profil these compani get their
inform from variou sourc and on variou updat schedul so a search in ani on
databas mai return differ result than a search done elsewher
asset locat and busi background check by knowx
knowx is a product of the lexisnexi risk and inform analyt group and it claim
to be the most comprehens sourc of public inform on the web it offer easili
navig public record search in variou categori among them asset search advers
file properti valuat and peopl and businessloc tool on can also verifi
licens conduct background check and look up a compani histori knowx is an
altogeth userfriendli sourc of inform
most importantli user can run knowx busi background check to uncov
bankruptci judgment lawsuit lien and ucc file against a busi with on search
in addit knowx asset locat servic enabl user to locat asset such as real estat
aircraft and watercraft with on search thi softwar can also be us to verifi ownership
and assess properti valu
knowx can be found at wwwknowxcom
access inform onlin investig
3526 2011 fraud examin manual
us datalink
us datalink is an employe background check servic although it cannot retriev
inform as quickli as some other vendor us datalink is the onli compani that reli
entir on manual search for it inform us datalink exclus send it research
to the counti courthous to look up the request inform as oppos to the electron
and possibl faulti inform that other onlin investig databas us therefor if a
fraud examin ha the time to wait for hi inquiri us datalink might be the most reliabl
option us datalink also ha media resourc and it can be found at wwwusdatalinkcom
infousa
infousa compil busi and consum data and it offer a wide rang of data process
servic infousa user have access to inform on 14 million us busi 13 million
execut and profession and 210 million us consum search of infousa
databas can produc result for a broad rang of inform includ sale volum
corpor linkag contact name and titl compani histori credit rate and ani
headlin involv the busi furthermor the versatil of the search is on of
infousa better featur search can be perform accord to busi size locat
length of time in oper gender or race of owner and industri infousa is locat at
wwwinfousacom
veri
veri is a social secur valid servic it special in provid verif of social
secur number possibl mail drop address date of birth and death record veri
allow an investig to match a social secur number to a name howev thi servic is
costli cost per search begin at 115 but the actual cost depend on the type of search and
number of search be conduct but veri accur veri can be access at wwwverisssncom
csc diligenz
csc diligenz is a webbas due dilig servic it is a great databas for retriev
inform about busi with it weekli databas updat csc diligenz strength li
in the reliabl of it public record inform csc diligenz can produc a businesss
financi statement record pertain to corpor statu busi credit and licens
inform ucc file bankruptci judgment and corpor goodstand search ar
just a few of their servic diligenz is locat at wwwdiligenzcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3527
dialog
dialog is a proquest compani and it offer user with access to more than 1200 databas
it contain nearli 2 billion record includ refer and abstract of publish literatur
statist tabl the full text of select articl and directori busi and financi data
dialog can be access at wwwdialogcom
db
db is a busi inform servic provid the varieti of inform avail
through db is impress it is probabl on of the most comprehens and divers
sourc avail with fact on more than 130 million compani in more than 190
countri db is renown for product like busi inform report and industri norm
and kei busi ratio both excel tool it is locat at wwwdnbcom
hoover
hoover a db compani is a onestop refer for busi inform hoover
provid comprehens uptod busi inform for profession who need
intellig on us and global compani industri and profession hoover databas
consist of 65 million compani with indepth coverag of 40000 public and nonpubl
us and intern compani subscrib also have access to inform on more than
15 million small privat busi across the unit state hoover is locat at
wwwhooverscom
lexisnexi
lexisnexi is a legal and busi inform databas that provid it subscrib with
daili newspap for either a flat fee or a perus fee lexisnexi maintain a cavern
databas of us and intern media sourc includ daili newspap magazin and
televis transcript in addit lexisnexi offer a servic in which the user can request
immedi inform on difficulttofind topic lexisnexi will research the topic and give
the user the inform as quickli as possibl for more inform visit wwwlexiscom
in on form or anoth lexisnexi ha been in the inform busi for nearli 30 year
it is now on of the lead electron data firm in the world user can obtain access to
public record media public and court case and record for more inform visit
wwwlexisnexiscom
dc inform system
found in 1967 dc inform system is an establish sourc for investig
inform dc provid onlin investig solut for busi and govern
from financi institut to law enforc or investig their onlin databas
product help organ prevent and detect fraud verifi applic inform screen
potenti employe and locat debtor miss person heir or asset dc provid
inform compris public record and publicli avail inform it amerifind
onlin resourc system is separ into three area make search simpl
access inform onlin investig
3528 2011 fraud examin manual
primedata provid bank and financ inform
quickfind serv gener investig secur and fraud prevent and detect
fraudtrac serv insur fraud investig and claim
ga public record servic
ga public record servic special in onsit countylevel crimin record inform
it can usual provid a report within 24 72 hour ha access to record in thousand of
counti coast to coast ga public record servic provid search servic for
employ screen corpor due dilig fraud investig privat investig
and tenant screen for more inform visit wwwgaprscom
experian
experian is on of the major provid of consum credit inform and it provid a
varieti of other public inform experian provid servic on consum and busi
credit direct market and real estat inform servic experian maintain credit
inform on more than 210 million us consum and more than 18 million us
busi it nation consum databas is updat 65 time per year with inform
on more than 110 million us household the nation busi databas is updat
monthli ha fact on more than 18 million compani in all industri and ha more than
200 million crossindustri applic record to help detect inconsist in incom
applic
some of the servic provid by experian includ
busi snapshot report that summar credit histori includ payment pattern
and legal file of small busi or contractor
precis id with knowledg iq consist of score analyt and knowledgebas
authent and it provid realtim and onlin valid and verif and fraud
assess of name address social secur number date of birth driver licens
and telephon number
transunion
transunion is on of the big three credit report compani and it offer credit inform
and servic for consum and busi alik more specif transunion is a global
provid of busi intellig servic with technologybas intellig product
includ innov creditdecis and fraudprevent tool advanc targetmarket
product risk and profit model and portfolio manag
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3529
transunion also offer a fraud victim assist depart fvad sinc it incept
the fvad ha help million of consum resolv or prevent problem with credit fraud
the fvad compris three distinct team
the consum protect team cpt
the fraud investig respons and support team first
the fraud assist and support team fast
search system
search system is a public record directori with more than 55000 searchabl public record
databas it search capabl includ busi inform corpor file properti
record deed mortgag crimin and civil court file inmat offend birth death
marriag unclaim properti and profession licens on of it mani directori the
crimin record and offend search ha access to more than 300 million crimin record
and it search system premium offer instant access to more than 100 million bankruptci
judgment and tax lien for more inform visit httppublicrecordssearchsystemsnet
westlaw
westlaw is an onlin legal research servic and it provid access to a comprehens and
current collect of public record it peopl finder databas directori contain
inform on individu compil from numer public sourc includ telephon
directori publish mail list chang of address file real estat file util record
public demograph and consum household data voter registr record driver licens
data feder and state death record and credit header data for more inform visit
wwwwestlawcom
newspapermedia databas
newspap period and journal can be excel sourc of inform in a fraud
investig particularli when search for background inform on an individu or a
busi for exampl in a texa case a person accus of insid trade wa clear us
materi from an media databas search defens attornei gather more than 300
publish comment about the compani financi prospect and show that someon
follow the advic distribut freeli in the press would have made more monei than
the accused2
2 bernstein paul comput for lawyer a complet guid to law offic autom 2nd ed chicago atla press
1997
access inform onlin investig
3530 2011 fraud examin manual
searchabl databas contain inform from liter hundr of publish sourc
can usual be access for free at most librari there ar also a number of onlin
databas that deal specif with new and media resourc these databas compil a
number of differ media resourc and allow the user to search for a specif topic
return articl or transcript that pertain to the request subject most public allow
user to search their archiv for free the full text of articl is avail but usual for a fee
us on of the follow servic allow user to search mani public at onc
factiva
factiva from dow jone is tailor for busi and financi new search maintain a
catalog of more than 28000 of the world lead new and busi sourc from 159
countri 350 geograph region and in 23 languag factiva allow user to pai onli for
the articl download and doe not requir an annual subscript for more inform
visit wwwfactivacom
highbeam research
highbeam ha an extens archiv contain million of document from lead
public that ar updat daili or go back as far as 20 year searchabl sourc
includ newspap magazin journal transcript book dictionari and almanac for
more inform visit wwwhighbeamcom
proquest
proquest is a data servic that offer access to thousand of onlin journal and magazin
cover a wide arrai of subject proquest vast content pool ar avail to research
through librari of all type and includ the world largest digit newspap archiv
period databas compris the output of thousand of titl and span more than
500 year with mani in fulltext fullimag format an extens dissert collect and
variou other scholarli collect for more inform visit wwwproquestcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3531
other new databas servic
newspap on the net wwwonlinenewspaperscom
newswis wwwnewswisecom
us websit
the follow is a list of websit group by topic that should prove us to fraud
examin and other antifraud profession
search engin
aboutcom httpwwwaboutcom
all the web httpwwwallthewebcom
altavista httpwwwaltavistacom
askcom httpwwwaskcom
bing httpwwwbingcom
complet planet httpaipcompleteplanetcom
copern httpwwwcoperniccom
dmoz httpwwwdmozorg
dogpil httpwwwdogpilecom
exalead httpwwwexaleadcom
excit httpwwwexcitecom
gocom httpgocom
googl httpwwwgooglecom
hotbot httpwwwhotbotcom
icerocket httpwwwicerocketcom
iwon httphomeiwoncom
infomin httpinfomineucredu
internet 101 httpwwwinternet101org
law crawler legal issu httplawcrawlerfindlawcom
legal engin httpwwwlegalenginecom
lococitato httpwwwlococitatocom
looksmart httpwwwlooksmartcom
lyco httpwwwlycoscom
mamma httpwwwmammacom
meta 360 httpwwwmeta360com
metacrawl httpwwwmetacrawlercom
monster crawler httpwwwmonstercrawlercom
my wai httpgotomywaycom
northern light busi httpwwwnlsearchcombresearchphp
search engin watch httpsearchenginewatchcom
search monger httpwwwsearchmongercom
searchcom httpwwwsearchcom
search site httpwwwsearchsitecom
snap httpwwwsnapcom
spokeo httpwwwspokeocom
surf canyon httpwwwsurfcanyoncom
surfwax httpwwwsurfwaxcom
technorati httptechnoraticom
webcrawl httpwwwwebcrawlercom
access inform onlin investig
3532 2011 fraud examin manual
web ferret httpwwwwebferretcom
yahoo httpwwwyahoocom
yonam httpwwwyonamecom
zoominfo httpwwwzoominfocom
socialnetwork site
twitter wwwtwittercom
myspac wwwmyspacecom
facebook wwwfacebookcom
classmat onlin wwwclassmatescom
linkedin wwwlinkedincom
reunion wwwreunioncom
bebo wwwbebocom
orkut wwworkutcom
hi5 httphi5com
xanga wwwxangacom
spoke wwwspokecom
alt wwwaltcom
new sourc
abcnewscom httpabcnew gocom
bnet research center httpfindarticlescom
cb httpwwwcbsnewscom
cnn interact httpwwwcnncom
crayon httpwwwcrayonnet
dialog web httpwwwdialogwebcom
dow jone factiva httpwwwfactivacom
fox httpwwwfoxnewscom
highbeam httpwwwhighbeamcom
investig report and editor httpwwwireorg
lexisnexi httpwwwlexisnexiscom
market watch httpwwwmarketwatchcom
msnbc httpwwwmsnbcmsncom
msn monei httpmoneycentralmsncomhomeasp
nbc httpwwwnbccom
cnet new httpnewscnetcom
newslink httpnewslinkorg
onlin new paper httpwwwonlinenewspaperscom
refdesk httpwwwrefdeskcom
reuter httpwwwreuterscom
salon httpwwwsaloncom
slate httpwwwslatecom
the council of state govern httpwwwcsgorg
wire new httpwwwwiredcom
newspap
annapoli capitalgazett httpwwwhometownannapoliscom
augusta chronicl httpchronicleaugustacom
baltimor sun httpwwwbaltimoresuncom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3533
boston globe httpwwwbostoncomboston globe
casper startribun wy httpwwwtribcom
chattanooga time free press httpwwwtimesfreepresscom
chicago suntim httpwwwsuntimescom
chicago tribun httpwwwchicagotribunecom
christian scienc monitor httpwwwcsmonitorcom
colorado spring gazett httpwwwgazettecom
daili gazett ny httpwwwdailygazettecom
dalla morn new httpwwwdallasnewscom
desert new ut httpwwwdeseretnewscom
detroit free press httpwwwfreepcom
evansvil courier press in httpwwwcourier presscom
florida timesunion httpwwwjacksonvillecom
fort worth startelegram httpwwwstartelegramcom
gainesvil sun httpwwwgainesvillecom
houston chronicl httpwwwchroncom
knoxvil newssentinel httpwwwknoxnewscom
lo angel time httpwwwlatimescom
miami herald httpwwwmiamiheraldcom
missoulian mt httpwwwmissouliancom
new york daili new httpwwwnydailynewscom
new york post httpwwwnypostcom
new york time httpwwwnytimescom
newsdai httpwwwnewsdaycom
norfolk virginianpilot httphamptonroadscompilotonlin
orang counti regist httpwwwocregistercom
orlando sentinel httpwwworlandosentinelcom
raleigh new and observ httpwwwnewsobservercom
roanok time httpwwwroanokecom
salt lake tribun httpwwwsltribcom
san diego uniontribun httpwwwsignonsandiegocom
san francisco chronicleexamin httpwwwsfgatecom
san jose mercuri new httpwwwmercurynewscom
seattl time httpseattletimesnwsourcecom
sioux citi journal httpwwwsiouxcityjournalcom
st paul pioneer press httpwwwtwincitiescom
st petersburg time httpwwwtampabaycom
the new york time on the web httpwwwnytimescom
usa todai httpwwwusatodaycom
wall street journal httponlinewsjcom
washington post httpwwwwashingtonpostcom
univers librari site
brigham young univers httpwwwlibbyuedu
cal state univers long beach httpwwwcsulbedulibrari
carnegi mellon univers httpwwwlibrarycmuedu
claremont colleg httpvoxlibrisclaremontedu
cornel univers httpwwwcornelledulibrari
drexel univers httpwwwlibrarydrexeledu
duke univers httplibrarydukeedu
eastern michigan univers httpwwwemicheduhal
georgetown univers httplibrarygeorgetownedu
access inform onlin investig
3534 2011 fraud examin manual
harvard univers hollisharvard onlin librari inform system httplibharvardedu
indiana univ purdu univ httpwwwulibiupuiedu
iowa state univers httpwwwlibiastateedu
john hopkin univers httpwwwwelchjhuedu
kansa state univers httpwwwlibksuedu
louisiana state univers httpwwwliblsuedu
mansfield univers httplibmansfieldeduindexcfm
miami oh univers httpwwwlibmuohioedu
middl tennesse state univers httplibrarymtsuedu
mit univers httplibrariesmitedu
new mexico state univers httplibnmsuedu
north carolina state univers httpwwwlibncsuedu
princeton univers httplibwebprincetonedu
tulan univers httplibrarytulaneedu
univers of arizona httpwwwarizonaeduhomelibrariesphp
univers of calberkelei httpwwwlibberkeleyedu
univers of callo angel httpwww2libraryuclaedu
univers of calriversid httplibraryucredu
univers of florida httpwebuflibufledu
univers of houston httpinfolibuhedu
univers of idaho httpwwwlibuidahoedu
univers of iowa httpwwwlibuiowaedu
univers of main httpwwwlibraryumaineedu
univers system of maryland and affili institut httpwwwitdumdedu
univers of michigan httpwwwlibumichedu
univers of minnesota httpwww1umnedu
univers of new orlean httpwwwunoedu
univers of north carolina httpwwwilsunceduindexhtml
univers of north carolinacharlott httpwwwunccedu
univers of virginia httpwwwvirginiaedulibrari
vanderbilt univers httpwwwlibraryvanderbiltedu
washington univers httpwwwlibwashingtonedu
state govern list
alabama httpwwwalabamagov
alaska httpwwwstateaku
arizona httpazgov
arkansa httpwwwstatearu
california httpwwwcagov
colorado httpcoloradogov
connecticut httpwwwctgov
delawar httpdelawaregov
florida httpwwwmyfloridacom
georgia httpwwwgeorgiagov
hawaii httpwwwehawaiigov
idaho httpwwwstateidu
illinoi httpwwwillinoisgov
indiana httpwwwstateinu
iowa httpwwwiowagov
kansa httpwwwkansasgov
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3535
kentucki httpkentuckygov
louisiana httpwwwlouisianagov
main httpwwwmainegov
maryland httpwwwmarylandgov
massachusett httpwwwmassgov
michigan httpwwwmichigangov
minnesota httpwwwstatemnu
mississippi httpwwwmsgov
missouri httpwwwmogov
montana httpmtgov
nebraska httpwwwnebraskagov
nevada httpwwwnvgov
new hampshir httpwwwnhgov
new jersei httpwwwstatenju
new mexico httpwwwnewmexicogov
new york httpwwwstatenyu
north carolina httpwwwstatencu
north dakota httpwwwndgov
ohio httpwwwohiogov
oklahoma httpwwwokgov
oregon httpwwworegongov
pennsylvania httpwwwstatepau
rhode island httpwwwrigov
south carolina httpwwwscgov
south dakota httpwwwsdgov
tennesse httpwwwtennesseegov
texa httpwwwstatetxu
utah httpwwwutahgov
vermont httpvermontgov
virginia httpwwwvirginiagov
washington httpwwwstatewau
west virginia httpwwwwvgov
wisconsin httpwwwwisconsingov
wyom httpwyominggov
telephon number and address
aol hometownhom page finder httpsiteaolcomnetfindhometownhtml
att anywho httpwwwanywhocom
5551212 httpwww5551212com
big yellow httpwwwbigyellowcom
bigbook httpwwwbigbookcom
email address revers phone httpwwwiafnet
gte superpag httpwwwsuperpagescom
infospac httpwwwinfospaceinccom
infousa httpwwwinfousacom
inteliuspeopl search httpfindinteliuscom
militari personnel record httpwwwarchivesgov
peoplefinderscom httpwww peoplefinderscom
peopl search httpwww peoplesearchnet
phone number infobel httpwwwinfobelcomteldir
registercom httpwwwregistercom
searchbynumb httpwwwsearchbynumbercom
access inform onlin investig
3536 2011 fraud examin manual
semaphor corp httpwwwsemaphorecorpcom
switchboard httpwwwswitchboardcom
the pi mall httpwwwpimallcom
us web finder httpuswebfindercom
whowher httpwwwwhowherecom
yahoo peopl search httppeopleyahoocom
yellowbook httpwwwyellowbookcom
map
bing map httpwwwbingcommap
googl map httpmapsgooglecom
mapquest httpwwwmapquestcom
map on us httpwwwmapsonuscom
databas public record search
brb public inc httpwwwbrb pubcom
choicepoint httpwwwchoic pointnet
choicepoint autotrackxp httpatxpchoicepointcom
dc inform system httpwwwdniscom
dialog httpwwwdialogcom
diligenz httpwwwdiligenzcom
dun bradstreet httpwwwdnbcom
experian httpwwwexperiancom
fedworld httpwwwfedworldgov
gs public record servic httpwwwgaprsbiz
infousa httpwwwinfousacom
knowx httpwwwknowxcom
lexisnexi httpgloballexisnexiscomu
locat fast httpwwwloc8fastcom
merlin inform system httpwwwmerlindatacom
nation center for health statist vital record httpwwwcdcgovnch
noncommerci organ httpwwwpirorg
publicdata httpwwwpublicdatacom
searchsystemsnet httpwwwsearchsystemsnet
social secur number verif servic httpwwwverisssncom
usdatalink httpwwwusdatalinknet
legal resourc
docusearch investig httpwwwdocusearchcom
administr offic of the us court httpwwwuscourtsgov
attornei search httplawyersfindlawcom
california law httpwwwleginfocagovcalawhtml
courthous new httpwwwcourthousenewscom
cyber secur law httpwwwcybersecuritieslawcom
divorc central httpwwwdivorcecentralcom
feder legisl inform on the internet httpthomaslocgov
findlaw httpwwwfindlawcom
findlaw california code and statut httpcaliforniafindlawcom
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3537
florida statut httpwwwfdlestateflusstatut
law on the web httpwwwlawcom
lawyer httpwwwlawyerscom
lawyer directori httpwwwlawyersfindlawcom
legal ethic httpwwwlegalethicscom
legal info institut of cornel httpwwwlawcornelledu
legal research on the web httpgsulawgsuedumetaindex
legal studi at the univers of massachusett httpwwwumasseduleg
martindal httpwwwmartindalecom
monei launder and terrorist financ httpwwwocctreasgovbsabsamainhtm
nation center for state court httpwwwncsconlineorg
nolo httpwwwnolocom
onlin sunshin florida legislatur httpwwwlegstateflu
practic law compani httpuspracticallawcom
report committe for freedom of the press httpwwwrcfporg
report committe tape convers httpwwwrcfporgtapingindexhtml
suprem court of the us httpwwwsupremecourtgov
us suprem court decis befor 1975 httpsupcourtntisgov
us suprem court internet site httpllrxcomfeaturesscourtsiteshtm
univers of chicago law school httpwww1libuchicagoedu
govern site and crimin justic resourc
bureau of alcohol tobacco firearm and explos atf httphttpwwwatfgov
bureau of industri and secur list of deni person httpwwwbisdocgovdpl
central intellig agenc httpwwwciagov
class action httpwwwclassactioncom
counti sheriff offic by state httpwwwcorrectionscomlink
court websit httpwwwuscourtsgov
courtlink httpwwwlexisnexiscomcourtlinkonlin
databas of govern websit httpwwwusagov
feder citizen inform center httpwwwpueblogsagov
fbi law enforc bulletin httpwwwfbigovpublicationsleblebhtm
us depart of homeland secur httpwwwdhsgov
fedworld httpwwwfedworldgov
feder bureau of investig httpwwwfbigov
feder bureau of prison httpwwwbopgov
feder elect commiss httpwwwfecgov
feder elect commiss inform httpwwwfecgovansanswersshtml
feder inspector gener httpwwwignetgov
feder judici center httpwwwfjcgov
florida depart of correct httpwwwdcstateflu
florida depart of law enforc httpwwwfdlestateflu
florida depart of state httpwwwdosstateflu
florida govern websit httpmyfloridacomportalgovern
govspot httpwwwgovspotcom
intern revenu servic httpwwwirsgov
investig guid to the sourc of httpwwwgaogovspecialpubssoihtm
access inform onlin investig
3538 2011 fraud examin manual
inform gaoosi972
librari of congress httpwwwlocgov
nation address server httpwwwcedarbuffaloeduadservhtml
nation archiv httpwwwarchivesgov
nation center for state court httpwwwncsconlineorg
nation crimin justic refer servic httpwwwncjrsorg
nobli httpwwwnoblisorg
nonprofit gatewai httpwwwusagovbusinessnonprofitshtml
director of defens trade control httppmddtcstategov
polic offic internet directori httpwwwofficercom
public access to electron record pacer httppacerpscuscourtsgov
publish list of recal nation highwai traffic safeti administr httpwwwodinhtsadotgov
royal canadian mount polic httpwwwrcmpgrcgcca
sec enforc regulatori action httpwwwsecgovrulesshtml
sec divis of enforc httpwwwsecgovdivisionsenforceshtml
secur exchang commiss edgar httpwwwsecgovedgarshtml
secur class action clearinghous httpsecuritiesstanfordedu
select servic system httpwwwsssgov
sex offend registri httpwwwfbigovhqcidcacstateshtm
social secur death index search httpssdirootswebcom
ssn valid databas httpusinfosearchcomssnvalidationdatabasehtm
state and feder prison httpwwwbopgov
state and local govern on the internet httpwwwstateloc govnet
state legislatur httpwwwncslorg
superior inform servic httpwwwsuperiorinfocom
texa depart of public safetycrim record httprecordstxdpsstatetxu
usagov httpwwwusagov
us commod futur trade commiss httpwwwcftcgov
us depart of justic httpwwwusdojgov
us depart of justic comput crime and intellectu properti section httpwwwcybercrimegov
us feder inspector gener httpwwwignetgov
us feder commun commiss httpwwwfccgov
us feder deposit insur corpor httpwwwfdicgov
us feder food drug administr httpwwwfdagov
us gener servic administr httpwwwgsagov
us govern print offic httpwwwaccessgpogov
us feder trade commiss httpwwwftcgov
us govern account offic httpwwwgaogov
us patent and trademark offic httpwwwusptogov
us postal servic httpwwwuspsgovncsc
us suprem court httpwwwsupremecourtusgov
unit nation crime justic inform network uncjin httpwwwuncjinorg
vital record databas httpwwwvitalreccom
voter registr httpwwwgloballocatecom
white hous httpwwwwhitehousegov
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3539
other fraudrel websit and websit of interest
acl data analysi softwar httpwwwaclcom
activ most want and crimin investig httpwwwactivemostwantedcom
associ of colleg and univers auditor httpwwwacuaorg
afu and urban legend archiv httpwwwsnopescom
ani birthdai httpwwwanybirthdaycom
associ of certifi fraud examin httpwwwacfecom
better busi bureau web server httpwwwbbborg
broward counti sheriff offic httpwwwsherifforg
cba consum tip for visa and mastercard httpwwwcbaca
compani site locat httpwwwswitchboardcom
comput secur institut httpwwwgocsicom
consum educ fraud httpwwwftcgovbcpconsumershtm
correct connect httpwwwcorrectionscom
cpa directori httpwwwcpadirectorycomindexcfm
check fraud httpwwwckfraudorg
black book onlin httpwwwblackbookonlineinfo
cyber space law center httpwwwfindlawcom01topics10cyberspaceindexhtml
dan moldea httpwwwmoldeacom
endfraudcom httpwwwendfraudcom
financi scandal httpwwwexacukrdaviesarianscand
forens account inform httpwwwforensicaccountinginformationcom
fraud index httpwwwscambustersorg
fuld compani internet intellig index httpwwwfuldcom
high technolog crime investig associ httphtciaorg
hoover httpwwwhooverscom
ident theftprivaci right clearinghous httpwwwprivacyrightsorg
ident theft assumpt and deterr act httpwwwidentitytheftorg
internet antiscam httpwwwnerdworldcomnw1319html
internet center for corrupt research httpwwwicggorg
internet crime complaint center httpwwwic3gov
inventor fraud center nation httpwwwinventorfraudcom
investor protect trust httpwwwinvestor protectionorg
justic refer servic nation httpwwwncjrsorg
loss prevent concept httpwwwlpconlinecom
miss monei httpwwwmissingmoneycom
municip bond scandal httpwwwlissackcom
bbb wise give allianc httpgiveorg
nation consum leagu fraud center httpwwwfraudorg
nation white collar crime center httpwwwnw3corg
network solut websit oper inform httpwwwnetworksolutionscom
nigeria the 419 coalit websit httphomericanetalphae419co
nobl ventur asset search httpwwwnobleventurescom
offshor busi new research httpoffshorebusinesscom
ponzi scheme httpwwwcrimesofpersuasioncom
access inform onlin investig
3540 2011 fraud examin manual
complianc headquart httpwwwcomplianceheadquarterscom
privaci tool httpwwwprivacytoolscom
privaci right clearinghous httpwww privacyrightsorglinkshtm
scambust httpwwwscambustersorg
scam and swindl httpwwwswindlescom
scamwatch httpwwwscamwatchgovau
secur manag onlin httpwwwsecuritymanagementcom
softwar inform industri associ antipiraci divis httpwwwsiianetpiraci
ssa fraud report httpwwwsocialsecuritygov
taxpay against fraud httpwwwtaforg
td bank fraud prevent httpwwwtdbanknorthcombankfraud preventionhtml
urban legend refer page httpwwwsnopescom
us postal inspect servic consum fraud httppostalinspectorsuspisgov
verizon busi httpwwwverizonbusinesscomu
viru bulletin httpwwwvirusbtncomresourc preval
websit hoax fsecur httpwwwfsecurecomvirusinfohoax
websit hoax vmyth httpwwwvmythscom
websit hoax symantec httpwwwsymanteccombusinesssecurityrespons
whistleblow websit phillip and cohen httpwwwphillipsandcohencom
world bank httpwwwworldbankorg
health careinsur fraud
ama select httpwwwamaassnorgamahomeindexshtml
america health insur plan httpwwwahiporg
american bar associationmedicin law committe httpwwwabanetorgtipsmedicinelinkshtmlfraud
american medic associ httpwwwamaassnorg
coalit against insur fraud httpwwwinsurancefraudorg
correct link health care httpwwwcorrectionscomnetworkshealthcar
depart of health and human servic oig httpwwwhhsgov
ed hay index to medic site httpwwwedha yescom
exclud parti list system httpwwweplsgov
health inform technolog us dept of health and human servic httpwwwhhsgovhealthitfederalprojectlisthtml
hipaa httpwwwcmshhsgovhipaageninfo
intern associ of special investig unit httpwwwiasiuorg
medic econom magazin httpwwwmemagcom
medic inform bureau httpwwwmibcom
medicar fraud and abus train onlin httpwwwcmshhsgovcontr actorlearningresourc
nation associ of insur commission httpwwwnaicorg
nation coalit on health care httpwwwnchcorg
nation fraud inform center httpwwwfraudorg
nation health care antifraud associ httpwwwnhcaaorg
nation insur crime bureau httpwwwnicborg
nation practition data bank httpwwwnpdbhipdbcom
offic of inspector gener health and httpoighhsgov
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3541
human servic offic of inspector gener social secur httpwwwssagovoigguidelinehtm
pdr physician desk refer httpwwwpdrnet
properti casualti insur associ of america httpwwwpciaanetsitehomensfmain
research america medic link httpwwwresearchamericaorglink
the hmo page httpwwwhmo pageorg
ultim insur link httpwwwultimateinsurancelinkscom
univers of floridacolleg of medicin complianc httpwwwmedufleduresearchraccompli
insur quot httpwwwinsur quotescom
state insur fraud divis
alabama httpwwwaldoigov
alaska httpwwwcommercestateakusinsur
arizona httpwwwidstateazusfraudhtml
arkansa httpinsurancearkansasgov
california httpwwwinsurancecagov0300fraudindexcfm
colorado httpwwwdorastatecousinsur
connecticut httpwwwctgovcid
delawar httpwwwdelawareinsurancegov
florida httpwwwfldfscomfraud
georgia httpwwwinscommstategau
hawaii httpdccakaku1hawaiigovdccaareasin
idaho httpwwwdoiidahogov
illinoi httpwwwinsuranceillinoisgov
indiana httpwwwingovidoi
iowa httpwwwiidstateiau
kansa httpwwwksinsuranceorg
kentucki httpinsurancekygov
louisiana httpwwwldistatelau
main httpwwwmainegovpfrinsur
maryland httpwwwmdinsurancestatemdu
massachusett httpwwwmassgovdoi
michigan httpwwwmichigangov
minnesota httpwwwstatemnu
mississippi httpwwwmidstatemsu
missouri httpinsurancemogov
montana httpsaomtgovinsuranceindexasp
nebraska httpwwwdoinegov
nevada httpwwwdoistatenvu
new hampshir httpwwwnhgovinsur
new mexico httpwwwstopfraudorg
new jersei httpwwwstatenjusdobiindexhtml
new york httpwwwinsstatenyusnyinshtm
north carolina httpwwwncdoicom
north dakota httpwwwndgovndin
ohio httpwwwohioinsurancegov
oklahoma httpwwwoidstateoku
oregon httpwwwcbsstateorusexternalin
pennsylvania httpwwwinsurancepagov
puerto rico httpwwwocsgobiernopr
access inform onlin investig
3542 2011 fraud examin manual
rhode island httpwwwdbrstateriusdivisionsinsur
south carolina httpwwwdoiscgov
south dakota httpwwwstatesdusdrr2reginsur
tennesse httpwwwstate tnuscommerceinsur
texa httpwwwtdistatetxu
utah httpwwwinsuranceutahgov
vermont httpwwwbishcastatevtu
virginia httpwwwsccvirginiagovdivisionboi
washington httpwwwinsurancewagov
west virginia httpwwwwvinsurancegov
wisconsin httpociwigov
wyom httpinsurancestatewyu
telecom fraudsecur
feder commun commiss httpwwwfccgov
financi industri regulatori author httpwwwfinraorg
help net secur httpwwwnetsecurityorg
intern engin consortium httpwwwiecorg
neural technolog httpwwwneuraltcom
travelassist magazin phone card fraud httpwwwtravelassistcommaga27html
audit
american institut of certifi public account httpwwwaicpaorg
coso httpwwwcosoorg
govern audit standard httpwwwgaogovgovaudybk01htm
institut of intern auditor httpwwwtheiiaorg
intern audit world wide web httpwwwbitwisenetiawww
intern audit and assur standard board httpwwwifacorgiaasb
unc busi manual httpwwwuncedufinancebusman
invest resourc
corpor inform httpwwwcorporateinformationcom
edgar onlin httpfreeedgarcom
kipling httpwwwkiplingercom
thestreetcom httpwwwthestreetcom
wall street network httpwwwwallstreetnetcom
intern site
global search engin
bubl link httpbublacuk
euroseek httpwwweuroseekcom
matilda mega search engin australia httpwwwaussieseekcom
search engin colossu httpwwwsearchenginecolossuscom
search new zealand httpwwwsearchnzconz
voila httpwwwvoilafr
webwombat httpwebwombatcomau
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3543
newspap
bbc new httpnewsbbccouk
even standard httpwwwthisislondoncoukstandard
financi time httpnewsftcomhom
intern herald tribun httpglobalnytimescom
internet public librari httpwwwiplorgdivnew
le mond httpwwwlemondefr
newspap societi httpwwwnewspapersocorguk
onlinenewspaperscom httpwwwonlinenewspaperscom
the daili telegraph httpwwwtelegraphcouk
the guardian unlimit httpwwwguardiancouk
the independ httpwwwindependentcouk
the irish time httpwwwirelandcom
the newspap societi databas httpwwwnsdatabasecoukindexhtml
the scotsman httpwwwscotsmancom
the time onlin httpwwwtimesonlinecouk
time higher educ supplement httpwwwtimeshighereducationcouk
time of india httptimesofindiaindiatimescom
new and inform servic
bbc new httpwwwbbccouk
canadacom httpwwwcanadacomindexhtml
euronew httpwwweuronewsnet
futur event new servic httpwwwfenscom
global investig journal httpwwwglobalinvestigativejournalismorg
hansard hous of common debat httpwwwpublicationsparliamentukpacmcmhansrdhtm
itn onlin httpitncouk
microsoft network new httpukmsncom
newsnow httpwwwnewsnowcouk
ninemsn httpninemsncomau
sky new httpnewsskycomskynewshom
the economist httpwwweconomistcom
the press associ httpwwwpressassociationcom
uk busi park media new httpwwwukbusi parkcouk
yahoo uk ireland new httpuknewsyahoocom
librari
aberdeen univers httpwwwabdnacuklibrari
british librari httpwwwbluk
cambridg univers httpwwwlibcamacuk
edinburgh univers httpwwwlibedacuklib
exet univers httpwwwasexacuklibrari
glasgow univers httpwwwlibglaacuk
king colleg london httpwwwkclacukiss
oxford univers httpwwwoxacuklibrari
public librari uk httpdspacedialpipexcomtownsquareac940weblibshtml
univers london global httpwwwuclacuk
univers of bath httpwwwbathacuklibrari
univers of east anglia httpwww1ueaacukcmhomeservicesunitsi
access inform onlin investig
3544 2011 fraud examin manual
telephon number
aol intern directori httpsiteaolcomnetfindinternationalhtml
infobel world httpwwwinfobelcomteldir
uk busi directori httpwwwfreeindexcouk
yellow page httpwwwyellcom
map
mapmachin httpplasmanationalgeographiccommapmachin
maporama httpworldmaporamacom
mapquest httpwwwmapquestcom
multimap httpwwwmultimapcommapplacescgi
ordnanc survei httpwwwordnancesurveycoukoswebsit
street map httpwwwstreetmapcouk
the rac httpwwwraccouk
legal resourc
access to law httpwwwaccesstolawcom
centr for commerci law studi univers of london httpwwwcclsedu
consum law center httpwwwhgorgconsumehtml
dunde univers legal websit directori httpwwwdundeeacuklaw
findlaw intern resourc httpwwwfindlawcom12intern
her majesti court servic httpwwwhmcourtsservicegovuk
infolaw gatewai httpwwwinfolawcouk
lawlink httpwwwlawlinki
the law commiss httpwwwlawcomgovuk
the law societi of england and wale httpwwwlawsocietyorgukhomelaw
govern site and law enforc site
australia attornei gener depart httpwwwaggovau
australia ministeri council on consum affair httpwwwconsumergovau
australian court and legisl httpwwwnlagovauozlawhtml
australian depart of foreign affair and trade httpwwwdfatgovau
australian privaci commission httpwwwprivacygovau
citi of london polic httpwwwcityoflondonpoliceuk
depart for busi enterpris regulatori reform httpwwwberrgovuk
govern inform centr httpwwwdirectgovukenindexhtm
inform commission offic httpwwwicogovuk
financi servic author httpwwwfsagovuk
foreign and commonwealth offic httpwwwfcogovuk
hm treasuri httpwwwhmtreasurygovuk
intern centr for crimin law reform and crimin justic polici httpwwwicclrlawubcca
ministri of econom develop httpwwwmedgovtnz
nation crimin intellig servic httpwwwdirectgovukenindexhtm
new zealand ministri of consum affair httpwwwconsumeraffairsgovtnz
new zealand govern onlin httpnewzealandgovtnz
investig access inform onlin
2011 fraud examin manual 3545
new zealand polic link httpwwwpoliceassnorgnzlinkshtm
organ crimenathanson centr httpwwwyorkucanathanson
intellectu properti offic httpwwwipogovuk
royal canadian mount polic httpwwwrcmpgrcgcca
seriou organis crime agenc httpwwwsocagovuk
the european commiss httpeceuropaeu
the home offic httpwwwhomeofficegovuk
the nation archiv httpwwwnationalarchivesgovukdefaulthtm
nite kingdom parliament httpwwwparliamentthestationeryofficecouk
worldwid embassi and consul httpwwwembassyworldcom
special fraudrel websit and websit of interest
associ of british insur httpwwwabioruk
australian institut of criminolog httpwwwaicgovau
depart for work and pension httpwwwdwpgovuk
hm treasuri fraud report httpwwwhmtreasurygovuk
seriou fraud offic httpwwwsfogovuk
the insolv servic httpwwwinsolvencygovuk
audit
uk nation audit offic httpwwwnaoorguk
hm revenu and custom httpwwwhmrcgovuk
insolv procedur and corpor rescu httpwwwinsolvencygovuk
associ of busi recoveri profession httpwwwr3orguk
institut of charter account in england and wale httpwwwicaewcouk
associ of chart certifi account httpwwwaccacouk
chart institut of manag account httpwwwcimaglobalcom
institut of charter account of cotland httpwwwicasorguk
institut of charter account in ireland httpwwwicaii
london intern financi futur and option exchang euronext httpwwweuronextcom
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3601
data analysi and report tool
in todai world comput ar an integr part of fraud examin whether us the
internet in an investig or to analyz data it is essenti that the fraud examin have
access to a comput and it applic comput contain volum of datafinanci
data market data custom data correspond and more and evid of fraud could
be locat within that data unfortun fraudul data often look like legitim data
when view in the raw take a sampl and test it mai not uncov fraudul activ
fortun for fraud examin softwar compani have develop comput program
that enabl user to sift through mound of inform these program identifi current
custom potenti custom and futur trend within their respect industri and can
be configur to identifi break in audit control program and anomali in account
record
in gener these softwar program perform two primari function that fraud examin us
to explor and analyz larg amount of data data mine and data analyt data mine is
the scienc of extract inform from larg data set or databas data analysi refer to
ani statist process us to analyz data and if properli us these process can provid
the ultim system of red flag detect a fraudul situat long befor previous
possibl
data mine
data mine ha root in statist machin learn data manag and databas
pattern recognit and artifici intellig all of these ar concern with certain aspect
of data analysi so thei have much in common yet thei each have a distinct and individu
flavor emphas particular problem and type of solut
data mine ha great potenti to help organ shift their energi and focu to the
most import inform in their databas data mine tool comb databas for
obscur pattern find predict inform that even expert mai not recogn
us data mine technolog compani can evalu a plethora of inform spot
pattern in their market and busi procedur
data analysi and report tool investig
3602 2011 fraud examin manual
although data mine technolog provid kei advantag to market and busi
activ thei can also manipul financi data that wa previous hidden within a
compani databas enabl fraud examin to detect potenti fraud
previous the datamin process requir a comput programm to overse the
process howev thi is no longer necessari the current method us a comput and
comput softwar to assist in the datamin process data mine softwar provid an
easi to us computer process that give the fraud examin the abil to get to data at a
requir level of detail
data mine combin sever differ techniqu essenti to detect fraud includ the
streamlin of raw data into understand pattern
data mine can also help prevent fraud befor it happen for exampl spss busi
intellig a consult group for busi in electron commerc report that some of
their custom us data mine tool and applic to develop antifraud model that
score transact in realtim the score is custom for each busi involv
factor such as local of the order frequenc of the order payment histori and other
factor onc a transact is assign a highrisk score the merchant can decid whether to
accept the transact deni it or investig further
data mine is an effect wai for fraud examin to develop fraud target for further
investig it can mine databas for variou fraud indic such as 1 specif type of
transact 2 pattern within the data or 3 a relationship between two data field that
should not have a relationship eg the same address or telephon number for compani
with differ name target ar then examin to develop an investig strategi
involv site visit and facetofac interview data mine can also be refin base on
interview of target
on of the most sophist us of data mine is known as comput match also call
data match in australia and canada thi approach involv the comparison of two
discreet data set to identifi question overlap
but befor appli data mine process it is import to identifi the sourc from which
the data will be collect data mai be store in ani of the follow locat
mainfram softwar
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3603
laptop instal softwar
secur system softwar
hand held devic issu by the compani employe eg smart phone thumb drive
inventori scan equip etc
compani vehicl gp system
telephon system
time card system
kei card access
often compani us data warehous to manag data for analysi data warehous ar
repositori of a compani electron data design to facilit report and analysi by
store data in a data warehous data user can queri and analyz relev data store in a
singl locat thu a compani with a data warehous can perform variou type of
analyt oper eg identifi red flag transact trend pattern or anomali to
assist manag with it decisionmak respons
although thi section focus on electron data examin should also identifi manual
gener data such as
visitor checkin log
appoint log or individu calendar
custom receipt for cash payment
return merchandis slip
ani manual maintain list
after the examin ha identifi the data sourc he should identifi how the inform is
store thi mean review the databas schema and technic document which
should allow the investig to determin how inform is store on must be readi to
face a number of pitfal when attempt to identifi how inform is store from weak
or nonexist document to limit collabor from the it depart
moreov onc collect it is critic to ensur that the data is complet and appropri for
the analysi to be perform depend on how the data wa collect and process it
could requir some scrub to make it usabl for analysi purpos it mai be necessari to
modifi certain field format eg date time currenc etc to make the inform usabl
data analysi and report tool investig
3604 2011 fraud examin manual
data analysi
onc data ha been extract us data mine techniqu it must be analyz while data
analysi is us mainli as an audit techniqu it can be an import part of the fraud
detect toolkit although it cannot be us as evid that a fraud wa commit or that
a specif individu wa involv it can serv to identifi red flag associ with a wide
varieti of fraud it will therebi provid investig with a trail to follow
us data analysi softwar
advantag of us data analysi softwar
there ar five signific advantag to us data analysi softwar first data analysi
softwar allow the fraud examin to central an investig reli less on other to
gather pertin inform becaus of the amount of inform data mine softwar is
abl to sort through the examin no longer ha to reli on differ sourc for inform
in the past when analyz a compani book for possibl discrep the examin
would have to ask for the assist of sever person within the account depart to
locat the pertin inform now howev the data analysi program will do all the
leg work ensur an abovetheboard investig without mani variabl
second data analysi softwar allow the fraud examin to ensur that an investig is
accur and complet in the past an audit or fraud examin could onli be complet to
the extent that the investig wa abl to sift through inform when look at on
month worth of a compani transact a fraud examin might be forc to research
more than on million transact given the amount of time an auditor gener ha to
conduct a singl examin the depth of a manual audit can be suspect at best by us a
data analysi program the fraud examin can run sever differ analysi pattern in a
matter of hour enabl him to look at greater volum of inform from a number of
differ angl these procedur lead to a more comprehens examin
third data analysi allow the fraud examin to base predict about the probabl of a
fraudul situat on reliabl statist inform by util data mine softwar the
fraud examin can base ani strong suspicion of fraudul activ on hard number
becaus the softwar will compar on month expenditur with the same data for the rest
of the month of the year the fraud examin can point conclus to troubl area with
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3605
hard data to support a fraud examin suspicion a compani is more like to conduct
further investig into the wrongdo
fourth data analysi allow the fraud examin to search entir data file for red flag of
possibl fraud the number of checkpoint a fraud examin can set up us a data analysi
program is stagger by cut down on the paperwork involv in an investig the
fraud examin is abl to execut a number of differ search and analys of the
compani raw data
final data analysi can assist the fraud examin in develop refer file for ongo
fraud detect and investig work by perform audit and examin with data
analysi softwar the fraud examin will begin to recogn trend and set up a list of
preced for individu account situat such as a monthli statement reconcili
in do so the fraud examin can establish a norm with which to compar individu
month or year these preced can also be us by the fraud examin in gener term
and the knowledg can be appli to nearli ani fraud investig
core data analysi softwar function
comput can scan databas inform for sever specif type of inform creat
a redflag system to perform thi most softwar packag us a combin of differ
function these function ar
sort
record select
join file
multifil process
correl analysi
verifi multipl of a number
complianc verif
duplic search
vertic ratio analysi
horizont ratio analysi
date function
graph
data analysi and report tool investig
3606 2011 fraud examin manual
sort
to sort mean to arrang data in a meaning order sort is noth new most report
you read ar sort in some wai with sort data you can quickli pick out what is
import an investig can ask a program to sort inform us differ method
such as alphabet or numer for instanc when search for a suspect
fraudster name out of thousand in a check disburs file the softwar can quickli sort
a list of paye name
sampl custom sale data
date invoic custom amount
5410 m3158001 j789889 1250000
7510 m5958256 q189425 1458000
8910 m8897158 t681897 3888900
72509 m1569897 t888971 8756956
122010 m3158001 p123089 1250000
1810 m2098159 w555258 5634723
data sort by invoic number
date invoic custom amount
72509 m1569897 t888971 8756956
1810 m2098159 w555258 5634723
5410 m3158001 j789889 1250000
122010 m3158001 p123089 1250000
7510 m5958256 q189425 1458000
8910 m8897158 t681897 3888900
data sort by amount
date invoic custom amount
5410 m3158001 j789889 1250000
122010 m3158001 p123089 1250000
7510 m5958256 q189425 1458000
8910 m8897158 t681897 3888900
1810 m2098159 w555258 5634723
72509 m1569897 t8 88971 8756956
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3607
record select
specif record select is accomplish by a request or queri of the comput to find the
occurr of item or record in a field thi type of request will onli return instanc
where the record did occur effect reduc larg amount of inform into concis
list often addit criteria place on the record select or queri will reveal a more
pertin list of inform most data analysi program includ simpl find macro to
help locat specif record
join file
the join function gather togeth the specifi part of differ data file join file
combin field from two sort input file into a third file join is us to match data in a
transact file with record in a master file such as match invoic data in an account
receiv file to a master cluster for exampl you mai need to compar two differ file
to find differ record between file the follow is an exampl of how join two file
can easili provid that inform
file 1
custom account balanc last invoic
jerri cleaner 555221 12500 123010
qualiti garment 555658 9283 111510
beverli tailor 554891 27588 011510
file 2
custom account balanc last invoic
qualiti garment 555658 9283 111510
mccloud fabric 556897 10888 092410
beverli tailor 554891 27588 011510
the join except file
custom account balanc last invoic
mccloud fabric 556897 10888 092409
jerri cleaner 555221 12500 123009
multifil process
multifil process allow the user to relat sever file by defin relationship between
multipl file without the us of the join command a common data relationship would be
to relat an outstand invoic master file to an account receiv file base on the
custom number the relationship can be further extend to includ an invoic detail file
base on invoic number thi relationship will allow you to see which custom have
outstand invoic sort by date
data analysi and report tool investig
3608 2011 fraud examin manual
correl analysi
us thi function investig can determin the relationship between differ variabl
in the raw data investig can learn a lot about comput data file by learn the
relationship between two variabl for exampl we should expect a strong correl
between these independ and depend variabl becaus a direct relationship exist
between the two variabl hotel cost should increas as the number of dai travel
increas the gallon of paint us should increas as the number of hous built increas
you can probabl us mani more of such relationship
independ variabl depend variabl
number of dai travel hotel cost
number of document print ream of paper us
number of hous built paint us
verifi multipl of a number
with thi function an auditor can determin whether regularli disburs check such as
reimburs for mileag ar consist within the regular rate for instanc if the mileag
check do not measur up to the 30centspermil rate a red flag should automat be
rais
complianc verif
thi function determin whether compani polici ar met by employe transact if a
compani limit the amount of it reimburs the softwar can check to see that thi
limit is be observ mani time fraud exam iner can find earli indic of fraud by
test detail data for valu abov or below specifi amount for exampl when
employe ar out of town do thei adher to the compani polici of not spend more
than 30 a dai for meal for starter we can look at the expens report and select those
with meal expens exceed 30 with the in format return from thi simpl queri we
have a start point for suspect fraud even though these varianc ar small 2 and 3
the time taken to research small varianc can be well invest the trail might lead to
someth big after further investig you might learn that the employe did not have
support document to submit becaus a vendor sale repres paid for all the
meal if thi is the case you have two fraud suspect the employe and the employe boss
who approv the report
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3609
duplic search
fraud examin and auditor can perform search on invoic disburs numer to
see if ani invoic have been paid twice by crosscheck the invoic with the vendor
paid duplic bill can be easi to catch
vertic ratio analysi
vertic analysi is a techniqu for analyz the relationship between the item on an
incom statement balanc sheet or statement of cash flow by express compon as
percentag in the vertic analysi of an incom statement net sale is assign 100 percent
on a balanc sheet total asset or total liabil and equiti is assign 100 percent all other
item ar express as a percentag of these two number
by perform thi function you can determin whether paid expenditur over a period ar
reason amount if on area of compani expens seem abnorm larg for a short
amount of time a red flag should immedi be rais
horizont ratio analysi
horizont analysi is a techniqu for analyz the percentag chang in individu financi
statement item from on year to the next the first year in the analysi is consid the
base year and the chang to subsequ year ar comput as a percentag of the base
year
thi function determin the trend of a compani expens inventori and so on
discrep in a compani net profit or a larg shift in amount of inventori would
suggest that someth is not right within the compani
data analysi and report tool investig
3610 2011 fraud examin manual
date function
variou softwar program allow you to check for differ in date such as invoic date
by verifi that check disburs ar consist you can ensur that no suspici
payment were arrang by an employe analysi program will also allow for ag of data
the follow is an exampl of account receiv ag
balanc sheet vertic analysi horizont analysi
year on year two chang c hang
asset
current asset
cash 4500 0 14 1 50 0 0 4 300 0 0 67
acct receiv 1500 0 0 45 2 0 00 0 0 47 5 00 0 0 33
inventori 7500 0 23 1 5 00 0 0 35 7 50 0 0 10 0
fi xed asset net 6000 0 18 6 00 0 0 14 0
total 33 00 0 0 10 0 4 2 50 0 0 100 9 50 0 0 29
acct payabl 9500 0 29 2 1 50 0 0 51 1 2 00 0 0 12 6
longterm debt 6000 0 18 6 00 0 0 14 0
stockhold equiti
common stock 2500 0 8 2 50 0 0 6 0
paidin capit 750 0 0 23 7 50 0 0 18 0
retain earn 7500 0 23 5 00 0 0 12 250 0 0 33
total 33 00 0 0 10 0 4 2 50 0 0 100 9 50 0 0 29
incom statement vertic analysi horizont analysi
year on year two chang chang
net sale 2500 0 0 10 0 4 5 00 0 0 100 2 0 00 0 0 80
cost of good sold 1250 0 0 50 3 0 00 0 0 67 1 7 50 0 0 14 0
gross margin 1250 0 0 50 1 5 00 0 0 33 2 50 0 0 20
oper expens
sell expens 5000 0 20 7 50 0 0 17 2 50 0 0 50
administr expens 6000 0 24 1 0 00 0 0 22 4 00 0 0 67
net incom 1500 0 6 250 0 0 6 400 0 0 26 7
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3611
graph
graph like pictur ar worth a thousand word data analysi program can provid
numer type of graph to give fraud examin a quick glimps of the data for exampl
an inquiri should be made as to why novemb expens ar 10000 more than the
monthli norm
gener and administr expens 2010
in thousand
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
jan feb mar apr mai jun jul aug sep oct nov dec
exampl of data analysi queri
the follow ar typic exampl of data analysi queri that can be perform by data
analysi softwar
gener ledger analysi
select specif journal entri for analysi
creat actual to budget comparison report
analyz and confirm specif ledger account for legitim transact activ
speed account reconcili through special account queri
calcul financi ratio
calcul percentag comparison ratio between account
prepar custom report cash flow profitloss and asset and liabil total report
compar summari by major account in ani order lowhigh highlow
creat report in ani format by account divis depart etc
data analysi and report tool investig
3612 2011 fraud examin manual
account receiv
creat a list of custom limit increas and decreas
ag account receiv in variou format
identifi gap in sequenti form such as invoic
identifi duplic invoic or custom account number
show specifi report on credit taken by custom
report custom summari by invoic product etc
identifi custom activ by ag product etc
compar custom credit limit and current or past balanc
sale analysi
creat a report of all system overrid and sale except
analyz return and allow by store depart or other area
summar trend by custom type product salesperson etc
compar ratio of current sale to outstand receiv or other variabl
gener report on a correl between product demand or suppli and sale price
account payabl
audit paid invoic for manual comparison with actual invoic
summar larg invoic by amount vendor etc
identifi debit to expens account outsid of set default account
reconcil check regist to disburs by vendor invoic
verifi vendor 1099 requir
creat vendor detail and summari analysi report
review recur monthli expens and compar to postedpaid invoic
gener a report on specifi voucher for manual audit or investig
asset manag
gener depreci to cost report
compar book and tax depreci and indic varianc
sort asset valu by asset type or dollar amount
select sampl for asset exist verif
recalcul expens and reserv amount us replac cost
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3613
cash disburs
summar cash disburs by account bank depart vendor etc
verifi audit trail for all disburs by purchas order vendor depart etc
gener vendor cash activ summari for analysi
identifi disburs by depart supervisor approv or amount limit
payrol
summar payrol activ by specif criteria for review
identifi chang to payrol or employe file
compar timecard and payrol rate for possibl discrep
prepar check amount report for amount over a certain limit
check proper supervisori author on payrol disburs
purchas
track schedul receipt date versu actual receipt date in summari and detail
compar vendor perform by summar item deliveri time and amount
isol purchas order type for analysi
analyz late shipment
data analysi checklist
the follow ar some kei issu to address as on conduct a data analysi
ensur data valid and data integr there is alwai a concern when the examin
move data from on venu to anoth on of the concern is data valid is the data
valid and pertin to the investig the second concern is integr is the valid data
that wa select correct a simpl check or au dit of the valid and integr of the data
should be the first step in the data analysi
consid data format and structur thi consider is import when the examin
wish to import or export data with hi comput a date can be format into a
number of differ style such as mmddyyyi the structur of the data will also be
import along with the extens a text file will have a txt extens associ with
it what format is the current data in what format will the comput requir how doe
the examin get the data from here to there if the data format and structur ar
differ
count the zero the examin should perform a preliminari analysi to ensur that the
kei strateg issu he is about to develop is worth the effort befor initi hi fraud
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3614 2011 fraud examin manual
consid the spectrum of distinct level of aggreg at which fraud monitor is
requir determin the lowest level transact level the highest level multiparti
crimin conspiraci and the interven layer that mai be present in your industri
and respect data
begin with the end in mind in hi book the seven habit of highli effect peopl stephen
covei state that begin with the end in mind is good habit when you develop your
fraud intellig action plan be certain to consid the end result on question to ask
mai be will thi algorithmconsult hold up under the intens scrutini of a court of
law
evalu data analysi softwar
in short there ar no silver bullet but ani data analysi softwar should possess the
follow minimum requir
data importexport capabl consid your data format and structur how easili
is data importedexport
data visual how easi is it to move your data from a spreadsheet into a graphic
for analysi and interpret
look for a suit of tool just as there is not on screwdriv for everi job there is not
onli on softwar program for the examin fraud intellig effort therefor he
should choos the most appropri set of tool accord to hi data and then select the
softwar that best fit hi current and futur need
develop a twoprong effort of us the comput to acquir fraud intellig us
commerci softwar current on the market and begin collabor activ with the
academ at your local univers there ar numer softwar packag in variou
stage of develop in academia that ar in need of data to be test thi can prove
to be a winwin for both parti the examin ha the data and the academ have the
prototyp softwar
evalu data mine softwar
becaus no singl softwar tool can satisfi all user purpos examin must consid the
applic with respect to their particular need ken collier an expert in data
wareh busi intellig softwar engin and agil method and hi
colleagu establish a framework for evalu data mining3 the framework divid the
criteria into the follow four area
3 collier k carei b sautter d and marjaniemi c a methodolog for evalu and select data mine
softwar proceed of the 32nd hawaii intern confer on system scienc 1999 ieee
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3615
perform perform refer to the abil to handl a varieti of data sourc
function function refer to the varieti of capabl technic method and
methodolog for data mine includ in the program
usabl usabl refer to the conform of differ level and type of user
without lose us or function
support of ancillari activ ancillari task support permit the user to perform the varieti
of task that support data mine
evalu data mine consult
if howev an entiti intend to us a data mine consult the follow qualiti should
be assess
innov how doe the individu stai current look for profession associ
public and train in your area of investig
creativ can the individu work in a creativ environ such as fraud intellig
can the individu work unsupervis and be expect to produc result sinc fraud is
a move target how ha a past client platfo rm alter from the origin investig
whyhow did that occur what were the result
experi doe the individu have experi in the type of investig you ar
plan doe the individu have experi enc in the type of softwaretool you ar
plan to us doe the individu have experi in the type of data you have
the embodi of thi expertis might take on two three or more peopl you realli
need peopl who understand what it is thei ar look forand what thei can do with it
onc thei find it
type of data mine and analysi softwar
there ar mani type of data mine and data analysi softwar on the market these dai
and everi year new product and new version of old product emerg becaus everi fraud
examin involv data analysi is differ it would be imposs to recommend on
softwar product to serv everi purpos choos a data analysi tool is someth that the
fraud examin must evalu on each individu case a fraud examin should research
applic intens to decid which packag is most appropri for the current
investig
data analysi and report tool investig
3616 2011 fraud examin manual
data mine and knowledg discoveri softwar ar gener classifi into the follow
categori
public domainsharewarefreewar thi type of softwar is avail free or for a
nomin charg through websit ftp site and newsgroup mani sharewar program
such as wink sda allow user a trial period after which thei must pai a fee to
reactiv the softwar freewar howev is avail at no cost or for an option fee
these type of program can be locat through internet search engin and through
softwar download servic such as zdnet
beta softwar beta softwar is prereleas softwar that is still in test mode gener
thi type of softwar is free and user ar ask to review the softwar perform
report malfunct and so on
commerci applic commerci applic ar gener releas product that
usual come with technic support and warranti the most promin commerci
applic which ar discuss below includ
acl
idea
excel
activedata for excel
autoaudit
snap report
datawatch corpor monarch for window
arbutu queri
oversight system
acl
acl is a gener audit softwar program it is on of the prefer softwar tool of
audit and financi profession for data extract data analysi fraud detect and
continu monitor acl provid a combinat ion of data access analysi and integr
report it read and compar enterpris dataflat or relat databas spreadsheet
or report file on pc or server allow the sourc data to remain intact acl emploi a
singl consist client interfac and provid easi immedi access to data
command ar alreadi preprogram for data analysi autom your analysi through
continu monitor and realtim notif
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3617
with acl you can
analyz data independ from your it depart with a user interfac pulldown
menu toolbar and pointandclick command
analyz transact data in file of ani size to ensur 100percent coverag and
confid in your result
produc report
identifi trend pinpoint except and highlight potenti area of concern
locat error and potenti fraud by compar and analyz file accord to end
user criteria
identifi control issu and ensur complianc with standard
for more inform visit wwwaclcom
idea
like acl idea interact data extract and analysi is a gener audit softwar
program more specif it is a pcbase file interrog packag that allow
account auditor and financi manag to view sampl and analyz data from ani
other computer system thi softwar provid some function previous onli
avail to electron data process edp auditor and system specialist idea let the
user make inquiri of data file perform random unit sampl and calcul total and
averag the softwar will perform specif criteria search unusu item queri and
identifi gap or duplic in sequenc addition to differenti normal audit pattern
from suspect on examin can us idea to perform data analysi us benford law
addition idea includ a number of tool to prevent and detect fraud includ
person vet tool the power to author transact independ and the abil to
observ employe thi softwar consid purchas payrol and bank the most
common place for the occurr of fraud
gener function
idea gener function ar discuss below
file file manag and file manipul
idea file manag and manipul applic allow the user to importexport file
from almost ani format includ xml and specif account packag us an easi
industrystandard file manag program gener a singl databas from sever other
data analysi and report tool investig
3618 2011 fraud examin manual
databas us a comparedatabas option to identifi differ in a numer field within
two file for a common kei combin field from two databas into a singl databas to test
for data match across file and us the appenddatabas option concaten two or more
file into a singl databas for audit test
data applic
with idea data applic user can exercis extract or except test to identifi
item that satisfi a specif characterist the equat editor allow you to creat simpl or
veri complex extract and the function ar us to perform more complex
calcul and except test the search function can seek text or numer valu
across select field in multipl databas us standard or advanc search techniqu
idea duplic can identifi item within a databas in which up to eight field of
inform ar the same user can also search for gap in numer sequenc or
alphanumer sequenc with a userdefin mask the chart data option allow data file
to be graph or test result exhibit in bar stack bar pie plot or area chart data
action field allow user to set up relationship across multipl file
sampl
idea offer five sampl method with the abil to calcul sampl size base on
paramet enter and evalu the result of sampl test the sampl method
avail ar systemat random stratifi random monetari unit and classic variabl
sampl
analysi
idea analysi applic allow user to appli benford law stratif
summar ag and pivot tabl to raw data
product
with the product applic there ar sever differ function that can displai the
data save the oper carri out on a databas gener statist for all numer and
date field within a databas and creat a script with the help of objectori
program languag
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3619
fraud test
fraud examin and auditor can us idea data analysi applic to identifi potenti
sign of fraud the follow ar a few exampl of the type of fraud scheme that
examin can identifi with idea data analys applic
employe fraud
identifi employe account at financi institut that have excess number of credit
memo
identifi employe account at financi institut that have larg deposit
compar employe home address social secur number telephon number and
bank rout and account number to those of vendor from vendor master file
at financi institut compar employe social secur number against those of
deposit and loan account to identifi those not properli code as employe account
analyz all debit to incom account particularli debit memo
monitor the activ in suspens account includ the ag of suspens item and the
roll of similar amount
analyz claim paid by corpor medic insur provid
obtain a social secur number list from an outsid vendor to test for valid social
secur number and determin whether the holder is aliv or deceas
question invoic
identifi invoic without a valid purchas order
look for invoic from vendor not in the approvedvendor file
find invoic for more than on purchas order author
identifi multipl invoic with the same item descript
extract vendor with duplic invoic number
look for multipl invoic for the same amount on the same date
find invoic payment issu on nonbusi dai saturdai and sundai
identifi multipl invoic at or just under approv cutoff level
phantom vendor scheme
match name address phone number and social secur number between
employe and vendor file
check vendor address against mail drop address list
data analysi and report tool investig
3620 2011 fraud examin manual
kickback or conflict of interest scheme
look for vendor price greater than the standard
identifi price increas greater than accept percentag
check for continu purchas in spite of high rate of return reject or credit
look for high volum purchas from on vendor
dormant account scheme
check that all applic account have been flag as dormant
identifi dormant account with activ
check for transfer from dormant account to employe account
check chang of address on dormant account crosscheck new address with
employe address
monei launder scheme
identifi account with larg averag valu of transact it is common for there to be
a small number of highvalu transact through an account be us for monei
launder
identifi match debit and credit transact on the same account within a short time
period
search for larg round transact valu
identifi multipl account for particular individu
identifi larg cash deposit
test custom identif procedur by search for miss data field such as date
of birth social secur number or driver licens number
cross check custom address against mail drop address list
for more inform about idea visit wwwaudimationcom
excel
excel is a spreadsheet program by microsoft that can be us for store organ and
manipul data mani account auditor and fraud examin us excel for basic data
analysi task for exampl excel allow user to sort subtot filter and merg data thei
can creat calcul field as well as perform statist analysi such as regress
excel howev ha mani limit that limit it us for detect fraud these
limit ar discuss in the next section which examin activedata for excel
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3621
activedata for excel
activedata for microsoft excel is an easytous tool for advanc data manipul and
analysi within the excel environ
activedata for excel wa design to overcom excel mani limit
excel limit activedata for excel compens
doe not document the fraud
examin work in easytoaccess
log for refer and storag
activedata for excel provid a log of each
process step as a comment in cell a1 of the
worksheet creat then us the index sheet
function a summari page of all comment field
can easili be creat for review in essenc
creat an audit log of all work perform with
the spreadsheet data
ha difficulti perform data
analysi and manag test such
as relat tabl although it can be
accomplish it is an oner task
activedata for excel provid more than 100
dataanalysi and manag featur that
autom function some of which mai be
possibl but extrem difficult in excel
doe not have function
specif tailor to the fraud
examin for exampl an examin
can calcul a sampl in just a coupl
of click with minim train us
specif design audit softwar
in excel it can be done but it doe
take much effort and guidanc
activedata for excel ha more than 100 featur
that ar tailor to the auditor account and
fraud examin for exampl you can us
activedata for excel to find duplic record in
a few click rather than set up complex
formula in excel
the follow ar some exampl of how activedata can be us for fraud detect
fraud detect techniqu for account payabl
vendor summari total period on to period two comparison
thi is a basic analyt report to identifi trend in a vendor purchas histori a trend
analysi should be complet to identifi kei vendor with whom activ ha increas or
decreas substanti thi can best be assess us the dollar and percentag varianc
field which can be ad as calcul field in excel base on the chang in the busi
data analysi and report tool investig
3622 2011 fraud examin manual
environ andor new compani project a reason assess should be
perform on the vendor chang
descript statisticsbenford law analysi
descript statist provid maximum amount minimum amount averag amount and
other highlevel statist these statist should be review for reason for
exampl a high number of neg amount or a maximum amount that look too high
might not be reason
after obtain the descript statist of a data set the softwar provid a benford law
analysi of the first two digit of the data as well as a list of all amount from highest to
lowest frequenc for review
to review benford law distinguish between natur and nonnatur number natur
number ar those number that ar not order in a particular number scheme and ar not
gener from a random number system for exampl most account payabl file will be
popul by dollar valu that ar natur number convers nonnatur number like
social secur number and telephon number ar design systemat to convei
inform that restrict the natur natur of the number
benford law provid that the distribut of the initi digit in natur number is not
random instead it follow a predict pattern the tabl below show the expect
occurr for the distribut of the first digit in natur number accord to thi law
first digit probabl
1 301
2 176
3 125
4 97
5 79
6 67
7 58
8 51
9 46
total 1000
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3623
that is benford law maintain that certain di git show up more than other do a 1 will
appear as the first nonzero digit roughli 30 percent of the time 2 will be the lead digit
almost 18 percent of the time 9 will lead o ff onli 46 percent of the time moreov zero
is most like to be the second digit appear 12 percent of the time
benford law make it possibl to detect fraudul number in larg data file by
compar the frequenc of the appear of initi digit in a list of number to those
anticip by benford law for exampl when embezzl invent number thei tend to
fake data contain too mani instanc of initi digit of 7 8 and 9 and too few
instanc of 1 2 and 3 thu with benford law examin can tell if someon
fake data that ar deriv from other data and thei can also identifi error within the data
that appear out of place given the data frequenc of appear
the benford law analysi should be execut first so the most statist outlier can be
review
furthermor as a follow up to these test examin should us a queri sheet to queri
outlier activ for addit review
aboveaverag payment to a vendor more than two time the averag
unusu larg payment to a vendor in relat to the averag ar a sign of error eg a
keypunch error or fraud eg a kickback scheme in which the vendor is paid addit
amount that ar kickedback to the employe enter the payment into the system
for vendor with unusu payment abov the averag a sampl of the averag payment
invoic as well as the unusu payment invoic should be review the reason of
the purchas should be assess base on the document review the auditor should
be keenli awar of the potenti for a keypunch error regard the unusu payment
andor the possibl of the vendor purpos overcharg the organ
duplic payment test
duplic payment to vendor normal repres error that the comput system wa
unabl to detect in most system a check will be made as to whether the vendor number
invoic number and amount ar the same thi test could be run to ensur thi basic control
is oper and also to test for other permut of duplic ani result from thi
test should be review first for trend for exampl rent payment that occur on a monthli
data analysi and report tool investig
3624 2011 fraud examin manual
basi mai appear to be duplic payment when in fact thei ar simpli regularli occur
payment note also that certain account packag allow the issuanc of partial payment
eg a payment to the same vendor with the same invoic number and amount therefor
the auditor should determin whether the system allow such payment and if so omit them
prior to run thi applic
void check should also be review if a payment is made first on a regular check and
then on a void on onli on payment wa technic made
employeetovendor address match
thi test identifi ident or similar field between the master tabl of vendor and
employe in an attempt to identifi fraudul payment to employe while thi test
explain how to complet thi task for address the same could be done for phone
number tax identif number and other person inform
onc the result ar produc the auditor should scan them to determin if there ar ani
valid address match between the employe and vendor tabl as a next step a queri
sheet could be creat of the actual invoic post to ani question vendor to determin
if thei ar fraudul two note when complet thi review ar
becaus thi exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or
vendor inform independ of the account payabl depart who mai be
culpabl for creat the fals vendor account
becaus it is common to pai employe travel and entertain expens or employe
advanc thi should be the kei reason to not consid the payment fraudul if
possibl the vendor file should be filter for all employe travel and entertain
vendor account prior to run thi test
identifi payment made after period end for valid liabil at period end
thi report work to identifi unrecord liabil a common scheme is for an
organ to hold an invoic by not enterin g it into the system then after period end
the invoic will be enter into the system therebi evad the expens charg in the period
under review
the invoic identifi in thi test should be review for reason and materi if
not materi further test work mai not be consid necessari if materi trend mai be
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3625
identifi in the type of invoic or the vendor the final analysi should includ pull the
actual invoic to determin whether thei ar for servic render or product receiv
befor the period end
identifi exceed purchas order
thi report work to identifi author issu within an account payabl process
wherebi the invoic paid exce the approv purchas order amount asid from
assess the author limit thi report test the system control that should not allow an
invoic to be paid abov a predetermin limit normal between 5 and 10 percent
the report mai also highlight fraud
in which a valid purchas order is provid to author payment yet inflat payment
ar made to assist the fraudster in some wai
in which vendor work with an employe creat a purchas order with valid unit
price yet inflat those price when the invoic ar sent
thi test mai highlight a control issu within the comput system which should check for
exceed purchas order or it mai identifi numer overrid to the comput system
these overrid mai be within the normal cours of busi eg purchas order price
were meant to be at the invoic price rate but were enter in error on the purchas order
but mai also highlight fraudul activ regardless the auditor should walk through the
process of enter a purchas order and associ invoic to understand the system
control onc understood the differ present in thi test can be investig by
vouch to purchas order and invoic document
fraud detect techniqu for the gener ledger
stratifi gener ledger detail inform
look at the multitud of activ in a gene ral ledger and ask yourself how can i survei
thi data in an extrem quick manner while effici plan my audit thi test should
provid the answer becaus it help the auditor focu on largedollar post while
assess the administr burden of maintain lowdollar activ
the stratif report should be review for
unreason larg balanc for which the activ could be queri for recalcul and
proper classif
a high number of transact with low accumul activ for possibl consolid
plan detail test of the journal entri approv process
data analysi and report tool investig
3626 2011 fraud examin manual
journal entri gap test
gap mai signal incomplet data process or in the situat of journal entri possibl
hidden entri usual a method of document these occurr along with a review by
an independ parti is suffici to ensur the complet and accuraci of process
howev it is rare that a journal entri gap test is perform in the account depart it
is more common in the account payabl area relat to the check sequenc so thi mai be
the first time thi test is be perform
gap in the journal entri sequenc should be review with the account depart the
test work should answer the follow question
what procedur ar in place to document and approv all gap in the sequenc
how ar gap commun to manag
identifi nonstandard journal entri made in a timefram after year
end relat to specif account
nonstandard journal entri ar gener those that ar post manual rather than
through an autom feed from a fix asset or account receiv subledg such entri
ar more prone to error and fraud mainli due to human error the judgment appli to
support the entri and the possibl of an overrid by manag in author the entri
thi is especi true for entri made just after year end relat to the prior year as these
entri ar more prone to be adjust for the fiscal year annual report
given the abov the test for these entri should includ
review the journal entri and associ support document
ensur the approv ar appropri for the size and natur of the journal entri
assess whether gener accept account principl gaap ar be appli
summar activ by user account
thi test look for
standard name such as default or test these name usual have equal simpl
password for a hacker to guess and should gener be avoid replac to these
gener user id would be specif id associ with the person us the system eg
jsmith
unrecogn or termin employe thi test focus on the respons within
the mi function to ensur that onli author employe have system access compar
the list creat by thi test to an activ employe roster to spot ani violat
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3627
user who have access beyond their level of respons thi access mai highlight a
nonsegreg of duti in which a person ha an opportun to commit fraud by be
abl to initi author andor record a transact
the result report should be review bear in mind the abov consider
recommend step includ
delet default password and replac them with specif id
delet employe who ar not on the activ employe roster
review user who ar post high activ or who mai have access to other non
segreg function and assess whether other control ar need to mitig the such
individu access
fraud detect techniqu for revenu
missingunusu custom masterfil informationmatch to prior year
for chang
thi report will identifi chang in the custom masterfil such as addit and delet
given that most system do not track the chang in the custom masterfil eg there is
no last maintain on date field thi report is sometim the onli mean of determin
chang in the custom master
the fraud examin should review major addit andor delet to the custom
masterfil given that there is a high potenti for fraud on newli ad custom eg
post fals sale invoic to phoni custom account to inflat periodend sale balanc
the name and address for such custom should be review against employe with the
abil to enter invoic into the system thi can be done us the account payabl test
describ in thi book that match vendor address to employe address sinc thi
exercis mai detect fraud it mai be benefici to locat the invoic or custom file
independ of the account receiv depart which mai be culpabl for creat the
fals custom account
cash receipt to open invoic match
thi test help assess the exist and valuat of open invoic at period end base on
the cash receiv subsequ to year end therefor it is on of the most popular test us
by fraud examin in assess the exist of period end invoic
data analysi and report tool investig
3628 2011 fraud examin manual
base on thi test the fraud examin can easili assess whether open invoic were paid with
cash and therefor exist at year end and for those still outstand whether thei should
be review further from the perspect of yearend valuat such invoic probabl
relat to custom who regularli pai late but thei could repres new custom payment
issu andor fraudul sale post at yearend that will never receiv cash
ag receiv extract older balanc and summar by custom
thi test mainli recalcul the ag of the invoic in the account receiv ledger for
review against the companyderiv report ani differ between thi calcul and the
report us by manag mai be due to a system error a poorli design report or fraud
to orchestr fraud manag mai hide the true payment pattern of custom to
minim their bad debt valuat reserv at year end
the ag report should be reconcil to the organ account receiv ag report
ani differ should be investig on approach is to extract a sampl of invoic
see previou test on review a sampl of invoic within a specif ag group and
reconcil to the ag report on an invoic by invoic basi thi work mai identifi report
error or an attempt by the organ to hide the true ag of account receiv
the focu of test work should be on more current ag categori that mai be
inappropri inflat
onc the invoic ar summar by custom the ag report also highlight custom
balanc older than a predefin old limit thi mai be 180 or 270 dai after which
payment of such invoic is unlik larg custom balanc could be review with
manag as to their collect and possibl with the actual custom thi analysi
would further support the yearend bad debt reserv calcul
calcul the differ between ship and invoic date as well as invoic date with no shipment
untim erron andor fraudul sale invoic mai be detect if invoic ar sent
without valid shipment in thi case revenu is potenti be record prior to be
earn further research of these invoic should be done independ of the sale and
account receiv function in order to ensur an independ analysi
for more inform about activedata for excel visit wwwinformationactivecom
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3629
autoaudit
autoaudit is a comprehens integr audit autom system in addit to the
workpap and report function autoaudit ha entitylevel and processlevel risk
assess staff schedul resourc plan issu track time report expens
report qualiti assur depart metric and an ad hoc report modul all of
these modul ar integr and data automat flow from on modul into the next
autoaudit is design to autom all of the primari process that occur in an audit
depart
although autoaudit autom mani part of ani type of audit of particular interest to
fraud examin ar it risk assess function autoaudit offer an integr risk
assess modul with the option of follow a horizont methodolog busi process
risk assess a vertic methodolog audit univers made up of userdefin audit
entiti or a combin of both methodolog specif risk and process ar identifi
by the client and the risk factor and weight can be custom to fit the specif need of
the depart and industri inform about the inher and residu risk help
determin issu dure the audit and the inform obtain dure fieldwork can be
push back into the risk assess to us as the start point for the next cycl of
plan and audit
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
snap report
snap report is a data mine softwar program design for us with lotu note
microsoft excel spreadsheet and access databas it chief virtu is it eas of us most
softwar requir a familiar with databas and data mine techniqu but anyon with
basic spreadsheet skill can produc report and graphic with thi product in snap data
retriev and analysi ar autom with onebutton function some task ar accomplish
by draganddrop
snap produc gantt chart ie graphic represent of project and count
occurr of kei word rather than onli chart actual number the softwar also
creat stack noncolumnar report and gener multipl relation data set from
on origin recordfunct not avail in other product snap is not as power
as some other data mine softwar but it is easier to us it is adequ to most task
though some complex case mai need a stronger packag
data analysi and report tool investig
3630 2011 fraud examin manual
for more inform visit httppaisleythomsonreuterscom
datawatch corpor monarch for window
monarch is reportmin softwar monarch is uniqu becaus it extract data from exist
report creat by other program and then convert the data into action data eg text
file spreadsheet or databas tabl for exampl electron data that is retriev from an
account system or download from an onlin sourc can be broken down into
individu record by monarch model monarch can read report file produc on ani
mainfram midrang clientserv or pc system these file ar commonli known as print
file spool file txt file format ascii file prn file and sdf file monarch can
also read dbf file and delimit ascii file
onc the data is action it can be analyz that is the record can be manipul by
data analysi applic like access and excel
monarch special in read complex report in ascii plain text format it data mine
capabl ar us for data integr test monarch can be us by itself or in tandem
with other audit softwar such as acl but it will provid the most benefit when us in
conjunct with anoth data analysi tool
monarch serv three main function for investig
perform autom audit test and test of variou program control
verifi data on manag or exter nal parti reportgener accuraci
proactiv identifi error and fraudul activ
moreov examin can us monarch to perform sever function in a financi analysi or
risk assess
summari window to summar inform by a differ criteria than the report did
sort data within the tabl window to gener an alphabet sort list or to identifi
the largest or smallest transact
time seri analysi to compil inform from 12 separ report into a monthbi
month summari allow the investig to identifi trend
graph data within the summari window to graph ani inform in the summari
window into a pie area line or bar chart quickli to visual composit trend or
distribut thi chart function is much more straightforward than in spreadsheet
program such as ms excel and lotu 123
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3631
creat calcul field to perform custom calcul on ex ist data field or new field
not present in the origin file
here ar a few practic exampl of monarch investig capabl the softwar
allow investig to
view the 20 largest vendor by invoic am ount to compar the amount with their
expect of those amount
summar by purchas order number to determin if the sum of all transact relat
to a purchas order exce the amount author by the purchas order
measur transact volum and amount process by each input clerk to identifi
unusu activ
compar budget versu actual figur by comput a differ field
chart custom delinqu trend for the past 12 month
for more inform about monarch visit wwwdatawatchcom
arbutu queri
arbutu queri is a comprehens queri tool with builtin dataanalysi capabl with
arbutu queri user ar abl to queri a wide rang of data sourc without have to know
the locat or structur of the underli data arbutu queri emploi arbutu analyz to
provid direct readonli queri of data arbutu analyz us a familiar spreadsheet
interfac to brows analyz or report on the data the softwar can handl unlimit file
size and ha power data analysi and manipul command that support even the most
advanc task
for more inform on the arbutu program visit wwwarbutussoftwarecom
oversight system
oversight system offer softwar that help busi check for fraud error and other
problem it softwar provid continu monitor and continu audit with
investig resolut and track capabl for continu protect against fraud
misus and error in busi transact oversight product also identifi error and
control violat as thei happen so compani can address these issu when thei ar less
complex and less costli to correct oversight product includ featur that integr
investig reconcili and document of data for more inform visit
wwwoversightsystemscom
data analysi and report tool investig
3632 2011 fraud examin manual
report and case manag softwar
there ar a number of program that can assist the fraud examin in manag the data and
inform gather these program can also be us to creat report graph and chart
of a particular case some of the most us of these program for fraud investig ar
discuss below
i2 analysi product line
i2 offer a line of analyt tool that allow user to search store visual and analyz data
some of those tool ar discuss below
analyst notebook
i2 inc offer a profession visual and analysi tool call analyst notebook
analyst notebook is a visual investig anali is softwar program that bring clariti to
complex investig and intellig analysi it enabl investig and analyst to turn
larg volum of dispar data into action intellig it creat chart and graph to
allow user to
visual larg volum of investig data to understand the big pictur
reveal pattern and hidden connect to help focu the investig
creat analyt chart manual or automat gener link and timelin chart from
structur data
commun complex case with intuit brief chart that captur and organ
support data
ibas
ibas is i2 investig databas that is it allow user to configur a data store captur
data and perform data analysi in a control environ
data miner
data miner is a data mine applic that can onli be instal with analyst
workstat it allow user to analyz larg amount of data and find ani pattern that mai
exist
analyst workstat
analyst workstat is an integr collect of analyt tool includ analyst
notebook ibas and data miner
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3633
for more inform on i2 product line visit wwwi2inccom
casemap by casesoft
casemap is a case analysi tool that make it easi to organ evalu and explor the fact
charact and issu in a case it is design for us on all type of case and by all type of
litig and investig casemap softwar integr with numer other litigationsupport
and electronicdiscoveri tool includ adob acrobat appli discoveri
binder concord jf litig notebook kpmg discoveri radar livenot and
sanction
spreadsheet
when a casemap file is creat the program auto matic set up a seri of spreadsheet
us to organ critic case knowledg these spreadsheet can be us to organ
inform about the fact document charact issu and case law in everi case
data analysi and report tool investig
3634 2011 fraud examin manual
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3635
fact spreadsheet
the fact spreadsheet includ a case chronolog in which the investig can enter fact
date time and the sourc of each piec of inform investig can also distinguish
between disput and undisput fact and keep track of the statu of each item
object spreadsheet
the object spreadsheet allow investig to organ the cast of charactersa list of the
individu and organ involv in the case and it should also catalog kei document
and other import piec of physic evid
data analysi and report tool investig
3636 2011 fraud examin manual
issu spreadsheet
the issu spreadsheet provid an outlin of the issu includ both legal claim and
critic factual disput the outlin can be ani number of level deep
question spreadsheet
becaus mani question occur dure the earli stage of an investig the question
spreadsheet allow user to filter and sort their open item us variou criteria
research spreadsheet
casemap ha three research spreadsheet author extract from author and a
combin of author and extract the research spreadsheet will organ and
explor the user knowledg about the preced and statut relev to their case and it
includ link to actual case law us the author and extract the author spreadsheet
can be us to manag toplevel inform about preced statut and other type of
case research the extract spreadsheet can be us to captur detail about particular
section of interest excerpt from import case law and statut
link
casemap also provid the abil to link piec of data in on spreadsheet with the sourc
data or other relev data in anoth sheet
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3637
filter
onc inform is organ casemap user can explor it the most power caseexplor
tool in casemap is the filter function a filter oper limit the row that
appear in a spreadsheet and on your print report to those that meet criteria you specifi
for more inform visit wwwcasesoftcom
data analysi and report tool investig
3638 2011 fraud examin manual
actim enterpris risk case manag
actim enterpris risk case manag is case manag softwar that empow
compani to address enterprisewid risk and complianc manag it is design to
help compani detect and react to fraud attack more effici by consolid all fraud
and complianc issu into a central locat accord to actim the risk case manag
support risk oper with workflow manag evid collect and
document and as a result it allow user to
improv risk and complianc oper
detect more issu reduc risk loss and fine
enabl effici and collabor investig
reduc it and oper cost
xanali suit
xanali offer a suit of case manag softwar applic to help user collect
manag analyz and share investig intellig it offer three product powercas
link explor and index
powercas
powercas provid an endtoend platform for conduct largescal investig it
manag all aspect of an investig team activ through the entir investig
process by provid the follow function
provid central data storag
establish a document workflow to ensur that all evid is examin a review
check new case inform against exist data for common and associ
assign and track line of investig
provid a rang of search featur
allow user to visual case data
gener a complet audit trail of all user activ within the system
link explor
link explor allow user to construct databas queri in natur everydai languag and
displai the result in graphic form simpli ask a question by drag and drop icon
onto a queri screen xanali link explor then gener easytoread interact chart
that map how peopl event telephon call email messag and other case detail ar
link as new inform arriv the displai ar instantli updat inform can be
view in a varieti of wai in addit to power link analysi chart link explor can
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3639
displai result in numer other format includ a report a timelin with event
organ in a chronolog order or a hierarchi chart show relationship among peopl
link explor offer sever method to import enter merg or modifi data as well as to
creat new object and link these includ a text import flexibl data import data entri
form quickchart toolbox and object card
index
index is a text extract program that clearli and automat reveal critic connect
between inform store in a databas index automat extract relev
inform from unstructur text us entiti such as a person compani or an event
attribut such as occup sex or compani titl and relationship such as locat at
work for and involv in event xanali provid variou wai to ensur that the
inform repres in the index plan is us these includ load them into a
databas for analysi by link explor or other report or analysi tool in addit to
embed the technolog into thirdparti applic with the kei entiti and
relationship contain in a structur environ it is now possibl to access and queri
thi inform onc a number of document have been process a list of all the peopl
mention in the document or a list of compani vehicl or phone number associ
with those list peopl could be obtain as new document arriv these can be
incorpor and augment the exist result the full power of index capabl can be
embed into a compani own product and technolog on the window platform it
data analysi and report tool investig
3640 2011 fraud examin manual
includ a com interfac to direct the inform extract output into ani requir form
such as input to some other process or to a databas
for more inform on link explor or index visit wwwxanalyscom
enterpris investig manag
norkom technologiess enterpris investig manag softwar is case manag
softwar for antimonei launder and fraud investig it link inform from
multipl insid sourc like foreign travel report databas and debrief employe
secur background inform network log and cyber activ log to compos a pictur
of potenti insid secur threat thi composit approach put otherwis disconnect
piec of inform in context to help prevent sensit inform and capabl from
be compromis for more inform on enterpris investig manag visit
wwwnorkomcom
multichannel fraud
norkom technolog multichannel fraud manag solut provid an endtoend
fraud solut from advanc detect to investig respons and recoveri and is
built on norkom uniqu configur financi crime and complianc platform which
enabl user to custom the technolog as their need chang and new fraud techniqu
emerg norkom sophist detect analyt ar optim to detect a wide rang of
fraud includ plastic fraud applic fraud check fraud deposit fraud sleeper fraud
electron bank fraud phish intern fraud insur fraud account takeov and
ident theft the solut provid fraud detect by unit the analyt power of
special techniqu includ predefin fraud detect scenario indepth behavior
and peer group profil unusu analyt predict model and network analyt
for more inform on multichannel fraud visit wwwnorkomcom
isight case manag softwar
isight case manag softwar is a type of case manag softwar for investig
complaint correct and prevent action manag and other busi process that
requir case manag it allow user to record investig note creat and assign
task with due date and remind send email from within a case record us templat
letter record investig find record investig resolut creat followup task
track time and cost effectu correct action keep an audit trail and attach document
investig data analysi and report tool
2011 fraud examin manual 3641
ethicspoint issu and event manag
ethicspoint provid hotlin and antifraud report and case manag servic it
issu and event manag help busi ma nage report issu eg hr manag
issu workrel injuri secur investig conflict of interest competitor
misconduct ani code of conduct violat etc ethicspoint offer web report form to
help streamlin issu document provid manag with a report mechan
that automat integr an entiti re port data within a central databas
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3701
digit forens
conduct an investig involv comput
the increas usag of the internet and other technolog in all aspect of our person and
profession live ha creat new opportun for technolog to be us in perpetr
almost everi type of fraud and in most fraud case investig gather some type of digit
evid
fraud examin must therefor be prepar to address the myriad issu relat to
examin involv digit evid
comput investig versu comput forens
while at first the term comput investig mai appear synonym with comput
forens there is an import distinct between the two an investig lead an
investig into a crime that involv a comput is not necessarili and in most case
should not be the forens examin it is import to keep these area separ combin
the two especi in case in which the suspect is alreadi name invit question about the
object of the forens examin it could also subject investig to unwelcom
scrutini regard whether thei suppress exculpatori evid that mai have been found
dure an examin by a more object investig
digit evid
digit evid when boil down to it basic is simpli binari data on and zero that
is interpret by the comput everyth that is digit store is made up of these on
and zero from the program themselv to the data with which the program interact
interpret built into the program show these on and zero as hex code thi hex code is
then translat onto the page or websit seen on the comput screen
as the profession us comput technolog increas so doe the crimin us financi
crime and fraud commit ar probabl the most common type of comput crime
commit the investig of financi crime gener requir a level of expertis not
commonli held by all investig therefor there is addit knowledg and experi
requir when conduct a forens comput examin in a financi or fraud case
digit forens investig
3702 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar three type of situat in which comput evid is gener discov 1
comput as the target of crime 2 comput as the instrument of crime and 3
comput as the repositori of evid
comput themselv can be the target of crime crime commit against comput
includ comput and computercompon theft system intrus softwar piraci and
softwar theft
comput can also be us to facilit a crime when thi occur the comput is known
as the tool or instrument of crime in such case as on would expect examin commonli
encount comput that have been us in offens such as the solicit of minor in
chat room check fraud and counterfeit
gener speak in all comput investig the examin attempt to locat the
storag of potenti digit evid in on form or anoth on the comput system the
comput system involv in the investig is a potenti repositori of evid whether
the user intend to store an item or not therefor the examin is interest in
incrimin evid that the user intention or unintention store on the comput
system
integr of digit evid
electron evid is more volatil than paper inform and becaus it can be easili
alter or destroi it must be handl properli for exampl comput file can be alter
simpli through the normal startup process most of the microsoft oper system such as
window xp chang the time and date stamp on a number of file dure startup and
delet a number of temporari file dure the shutdown process these piec of
inform could be critic to the investig
the destruct of digit evid through improp handl can result in a find of
spoliat of evid by a judg or can rais question about the alter of exculpatori
evid by the defens
addition if a judg determin that the authent of the evid cannot be
satisfactorili made then he mai rule that the evid is inadmiss although digit
evid is differ from tangibl evid the rule regard it admiss in court is
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3703
realli no differ from the admiss of ani other type of evid to be admiss
digit evid must be
relev
support by a foundat for it introduct into court
legal obtain
properli identifi
properli preserv
therefor should the fraud examin discov digit evid he must be abl to state
unequivoc that the evid wa not chang in ani wai by hi action thi requir that
strict forens methodolog be follow to satisfi the stringent evidentiari standard
necessari to ensur the integr of the evid beyond a reason doubt for
present in court
forens expert
also when conduct an examin involv comput the examin should determin
whether an outsid forens examin is need or whether the expertis is avail inhous
some organ have their own inhous personnel whom thei have train and
outfit with the proper equip and softwar tool to conduct the examin and
analyz digit evid while other mai prefer the us of an outsid examin who will be
abl to conduct a thorough examin prepar a proper report and deliv expert
testimoni if need in legal proceed
sometim inform retriev is as easi as obtain a warrant and search the hard
drive of the target comput but mani fraudster anticip their exposur and delet
incrimin file from their machin in these instanc it is import to know that there
ar a varieti of wai of recov delet or hidden data from a target comput and it
peripher
a computerforens examin is a train profession who is capabl of analyz digit
media at the hexadecim level the hexadecim level mean that everi sector and all the
byte in those sector ar avail for view thi includ delet file both purposefulli
delet and those that were delet through variou windowsautom process thi
can also includ temporari autosav file printspool file delet email and link file
the hexadecim level also contain variou item found in restor point and registri file
digit forens investig
3704 2011 fraud examin manual
that defin hardwar such as extern drive and websit visit in addit to the
document revis and file creat and maintain by the user
the increas sophist of window allow the comput system to store more
inform about how peopl us their comput the forens examin will be abl to
uncov a larg amount of data that relat to the us of a comput what is or ha been
store on it and the detail about the user in micr osoft effort to be all to the user it ha
incorpor wai to make comput us more secur such as offer encrypt and other
method to protect data from unwant access in the futur these type of innov will
stall the examin and will sometim successfulli prevent system access howev these
encrypt packag ar not alwai foolproof the encrypt file system offer by
microsoft ha in fact been crack by a number of passwordcrack softwar maker in
addit to encrypt file other encrypt algorithm exist that ar easili instal and can
be us to encrypt the entir hard drive in situat such as thi it becom necessari for
the examin to be abl to identifi whether a drive is encrypt befor seiz and
disconnect the system
moreov computerforens examin have special tool and softwar design to
facilit a thorough and legal suffici analysi of item that contain digit evid it is
import to allow a train examin to conduct a proper seizur and examin on a
piec of evid so the investig will have the best chanc of us that evid in a
legal proceed whether an agenc or compani is defend against an unlaw
termin suit or file a crimin complaint it is vital that the digit evid is handl
properli
furthermor whether technic specialist ar need to assist with an investig will
depend on the complex of the examin requir the more technic the natur of the
crime the more technic and special the analyt skill requir some comput
investig howev do not requir extrem sophist technic skill for exampl
in case where the comput is the instrument us to commit the crime eg scam
involv payrol applic cook the book fraudul electron fund transfer
insid trade etc the fraud examin need onli know how to search a databas and
analyz the result
addition thi determin will depend on the examin skill level therefor an
examin conduct an examin involv comput must have a basic understand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3705
of hi skill level and must be awar of hi limit in the field of comput technolog
becaus in mani instanc on or more technic specialist ar need to assist with an
investig
within the comput forens field there ar sever differ type of special expert
oper and file system expert these expert ar profici in certain oper system
eg window 7 unix solari os x or as400 and the variou file system thei
emploi eg joliet ntf fat vf ex t2 and thei have the abil to convei
oper characterist and observ artifact
data recoveri expert these expert oper clean room design to magnet extract
inform from a damag media sourc us special tool and equip these
expert can disassembl a hard disk separ the platter and extract and reassembl the
inform for subsequ examin
forens account expert a forens account can prov id variou servic includ
audit account perform review and examin of financi document for
fraud misconduct or industri standard violat
tape and archiv extract expert these ar expert in extract inform from tape or
other system backup typic backup solut archiv data in proprietari format
make extract veri cumbersom
intrus and malici code expert these expert special in investig comput
network intrus specialist can determin attack vector the tool emploi what
occur dure access and what if anyth wa taken
but given the divers of computerrel fraud no person can be an expert in all aspect
of comput technolog
locat evid
to conduct a success examin examin must know what to look for and where to
look for it but thi can be difficult becaus digit data can be store larg volum and in a
number of differ locat
the effici of comput technolog ha allow user to creat more volumin piec
of data than wa onc possibl comput hard drive ar pack with digit data and data
storag now exce gigabyt therefor it is necessari to refer larger storag
capac here is a chart that will help
digit forens investig
3706 2011 fraud examin manual
name abbr size
kilo k 210 1024
mega m 220 1048576
giga g 230 1073741824
tera t 240 1099511627776
peta p 250 1125899906842624
exa e 260 1152921504606846976
zetta z 270 1180591620717411303424
yotta y 280 1208925819614629174706176
furthermor digit evid mai be locat in a number of differ locat in addit
to be store on comput evid will be locat in ani form of technolog that can be
us to transmit or store data therefor it is also import to investig ani suspect
workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be us to
transmit or store data and the inform store on the compani network
workstat
in addit to investig the suspect mainfram it is also import to investig the
suspect workstat includ ani peripher or other portabl media devic that can be
us to transmit or store data as data move to and from peripher devic it leav
evid of it presenc and sometim leav full copi of it content
therefor fraud examin should consid the mani differ type of peripher that
might contain evid item to be seiz might includ ani or all of the follow item
list below depend upon the natur of the fraud case
printer
examin must also be awar that it might be possibl to recov previous print
document although the odd of recoveri can be low depend on a varieti of factor
understand how retriev can be achiev can be of great valu to the investig
in addit to us printerspool file to recov previous print document mani
printer have intern hard drive that mai contain inform relev to a fraud
examin in gener ani inform sent to and store by a printer is recover unless
the printer ha overwritten the data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3707
furthermor some printer have memori buffer temporari storag area of job wait to be
print which mai also contain import inform inform contain in memori
buffer howev is gener limit to recent creat and store data
copier and scanner
like some printer copier and other multifunct machin mai have intern storag
devic that store relev data in fact almost everi copier built sinc 2002 ha a hard drive
that store imag of document the machin have copi scan or email some
copier store user access record and a histori of copi made and as with most file
system it mai be possibl to retriev inform from a copier hard drive that ha been
delet as a result copier mai be brim with import inform
fax machin
although some kind of standalon fax machin simpli scan and send data without store
it like mani printer and copier some fax machin store fax data on their own intern
hard drive thi data mai remain in the machin memori until overwritten
backup tape
backup tape ar a type of remov media that store data and can be easili remov from
a comput system or devic most comput user archiv their activ on backup tape
or some other form of extern storag devic and most compani us backup tape to
store old data includ email data that wa onc store on their server
remov storag devic
in addit to backup tape a suspect remov storag devic should be examin
remov storag devic such as cd dvd usb flash drive also known as thumb
drive mp3 player and variou other devic provid user with the abil to store larg
amount of data such devic can be us to facilit a varieti of fraud thei provid
user with the abil to store file that go undetect by anyon access the comput
remov media can also be us to store copi of file contain sensit inform in
order to facilit unapprov us
smart phone
the prolifer of smart phone ha made them an extrem valuabl sourc of
inform smart phone eg the iphon and blackberri ar cell phone that also have
the abil to store person data search the internet check email instant messag im
digit forens investig
3708 2011 fraud examin manual
make video call downloadupload content to and from the internet take pictur and
record video the inform that can be store on these small devic can be veri
import in mani case
network
in addit to search for evid on the suspect oper system and workstat it is
also import to examin inform store on compani server a wealth of inform
which is separ from a user workstat mai be store on compani server data store
on compani network mai includ document post to a suspect own home directori on
the network collabor work save to a share folder or directori email messag that
have been sent receiv delet or archiv calendar contact list and so on
law enforc assist
befor conduct a forens examin examin must consid whether a crime ha in
fact been commit if at the begin of the investig it is determin that the victim
compani will make a formal referr to law enforc or prosecut agenc then the
author must be notifi befor the investig begin to determin whether law
enforc personnel should particip in the examin in some jurisdict an
examin from the law enforc commun mai not be avail
comput investig and comput forens
prepar
befor the examin can seiz evid he must take certain step to help ensur that the
evid is admiss he must determin whether an employe ha a privaci interest in the
item to be search he must take certain step to prepar for an investig that
involv the us of a search warrant and he must take step to ensur that hi equip is
sound eg onli us licens softwar applic independ valid all forens
equip and maintain the valid on file
privaci issu
befor search and seiz an item the examin must determin whether an employe ha
a privaci interest in the item to be search in everi case where it becom necessari to
seiz a comput or other devic capabl of store digit evid the investig should
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3709
consult with legal counsel it is imper that legal counsel be involv in the seizur
process and be knowledg of case law pertain to workplac seizur
case law govern workplac seizur in the privat sector is differ from case law
govern seizur in the govern workplac but gener it all come down to the
employe expect of privaci although the fourth amend constitut right
guarante protect against unreason search and seizur typic the fourth
amend doe not protect privat sector employe
in the privat sector disput over unreason search and seizur usual come down
on the side of the corpor the case law in the privat sector tend to support the
argument that corpor have the right to decreas the level of privaci employe can
expect with regard to workplac search of comput and other digit media thu
compani to adopt a written polici establish that all comput system eg the internet
email commun hardwar and file ar sole for busi us and that the
compani reserv the absolut right to review audit and disclos all matter sent over the
system or place in storag and as long as written polici ar in effect that support
manag action the corpor can avoid liabil for violat an employe right to
privaci
addition when conduct an intern investig or inquiri into alleg of
misconduct or illeg activ in both the privat and government sector it is import to
be awar of what the employe polici protect against and what it allow it should also be
determin whether step have been taken to nullifi ani expect of privaci
government employe whether local state or feder have been provid special
protect that do not gener appli to employe in the privat sector in all case where
it becom necessari to seiz a government employe comput or other digit devic it
is imper that the investig consult with the entiti legal counsel
bryan r lemon branch chief of the legal di vision offic of train oper at the
fletc train center in georgia ha written an excel paper on the subject of
government workplac search and seizur in which he summar a number of case
where the court have render opinion on government workplac search and seizur
in hi paper mr lemon defin the term workplac to includ those area and item that ar
digit forens investig
3710 2011 fraud examin manual
relat to work and ar gener within the employ control which includ file cabinet
desk and comput
case law on thi issu ha attempt to answer sever question can a govern
employe have a reason expect of privaci in the workplac if so what standard
should be follow to ensur that a supervisor is conduct a law search of an
employe work space is there a lesser standa rd emploi in the case of mere suspicion
the suprem court case of oconn v ortega wa the hallmark case in the argument about
the reason of search and seizur but there were a number of other issu that
were decid at the lowercourt level in oconn the suprem court held that the
realiti of the workplac made some exp ectat of privaci among public employe
unreason when the intrus wa by a supervisor rather than a law enforc offici
workrel search the court found were m er incid to the primari busi of
the agenc and a warrant requir would serious disrupt the routin conduct of
busi the court thu held that a standard of reason wa suffici for work
relat intrus by public employ
to simplifi the decisionmak process when consid a workplac search lemon
explain that there is a twopart analysi that will offer some guidanc the first part requir
a determin of the employe reason ex pectat of privaci in the area to be
search second if a reason expect of privaci doe exist then ani search that
occur in the workplac must be reason under the given circumst
in unit state v gonzalez 4 the court dealt with the search of a govern employe
person belong in thi case the employe gonzalez as a condit of employ
sign a paper that indic among other thing hi person belong might be search
in an effort to discourag employe theft gonzalez work at a militari exchang he wa
stop on dai dure hi departur from the store and hi backpack wa search by store
secur the search reveal that gonzalez backpack contain merchandis stolen from
the store on appeal gonzalez claim that hi fourth amend right had been
violat the court look to the paper that wa origin sign by gonzalez and state
4 unit state v gonzalez 300 f3d 1048 9th cir 2002
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3711
that gonzalez wa put on notic that hi person belong might be search and as a
result hi expect of privaci wa limit by hi knowledg of store polici
in gossmey v mcdonald the court dealt with the question of whether there wa a reason
expect of privaci regard person purchas item that were us to store work
relat materi in the govern workplac in thi case a local detect receiv an
anonym tip from on of gossmey cowork that gossmey wa store illeg
pornograph materi in a storag contain that wa purchas at gossmey own
expens the local detect relai the inform to gossmey supervisor who
proceed to search gossmey workplac includ the storag cabinet the supervisor
found evid to substanti the alleg but no charg were ever file gossmey file
a lawsuit alleg that her fourth amend right had been violat by the search of her
person properti the court disagre state that the cabinet wa not mere an item of
person properti such as a purs or briefcas brought into the workplac but that it wa
be us to hous workrel materi and therefor the cabinet wa a part of the
workplac and not a part of her person domain
in oconn the suprem court rule that it is possibl to reduc the expect of privaci
on the part of govern employe for exampl in the form of a written notic sign by
the employe that give the employ the right to access or inspect inform store on the
employe comput in the case of unit state v simon the defend simon wa found
to have visit sever illicit websit that were prohibit by agenc polici the polici
specif prohibit access to unlaw materi and further prohibit ani person us of
the agenc internet a remot audit of the hard drive on simonss governmentown
comput reveal that the comput contain sever illeg imag in simonss challeng
of the search under the fourth amend he claim that hi right were violat when
the hard drive wa search remot the fourth circuit court of appeal held that simon
had no legitim expect of privaci becaus of the agenc internet us polici the
polici languag place employe on notic of their diminish expect of privaci
when determin whether to conduct a search of governmentworkplac comput it is
import to determin whether a reason expect of privaci exist to answer that
question on must look at whether there wa a prior notic that diminish the expect
on can also look at the polici practic of the agenc have a polici and onli select
enforc it tend to diminish the polici to the point that it mai not negat the privaci
expect on must also look to the open and access of the workplac to other
digit forens investig
3712 2011 fraud examin manual
employe final wa there a written waiver of the employe expectati on of privaci if an
expect of privaci doe not exist then the fourth amend will not appli if it is
determin that an expect of privaci doe exist then what is the purpos behind the
search is it a workrel search such as look for a miss file or is it due to an
alleg of misconduct if it is a workrel search the search must be justifi base on
the overal circumst it must be justifi in it incept and permiss in scope if the
search under these condit is sole for the purpos of a crimin investig then a
probabl caus warrant will gener be necessari in addit to the employe consent
it should also be note that person digit devic ar becom more common in the
workplac employe often carri smart phone thumb drive or mp3 player into the
offic each of these devic is capabl of store larg amount of data and can easili be
us to steal a compani intellectu properti becaus these devic ar often purchas by
the employe for person us a search warrant mai be need to seiz or search these
devic becaus employe mai have a reason expect of privaci in these type of
person devic therefor it is extrem import to includ such devic in the
compani search polici the polici should cl earli state that ani person electron devic
includ laptop cell phone smart phone thumb drive mp3 player and so forth ar
just like handbag and briefcas subject to search if brought onto the compani premis
search warrant
if howev a search warrant is requir addit consider must be address a
search warrant is a court order that grant author the right to search a premis or properti
for inform pertin to the case
all warrant must satisfi the requir under the fourth amend that is all
warrant for search must be judici sanction and support by probabl caus and
thei must particularli describ the place to be search or thing to be seiz onli a
judg can issu a search warrant and onli law enforc can seek and serv a search
warrant
to obtain a valid search warrant law enforc offic prepar affidavit the affidavit
will detail the probabl caus or legal reason behind the request for the warrant often
law enforc personnel will need guidanc from the fraud examin as thei conduct pre
search prepar and construct the search warrant affidavit
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3713
but becaus the requir for these affidavit have been affect by technolog
innov fraud examin must consid sever new issu must when construct a
search warrant affidavit involv digit evid the fraud examin must know how to
write a warrant to seiz tangibl properti that contain intang evid further the
fraud examin must be allow to convert that evid into a humanread form eg
storag devic such as disk which contain inform that cannot be view without the
aid of some electron devic likewis the warrant must allow for the abil to seiz data
file pertin to the case that ar mix with data file which have noth to do with the
case but resid on the same storag devic
addition the warrant must be broad enough to defend the search and seizur of all
comput evid relev to the investig but narrow enough to exclud all materi
that is not and thi can be an extrem difficult standard to meet at time and might depend
on the magistr to whom the affidavit is present howev with some thought fraud
examin should be abl to justifi the search and seizur of everyth that thei need to
complet the search for evid item to be seiz might contain ani or all of the
follow depend on the natur of the fraud case
comput
comput compon
comput peripher
wordprocess equip
modem
monitor
printer
plotter
optic scanner
data storag devic
magnet
laser
optic
tape
pcmcia
portabl drive such as flash or thumb drive
cabl wire cord
storag media
disk
digit forens investig
3714 2011 fraud examin manual
magnet tape reel
pcmcia ram card
cdrom
magneticopt disk
digit audio tape dat
person data manag
flash ram card consid digitalcamera storag
comput program
oper system
applic softwar
util program
compil
interpret
document
manual
printout
file list
moreov to satisfi the particular requir of the fourth amend the affidavit
must be abl to justifi each item that might contain evid for exampl state that all
printer should be seiz might be overli broad unless the fraud examin can justifi the
need for each specif printer but with some thought fraud examin should be abl to
justifi the search and seizur of everyth thei need to complet the search for evid
also all relat document should also be seiz with the target comput system and
therefor it should be cover by the search warrant word such document is
import becaus it mai be critic when analyz the system hardwar and softwar
document could indic system chang that will help to avoid damag the system
document could also contain other help piec of inform eg the fact that access
control product have been ad to a system might be a help piec of inform
thu obtain as much intellig as possibl regard the locat of the potenti
evid is veri desir befor write the search warrant affidavit consider includ
determin the type of comput system that will be involv in the search what
oper system is us ar the comput network togeth
determin how mani peopl will be need to conduct the search
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3715
if expert wit with a specif expertis ar requir dure the search identifi and
clear them befor the search warrant is written depend on the circumst their
credenti should possibl be includ in the warrant affidavit befor thei ar approv
by the magistr issu the search warrant
determin the resourc that will be requir to conduct the search if a great deal of
equip is to be seiz consid how the equip will be transport from the
locat obtain suffici box label bag and other suppli at thi time
consid the time of the search
four phase
there ar sever definit and differ school of thought for investig involv
comput forens but all practition in the field will agre that investig typic
involv four phase seizur imag acquisit analysi and report and testifi
each phase is depend on the phase that come befor it for instanc if the seizur phase
is handl incorrectli then each of the follow phase can suffer and ultim render the
report and testifi phase moot
seiz digit evid
perhap the most critic step in the forens process is how data is collect or acquir
acquisit of digit evid must be complet in such a wai as to ensur that all relev
evid is seiz and secur in a forens sound manner so that the evid is not
taint or destroi
in fact there ar a number of practic consider and procedur to emploi when the
decis is made to go forward with a comput seizur on of the primari consider
that is often neglect is debrief the subject which involv ask the subject for
password and whether ani encrypt data exist on the target comput
the scientif work group on digit evid swgde from the organ of
american state ha publish a document titl best practic for comput forens
which provid a good foundat for digit forens examin although a complet
5 scientif work group on digit evid of the nation center for forens scienc best practic for
comput forens v2 2006 httpwwwoasorgjuridico panishcybbestpractpdf
digit forens investig
3716 2011 fraud examin manual
review of the entir document is beyond the scope of thi cours sever guidelin deserv
review accord to the swgde examin should adher to the follow guidelin
befor obtain evid ensur that there is legal author to seiz evid and
review the data associ with the evid thi mai requir obtain a warrant in a
crimin matter or ensur that intern polici author seizur for an intern
investig
if remov evid from the scene is impract copi or imag the item of evid
accord to establish procedur
remov all suspect wit and bystand from the proxim of the digit
evid keep in mind that remot access to comput can put potenti evid at
risk even if no person ha physic access to the comput also consid the wide rang
of mobil data storag devic todai eg usb flash drive that can be hidden
ensur that no suspect wit and bystand possess ani item contain
potenti evid
thoroughli and systemat search the scene for potenti evid onc again
consid the wide rang of data storag media and devic
unless complet unavoid data should not be analyz on the machin from which it
wa collect instead the examin should make forens sound copi of all data
storag devic primarili hard drive and analyz the data on these copi
to ensur that a machin can be fulli analyz the examin should take the follow
step
examin and document the machin surround
secur the evid
power down carefulli
inspect for trap
implement a system to manag the evid
examin and document the machin surround
the first step in the evid collect process is to examin and document the machin
surround thi includ collect all printout disk note and other physic evid
for further analysi document the scene with photograph or a diagram depend on the
complex of the setup rememb that it mai be a year or longer befor testimoni about
what the offic look like on the dai of the seizur will be ask for in a legal proceed
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3717
when document the condit of the evid the examin should consid
document what is on the screen if the system is on
document ani process that ar current run
take photograph of the variou view of the equip and media to document ani
damag or defect
take photograph of the equip physic connect
make a draw of the locat to document the layout and rel locat from
which evid wa seiz
addition becaus mani peopl have a habit of write down or record their
password near their comput examin should look around for note that mai appear to
be password thi mai aid in discov password need to access encrypt data if the
subject of the investig is be uncoop
take good note on the machin state at the ti me of the seizur record the time and date
that the system wa seiz and the personnel involv in the seizur the statu of the
system should also be note wa it on off or on standbi wa there anyth unusu
attach to the system wa there ani obviou damag did ani file have to be save
also if the comput wa activ record ani open applic make sure to start a chain of
custodi document and note each person and storag locat through which each piec of
evid pass
in addit to document the machin state at the time of seizur the examin should
document ani serial number and other potenti identifi mark eg manufactur
model number asset track number etc and he should photograph and diagram the
system entir configur
secur the evid
when secur a comput system follow the two golden rule the first rule is if the
comput is off dont turn it on also if a comp uter is on an investig will not want it to
go through it normal shutdown routin becaus window is veri good about clean up
after itself a number of temporari file will be delet and possibl overwritten dure a
normal shutdown and some of these file mai be import to the investig in most
case the investig should simpli unplug a run comput onc the investig take
possess of the comput he should not allow anyon access it with the except of a
train forens examin
digit forens investig
3718 2011 fraud examin manual
there ar other reason to conduct the seizur in thi wai by preserv the state of the
system at the time of seizur on can help to defeat an argument by oppos counsel that
exculpatori inform wa somehow taint or eras due to mishandl of the system if
on bit is chang in the system data it will ha ve a complet differ hash valu that is
to sai it would be differ than the origin even though the averag person mai not be
abl to recogn ani differ at all
all data is compos of bit binari digit it take eight bit to make on byte which is
what we ar commonli us to hear when we talk about storag capac such as 256
megabyt on megabyt equal 1024 kilobyt and on kilobyt equal 1024 byte as you
can see on bit is a rel infinitesim piec of data but it is import that not even on
bit of data be alter by the forens process
the second golden rule when secur a comput is do not peek through the file thi
also appli to disk if a system is run the examin mai be tempt to click on the my
comput icon to look for evid or copi file to a flash or optic storag devic thi
should never be done becaus each file the investig touch will have it origin time
stamp chang onc thi is done the origin time stamp cannot be recov it will be
obviou to the forens examin that thi ha occur
there ar two method for shut down a run system a hard shutdown and a grace
shutdown gener the hard shutdown is prefer there mai be extenu
circumst that would lead the investig to perform a grace shutdown so it is
import to evalu the best shutdown option base on the type of data be preserv
and the possibl ramif of a hard shutdown base on the type of oper system
instal a hard shutdown is basic pull the power cord from the back of the pc
laptop comput howev requir addit consider when seiz a laptop it is
import to remov the batteri first and then pull the plug it is essenti when seiz a
laptop to recov all of the compon that belong to the laptop such as flash drive cdrom
and dvdrom and power suppli often laptop comput must be imag with their
drive instal and becaus of the proprietari natur of the laptop themselv thei will
onli function with their own compon mani time these compon can be locat in
the laptop carri case
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3719
similarli network comput also present uniqu consider when power down a
network comput remov the power suppli from the back of the comput
when handl server howev it is import to us extrem caution when remov
power from a server without us proper shutdown method becaus thi can damag the
system and expos the examin to liabil
onc a comput is seiz it is necessari to secur it in such a wai that will allow the
investig to testifi if need be that no unauthor access to the suspect system
occur
inspect for trap
examin should also inspect the comput chassi for trap intrus detect softwar
and selfdestruct mechan although complet destroi a hard drive is extrem
difficult it is not difficult to make recoveri veri difficult
implement a system to manag the evid
examin should have a system to track and manag physic and digit evid the
most common method us to track physic evid is to assign each item a uniqu
evid number although thi number can be in ani format it should be consist and
never repeat
imag acquisit
to avoid alter evid the examin should make forens sound imag of the
suspect system for analysi imag acquisit involv us a standalon hard drive
duplic or similar devic to duplic a comput entir drive thi process is known as
imag becaus the hard drive can be imag to anoth hard disk drive a tape or other
media
the examin ha to be sure that the imag is creat and preserv in a manner that will
withstand a legal challeng therefor befor imag a hard drive the examin must
determin the best method for acquir an imag and the proper procedur to facilit the
imag captur
digit forens investig
3720 2011 fraud examin manual
dure the imag process examin should us some type of writeprotect devic or
applic to ensur no inform is written onto the origin drive and after the hard
drive is duplic the origin drive is move to a secur locat to prevent tamper
analysi
the analysi phase is arguabl the most timeconsum phase especi for a financi
crime or fraud investig thi phase involv the us of special softwar design to
give the examin the mean to locat and extract artifact that will be us as evid in
the investig the evid can serv to incrimin the subject of the investig or it
can be exculpatori by disprov the subject involv
the primari concern when analyz electron store inform esi is to maintain
it integr examin must be care with comput equip becaus a careless
investig mai inadvert alter import evid therefor it is help to develop
procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the methodolog us
to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or alter the evid it
mai also be help to us a hardwarebas writeblock devic to protect the integr of
digit evid
on method to help ensur the integr of digi tal evid is to maintain a chain of custodi
for all evid gather and analyz the chain of custodi is both a process and a document
that memori 1 who ha had possess of an object and 2 what thei have done with
it it is simpli a mean of establish that there ha not been a materi chang or alter
to a piec of evid gap in the chain of custodi eg when it is not clear what occur
with a set of record or outright mishandl eg a group of question document wa
not properli seal can harm a case
at a minimum the follow chain of custodi procedur should be follow for digit
evid
identifi each item that contain relev inform
document each item who it wa receiv from who author it remov the locat
of the item and the date and time the item wa receiv
maintain a continu record of the item custodi as it chang hand
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3721
report and testifi
the report and testifi phase is where the hour of analysi ar report fairli and
object in thi phase a qualifi comput forens expert mai be ask to render an
opinion about the us or misus of a comput system thi is where experi and train
ar test and where examin must know with certainti that their opinion is base on their
research knowledg and experi and that an oppos expert will not find fault with
their conclus
forens examin and analysi
while everi fraud examin should have basic knowledg of comput evid and how to
properli identifi collect and store digit evid some fraud examin mai decid to
pursu addit train in the area of comput forens analysi the process of
develop the skill set necessari to be a computerforens examin take a consider
amount of time train and experi addition there ar a number of softwar and
hardwar tool that ar now avail to conduct thi type of work the forens examin
must be awar of these tool and understand how thei work
again a forens analysi of a comput could involv the examin of a tremend
volum of data in 1993 the averag hard disk wa 60 megabyt mb in size the standard
size in 1999 wa 8 gigabyt gb and current the averag size of hard disk offer is
between 120 gb and 19 terabyt
forens examin will gener us at least two softwar tool on a project simultan
to crossvalid their result it is also import to note that mani insuffici train
examin who us autom tool do not in fact understand what the autom process is
do it is extrem import to understand and be abl to articul how a tool is
conduct an autom process thi mean that a forens examin who us an
autom tool should be abl to explain how to conduct the same process manual
becaus the primari concern when collect and analyz digit evid is to maintain it
integr forens examin must be care with comput equip therefor it is
help to develop procedur to prevent the oppos parti from rais alleg that the
methodolog us to collect or analyz data wa improp and could have damag or
alter the evid it mai also be help to us a hardwar or softwar writeblock
devic to protect the integr of digit evid these devic allow the user to acquir
digit forens investig
3722 2011 fraud examin manual
inform on a drive without damag the drive content by allow read command to
pass and block write command
a hardwar writeblock devis stop ani autom process or incident process
that an oper system or examin mai us to interact with a piec of digit media that
is the devis trick the oper system into believ that the interact occur so that it
will not gener an error and thwart the acquisit process what actual happen is that
the write command ar intercept and cach by the devic instead of reach the target
therefor no write to the media occur the devic allow onli read permiss to the
media
the softwar write blocker howev deni access to media by prohibit certain request
to the media by filter out those request onli read request ar accept and all write
request ar deni softwar write blocker must oper at a separ level than a standard
graphic user interfac gui such as in do mode there ar a number of these type of
devic on the market todai made for all applic and media type
keyword search
onc the collect process is complet examin ar left with larg volum of digit data
that mai contain relev or irrelev inform at thi point the examin must process
and filter the digit inform to reduc the amount of data commonli known as data
cull that ha been collect by perform keyword search to identifi relev
inform
keyword search involv identifi relev evid by search for word that ar
materi to a case eg name date account number etc thi type of search will
minim the amount of time us to complet an analysi and it will help protect the fraud
examin from alleg that hi search wa overli broad
base on the inform known about the case the examin should establish a list of
relev keyword becaus enorm amount of data will need to be search in most
fraud examin examin and investig should take care in keep the list as short
and relev as possibl and thei should avoid common word or word that can be part of
other word as a case progress there is a strong likelihood that more keyword will be
identifi furthermor search term can be devis to look for pattern in data
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3723
recov evid
in addit to live file a wealth of inform can be recov and analyz on seiz
system becaus window oper system ar the most wide us knowledg about the
file systemsmethod us to store and organi ze comput file and the data thei contain
for easi accessus by the window oper system is critic knowledg of the
window oper system will help the examin locat relev evid that is commonli
found in file store on hard drive storag devic and media
common file contain evid store in the oper system includ usercr file
userprotect file and computercr file
usercr file
usercr file ar file creat under the user direct and includ textbas
document spreadsheet databas email address book present slide audiovideo
file imag file internet bookmark and so on
userprotect file
often user hide file to prevent them from be found there ar a varieti of techniqu
to hide file but some of the most common method ar detail below
camouflag file
a user might camouflag certain file under an innoc name or differ file extens to
prevent other from discov them for exampl a suspect might chang a file name
from evidencedoc to instal ex and place the file in a directori that store program
file therefor examin should analyz a target hard drive to determin whether ani file
type have been camouflag thi is done by analyz the file header the first bit of data
in a file which contain data identifi the file format
steganographi
steganographi is the process of hide on piec of inform within an appar
innoc file for exampl a user can us the least signific bit of a bitmap imag to hide
a messag by hide the messag in the least signific bit of an imag there is almost no
perceiv chang in the bitmap imag itself and without directli compar the alter
imag to the origin it is practic imposs to tell that the imag wa alter
digit forens investig
3724 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
after a french defens contractor suspect that some of hi critic design were be
compromis the govern conduct an invest igat the investig reveal that an
employe had obtain hi posit at the compani to steal the contractor trade secret to
transmit the trade secret out of the compani the employe imbed them into graphic imag
us on the compani public access websit usin g steganographi anoth parti then copi the
imag file from the websit and extract the proprietari design
digit audio file ar anoth type of file that can be us to hide messag for exampl
by encod a messag in the least signific bit of a wav file a user can make the
messag almost imposs to detect messag can also be hidden in the unus sector of a
floppi disk
encrypt
encrypt refer to procedur us to convert inform us an algorithm call cipher
that make the inform unread although there ar mani free and commerci
encrypt program avail there ar two primari wai to access encrypt inform
first there ar numer util program that can decrypt document encrypt by mani of
the more common softwar applic in addit some encrypt program have a
secret kei for emerg that mai be veri help in an investig there ar also
sever compani that special in decrypt
second there is preced for forc a suspect or employe to divulg hi decrypt
code the comput is onli a contain and encrypt is an addit lock prohibit the
investig from review the file for potenti evid an examin with a legal right to
examin encrypt data is no differ than order a suspect or employe to unlock a file
cabinet to inspect it content
altern data stream
anoth method us to hide file in window system is the us of the altern data
stream of a file or directori thi method howev is onli possibl in window new
technolog file system ntf on of two basic type of file system us to organ
data in window system altern data stream ar a featur in the ntf filesystem that
offer the abil to put data into exist file and folder without affect their
function size or displai in mani tradit filebrows util like command line or
window explor
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3725
although window explor doe not provid a wai to see what altern data stream ar
in a file thei ar easi to make and allow an individu with basic knowledg to hide file
without have to resort to ani thirdparti tool
fortun there ar forens tool that can search ntf partit for altern data
stream
computercr file
evid mai also be found in inform gener by the oper system thi type of
inform is import becaus it can identifi that a certain activ ha taken place and in
most case the user is not awar that it is be written some common exampl of
computergener data avail for examin includ metadata registri page file
event log lnk file internet activ temporari data delet data and printerspool file
metadata
metadata is data about data and these file tidbit contain a tremend amount of
inform it can help determin who wrote a document who receiv open copi
edit move or print the document and when these event occur
window registri
the window registri is a central databas that store set and configur for the
oper system and most applic instal on the system the registri is an import
sourc of potenti evidenti data becaus it contain inform on user account type
url network share the run command histori and so on often softwar us by the
fraudster will creat a footprint in the registri that can provid valuabl insight into relev
activ that occur in the system
window page file
oper system have a limit suppli of random access memori ram and if an
oper system run out of physic ram and need more memori it will move some of
the data outsid physic memori and store it temporarili in a special file on the hard disk
thi file which is call a page file or a swap file is us to simul ram
window event log
event log ar file that record signific event on a comput in window system there
ar three type of event system applicat ion and secur the system log track
digit forens investig
3726 2011 fraud examin manual
miscellan system event includ event gener dure system startup like hardwar
and control failur the applic log track applicationrel event and applic
error such as fail to load a dll the secur log which is turn off by default track
securityrel event like logon and logoff time and chang to access right
lnk file
lnk file which ar also call shortcut refer or link to target file that mai be
applic document or system resourc click on a lnk file will either caus the
applic to start or the document to open and will prompt the applic system
resourc to run although the user mai creat these file the system gener creat them
when a user perform certain task these file therefor provid a histori of previous
open document and file
internet activ
web browser creat temporari file that store inform about websit that a user ha
visit these file can show websit that were recent visit and usual includ time and
date inform relev to the visit thei ca n also show imag previous view onlin
thi inform allow the examin to recov websit and imag previous view by
the system user
temporari file
applic will creat temporari file like those creat by web browser for exampl
certain commun softwar like instant messag im and chat softwar will keep a
histori of the user convers in a proprietari and sometim encrypt format
delet data
delet is a wide misunderstood function in comput becaus delet data is not the
same as destroi data choos the delet option eras the file refer from the tabl
of content but it doe not eras the file in fa ct data is not eras from a comput hard
drive until the file is overwritten
printerspool file
it is sometim possibl to recov an imag of the last page print on a printer when
comput run window oper system print file a printspool process occur
the process involv write the print job to file allow user to keep work while the
print job run in the background after the user creat a print job it is place in a queue
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3727
and is print when the printer becom avail to perform the job onc print is
complet the oper system delet the file but again delet file can be recov
digit forens softwar
in recent year a number of product have emerg for digit forens analysi thei rang
in complex featur and price these product ar continu updat as new technolog
requir new featur below is a gener list of the most frequent us product on the
market todai thi is sure to be constantli chang pleas note that the product
descript ar adapt from materi provid by the manufactur and the acf doe
not endors ani particular product
encas forens
encas forens is a comput forens softwar program by guidanc softwar it give
investig the abil to imag a drive and preserv it in a forens manner us the
encas evid file format lef or e01 a digit evid contain vet by court
worldwid
encas forens also contain a full suit of analysi bookmark and report featur
guidanc softwar and third parti vendor provid support for expand capabl to
ensur that forens examin have the most comprehens set of util
encas forens also offer power hidden volum detect and volum rebuild
capabl allow investig to review evid that would have been irretriev with
other comput forens applic
how encas forens work
obtain forens sound acquisit
encas forens produc an exact binari duplic of the origin drive or media then
verifi it by gener md5 hash valu for relat imag file and assign crc valu to
the data these check and balanc reveal when evid ha been tamper with or
alter help to keep all digit evid forens sound for us in court proceed
advanc product featur
examin can preview data while drive or other media ar be acquir onc the imag
file ar creat examin can search and analyz multipl drive or other media
digit forens investig
3728 2011 fraud examin manual
simultan encas forens also featur a case index thi power tool build a
complet index in multipl languag allow for fast and easi queri indic can also be
chain togeth to find keyword common to other investig thi unicodesupport
index contain person document delet file file system artifact file slack swap file
unalloc space email and web page in addit encas ha extens file system
support give organ the abil to analyz all type of data
enscript program
encas forens featur enscript program capabl enscript an objectori
program languag similar to java or c allow user creat to custom program to
help them autom timeconsum investig task such as search and analyz
specif document type or other laborintens process and procedur
provid action data and report on it
onc investig have bookmark relev data thei can creat a report suitabl for
present in court to manag or to anoth legal author data can also be
export in multipl file format for review
kei featur
advanc search option
internet and email support
multipl viewer
instant messag analysi
enscript program
bookmark
extens system file support
multipl acquisit option
for more inform about encas forens visit wwwguidancesoftwarecom
forens toolkit
creat by accessdata the accessdata forens toolkit ftk offer law enforc and
corpor secur profession the abil to perform complet and thorough comput
forens examin the ftk featur file filter and search function ftk
customiz filter allow investig to sort through thousand of file to quickli find the
evid thei need ftk is also a forens tool to perform email analysi
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3729
some of the main featur of thi product ar discuss below
integr comput forens
creat imag analyz the registri conduct an investig decrypt file crack
password identifi steganographi and build a report all with a singl solut
recov password from 100 applic har idl cpu across the network to
decrypt file and perform robust dictionari attack
kff hash librari with 45 million hash
enterpriseclass architectur
support larg complex dataset
becaus the ftk compon ar compartment the user will never lose work due
to a crash eg if the gui crash the worker continu to process data
provid the abil to back up and archiv case
everi copi of ftk 3 includ a total of four worker to enabl distribut process
it incorpor lab capabl such as the abil to leverag a central databas
infrastructur and share distribut process farm as well as collabor forens
analysi central casetask manag and web review thi is of particular valu to law
enforc and govern comput forens lab
power process and speed
distribut process allow the user to leverag up to three addit comput to
reduc process time and tackl massiv data set
true multiprocessor and multithread support that take advantag of hardwar
advanc
pre and postprocess refin allow user to control how imag ar process
an advanc datacarv engin that allow user to carv alloc and unalloc
data and specifi criteria such as file size data type and pixel size to reduc the amount
of irrelev data carv while increas overal thorough
optim dtsearch integr deliv fast index and fast search result
advanc analyt
ram dump analysi
an index search engin and a proper fullfeatur regular express engin for binari
search
broad file system compound file and email support
digit forens investig
3730 2011 fraud examin manual
support popular encrypt technolog such as credant safeboot utimaco ef
pgp and guardian edg
mac support
preview acquisit and analysi of live data
perform networkbas secur singlesystem forens acquisit of physic devic
logic volum and ram
secur remot devic mount
for more inform on accessdata visit wwwaccessdatacom
password recoveri toolkit
the password recoveri toolkit prtk fr om accessdata is gear toward law
enforc and corpor secur profession it allow examin to find and identifi
encrypt file on handheld desktop and server comput system prtk recov lost
forgotten or unavail password if user need access to lock file or if thei have
simpli lock themselv out of their file the prtk can get them back in
secur risk assess tool
how do hacker bypass an organ strongest secur measur mani peopl us the
same password to gain access to differ program and network thi could be on of the
weakest link in an organ secur profil some passwordprotect program ar
easi to crack while other ar virtual imposs but what if the same password is us for
both program by gain access to the weakest on fraudster have gain access to the
strongest on without need to crack both
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3731
recoveri properti statu
featur
enabl password manag
analyz file and their password with an option report file
recov all type of password regardless of password length
analyz multipl file at on time
recov multilingu password
prevent unauthor us with a person secur code
for more inform on accessdata visit wwwaccessdatacom
prodiscov forens
produc by technolog pathwai prodiscov forens is a comput secur tool for
law enforc that enabl comput profession to find all the data on a comput disk
while protect evid and creat evidentiari qualiti report for us in legal
proceed
featur
creat bitstream copi of the disk to be analyz includ a hidden hpa section
patent pend to keep origin evid safe
search file or an entir disk includ slack space hpa section and window
nt2000xp altern data stream for complet disk forens analysi
preview all file even if hidden or delet without alter the data on a disk includ
file metadata
digit forens investig
3732 2011 fraud examin manual
maintain multitool compat by read and write imag in the pervas unix
dd format
examin and cross refer data at the file or cluster level to ensur noth is
hidden even in slack space
automat gener and record md5 sha1 or sha256 hash to prove
data integr
examin fat12 fat16 fat 32 and all ntf file system includ dynam disk
and softwar raid for maximum flexibl
examin sun solari uf file system and linux ext2ext3 file system
integr graphic thumbnail viewer and registri viewer
integr window event log viewer
extract internet histori
util perl script to autom investig task
extract exif inform from jpeg file to identifi file creator
autom report gener in xml format save time and improv accuraci and
compat
gui interfac and integr help function ensur a quick start and eas of us
design to nist disk imag tool specif 316 to ensur high qualiti
prodiscov forens is a tool for comput forens analysi it is not possibl to hide
data from prodiscov forens as it read the disk at the sector level thi least intrus
approach also allow the investig to examin the file without alter ani valuabl
metadata such as last time access prodiscov forens will not alter ani data on the
disk prodiscov forens can recov delet file examin slack space and access
window altern data stream it can even allow the investig to preview search and
imag the hardwar protect area hpa of the disk with a patentpend process
prodiscov forens let the investig search through the entir disk for keyword and
phrase with full boolean search capabl to find the data thei want investig can us
the hash comparison capabl to find known illeg file or to weed out known good file
such as standard oper system file by emploi the includ data from the nation
drug intellig center in their hashkeep databas prodiscov forens search
capabl allow search for word or phrase anywher on the disk includ the slack
space
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3733
prodiscov forens automat creat evidentiari qualiti report need to document
result complet with everi file and hash signatur where evid wa found thi save
time and prevent error that might compromis an investig case
for more inform about technolog pathwai visit at wwwtechpathwayscom
gargoyl investig forens pro edit
gargoyl investig is a softwar tool creat by wetston for digit investig it is
us for perform incid respons field investig digit forens analysi threat
manag or complianc audit gargoyl investig perform a quick search on a
standalon system for known contraband or hostil or bad program it also provid
clue regard the activ motiv and intent of suspect or potenti suspect
gargoyl investig forens pro edit provid investig with inform
regard the content of a suspect comput along with inform about it owner
comput us gargoyl perform search for known bad or hostil program their
associ file and remnant of file onc identifi gargoyl also map the detect file
to the associ cyber weapon and classifi them into a categori of malwar
the forens pro edit is design for forens investig examin law enforc
personnel privat investig and forens lab us
digit forens investig
3734 2011 fraud examin manual
gargyol
gargoyl provid the investig with the abil to gather suspect characterist from the
inform reveal the comput sophisticat ion covert behavior and paranoia level
ha the suspect tri to delet incrimin program can all be deriv when search
for applic with a common theme these behavior can assist in assess suspect
capabl activ intent threat or conscious of guilt
for more inform about forens pro edit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
stego suit
the stego suit by wetston is a softwar bundl avail for the investig detect
analysi and recoveri of digit steganographi it identifi the presenc of steganographi
without prior knowledg of the steganographi algorithm that might have been us against
the target file
wetston stego suit compris four product stego watch a steganographi tool stego
analyst an imag and audio file analyz stego break a password cracker and the recent
ad stego hunter a steganographi applic identifi
investig digit forens
2011 fraud examin manual 3735
stego watch
stego analysi
stego break
digit forens investig
3736 2011 fraud examin manual
postmortem analysi of data recov from a digit crime scene can be a tediou process
when the digit data contain thousand of imag audio file or digit video that mai
contain other hidden evid the process can be imposs without the aid of kei
technolog and expertis stego suit tool provid the abil to quickli examin and
evalu digit imag andor audio data for the presenc of hidden inform
or commun
activ web scan of a websit to ensur that unauthor peopl ar not us the site
to exchang innocuouslook messag or smuggl proprietari data is also becom a
must the tool of stego suit baselin a web domain and continu scan the domain for
the presenc of hidden data insid digit imag
for more inform about the stego suit and other product by wetston visit
wwwwetstonetechcom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3801
trace illicit transact
interview wit to obtain financi data involv the systemat question of peopl
who have knowledg of the event the peopl involv and the physic evid
surround the case financi interview is not unlik other kind of interview but in
financi interview evid often develop in bit and piec that when view separ
might appear to lead nowher frustrat is common and tactic and techniqu might
have to be modifi dilig patienc and persist ar essenti for success result
comprehens guidelin for inform to be collect in financi interview
the follow is a checklist of gener inform that can be cover in the financi
interview
identif
full name
alia
reason for alia
birth
date and place of birth
citizenship
father name live if deceas when
mother name live if deceas when
address dure pertin year
resid address phone number
busi address phone number
other present or prior address
marit statu if marri date and place of marriag
if divorc when and where
spous maiden name
spous parent live if deceas when
children name and ag other depend
trace illicit transact investig
3802 2011 fraud examin manual
occup
present occup
compani name and address
present salari
length of time emploi
addit employ
prior occup
spous occup
gener background
physic health
mental health
educ
profession qualif
militari servic
passport social secur andor social insur number for identif purpos
ever been investig for financi crime
ever been arrest
ever file bankruptci if so who act as receivertruste
hobbi and interest
financi institut busi and person
financi institut account
safe deposit box request inventori in whose name content doe anyon els
have access
credit card
trust beneficiari donor or truste
mutual fund or other secur own
broker currenc exchang us
life insur
indirect deal eg through lawyer or account
cashier check
monei order bank draft travel check
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3803
sourc of incom
salari wage busi receipt
interest and dividend
sale of secur
rent and royalti
pension trust annuiti etc
gift monei properti etc
inherit
loan
mortgag
sale of asset
municip bond interest
insur settlement
damag from legal action
ani other sourc of fund ever
net incom and expenditur
current cash on hand includ cash in safe deposit box but not cash in bank
account
locat of current cash
largest amount of cash ever on hand locat
endofyear cash
note receiv
mortgag receiv
life insur polici
automobil
real estat
stock bond and other secur
jewelri fur
airplan boat
ani other asset valu
liabil
payabl
loan
asset purchas by financ
trace illicit transact investig
3804 2011 fraud examin manual
mortgag
bond
expenditur
debt reduct
insur premium
interest expens
contribut
medic
travel
real estat and other tax
household wage eg babysitt housekeep garden
casualti loss
busi oper
name and address
date organ and natur corpor partnership
compani or busi registr number
tax identif number
titl and duti
report arrangementsto and from whom
bank and cash handl arrang
invest where and when
subsidiari and associ
kei peopl
book and record
natur of account system eg cash accrual
period cover
locat
name of person maintain and control
type journal ledger minut book cancel check bank statement invoic cash
extern auditor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3805
busi receipt
form electron check or cash
ar all receipt deposit where
ar busi receipt segreg from person on
ar expens ever paid with undeposit receipt
arrang for foreign currenc payment
trade financ arrang letter of credit etc
direct method of trace financi transact
a subject incom can be establish by the direct or indirect approach the direct
approach or the specificitem method of prove incom reli on specif transact
such as sale or expens to determin incom the indirect approach reli on
circumstanti proof of incom indirect method will be discuss in the next section
to trace financi transact us the direct method the examin must obtain relev
financi record
financi institut
fraud examin should recogn that in most instanc bank record ar not readili
obtain substanti requir usual must be met to justifi legal process eg
subpoena search warrant and the like which bank will customarili demand as a condit
for disclosur preliminari investig is of the utmost import to lai the basi for
obtain such record more inform on bank transact is contain in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual
the avail of investig avenu often determin whether a promis fraud
examin will grind to a halt or proce successfulli legal advic from a prosecutor or
civil counsel should be sought in all such instanc it should also be recogn that bank
offici and employe can be question by fraud examin in the same manner as ani
other potenti wit and that their respons to proper inquiri might provid
import inform
bank record ar perhap the singl most import financi sourc avail to a fraud
examin in addit to their us as evid for fraud a bank record might provid lead
on sourc of fund expenditur and person affair
trace illicit transact investig
3806 2011 fraud examin manual
the follow inform can be of valu to fraud examin seek inform from
bank concern pertin financi transact of econom crime perpetr it is base
in part on the oper guidelin issu by the american banker associ to all
member bank in the unit state and on the train guid issu by the us
depart of the treasuri
type of financi institut
bank ar classifi primarili by their major servic
commerci bank offer busi and individu such servic as check account
loan and exchang instrument
save bank and save and loan associ handl save account and mortgag loan
trust compani handl properti for other under variou type of fiduciari
accommod
mani bank combin all three servic bank ar organ under either state or nation
bank law
the basic bank function ar as follow
receiv deposit
pai check
transfer fund
make loan
collect sundri financi instrument
hold and administ properti for other
perform other servic such as rent safe deposit box
intern bookkeep procedur
the intern recordkeep practic and procedur of bank not onli ar complex but
thei constantli ar chang becaus of the grow sophist of comput technolog
bank ar move steadili toward an electron fundstransf system that will elimin the
us of check such a system will automat transfer monei from the account of the
purchas to the account of the seller paper trail will disappear detail familiar with the
intricaci of intern bank oper is not essenti howev for the fraud examin to
obtain the type of inform necessari for investig what is essenti is the
knowledg that record of custom transact ar maintain and retain
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3807
electron bank
electron bank is possibl the most common form of bank todai electron bank
includ autom teller machin transact pointofsal transact us credit or
debit card smart card which ar gain popular in the us and ar alreadi popular in
europ wire transfer onlin bill payment through internet bank and biller websit
and tradit autom clear hous ach applic of direct payment and direct
deposit
all of these form of electron bank ar govern by the electron fund transfer act
efta 15 usc 1693 see appendix a the efta current requir financi
institut to keep record on all transact of 3000 or more
retent of record
the bank secreci act set forth a system of report and recordkeep requir
design to help track larg or unusu financi transact the act consist of two titl
titl i contain provis requir financi institut and secur broker and dealer
to keep extens record of the transact and account of their custom titl ii of the
act origin entitl currenc and foreign transact report act requir bank
financi institut which includ casino secur broker and dealer currenc
exchang and other and in some case individu to report certain transact to the
govern
titl irecordkeep
the regul govern recordkeep ar set forth in chapter 31 of the code of feder
regul at part 103 subpart c the recordkeep requir ar set forth for bank
nonbank financi institut secur broker casino and currenc dealer and
exchang under these regul all institut ar requir to keep a record of ani
financi transact of more than 10000
these regul provid in part that bank must keep an origin microfilm or other
copi or reproduct of most demand deposit check account and save account
record must be retain for five year the record must includ signatur card
statement ledger card or other record disclos all transact that is deposit and
withdraw and copi of custom check s bank draft monei order and cashier
check drawn on the bank or issu and payabl by it
trace illicit transact investig
3808 2011 fraud examin manual
in addit bank also must retain for two year all record necessari to reconstruct a
custom check account these record must includ copi of custom deposit
ticket thei must also retain record necessari to trace and suppli a descript of a check
deposit to a custom check account
although some of these requir appli to check written or deposit made in excess of
100 most bank find it cheaper to microfilm all pertin record includ the check and
deposit in amount less than 100 rather than sort their record into two categori the
bank secreci act also requir financi institut to retain a record of ani extens of
credit of more than 10000 as well as each tr ansfer of 10000 or more outsid the unit
state
titl iireport and recordkeep
titl ii of the bank secreci act is codifi as 31 usc 53115330 the purpos of
these section is to requir certain report or record to be file or kept by financi
institut section 5312a2 defin financi institut veri broadli to includ not
onli bank but also secur broker curr ncy exchang hous insur compani loan
compani travel agenc telegraph compani s issuer or cashier of check or monei
order auto boat and airplan dealer casino and person involv in real estat close
and settlement onli recent ha the treasuri depart begun to reign in much of the
nonfinanci institut transact busi in the by requir registr of these divers
enterpris
gain access to record held by financi institut
on of the most difficult challeng to the fraud examin will be to gain access to the
record held by financi institut although bank record ar on of the most import
sourc avail to fraud examin thei ar not readili obtain most suspect will
not willingli give their record to a fraud examin especi if the record contain
potenti incrimin evid
moreov financi institut author to di sclose bank record is restrict by feder
and state law for exampl the right to financi privaci act prohibit financi institut
from disclos financi inform about individu custom until the government
author obtain the custom consent a court order a subpoena a search warrant or
some other formal demand with limit except and even though right to financi
privaci act appli onli to demand by government agenc most bank and other
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3809
financi institut also will not releas such inform to privat parti absent legal
process such as a subpoena issu in a civil lawsuit
as a result substanti requir must gener be met befor bank will disclos such
inform in gener bank record can be obtain in most jurisdict by us on of
the follow method
civil discoveri
administr subpoena or summon
civil summon
custom author disclosur
court subpoena
grand juri subpoena
search warrant
furthermor the cost of obtain bank record can be quit high bank gener charg
both public and privat entiti to search and retriev record there ar usual addit
cost for the reproduct of record it might be prudent for the examin to limit record
request as much as possibl
despit such complic the examin might attempt to obtain the financi record of
suspect by contact their former spous former spous might have bank record
us to the fraud examin that thei mai be happi to turn over similarli the bank
record might also be a part of a divorc settlement or a lawsuit
type of financi record
the financi record identifi and discuss below ar limit to those of particular
interest to fraud examin
account open document
account open document includ the record requir to creat a bank account but the
type of file requir mai vari depend on the type of account
person account
signatur card ar the kei record requir to open and us a person account the
signatur card is the evid of a contract between the custom and bank when a
depositor open an account the bank requir that a signatur card be sign by sign the
trace illicit transact investig
3810 2011 fraud examin manual
card the depositor becom a parti to a contract with the bank under which he accept all
rule and regul of the bank and author the bank to honor hi order for
withdraw fund for a corpor or a partnership account the signatur card is
accompani by copi of resolut of the board of director or partnership agreement
name the person author to draw check on the account
the signatur card is a sourc of valuabl inform although it form vari the card
usual contain such data as bank connect and the date and amount of the initi
deposit the initi deposit trace through the bank record mai disclos a sourc of
incom the identif of the person who open the account might be signific
especi if the depositor us an alia
mani bank investig the refer give n by a new custom thei might also make
inquiri of variou credit report agenc thi inform is contain in a
correspond file or a credit file that can contain comment of the person who open the
account and might show inform given by the depositor when open the account
in bank us automat data process adp the signatur card also contain an
account number assign to the custom in trace inform about a subject
transact with the bank the account number must be us if it doe not appear on the
signatur card it can be locat in the bank crossrefer file assign account number
ar encod on other document relat to the depositor by mean of a system call
magnet ink charact recognit micr the card also might contain the depositor
social secur number
the signatur card might defin the account as either a regular or a special check account
the main differ between the two is the servic charg made by the bank the regular
check account is us mostli by busi and individu who maintain larg averag
balanc the special check account is us by individu who usual have small
account balanc
when request the signatur card the fraud examin should determin whether the bank
maintain ani type of central file most larg bank have a central file that list all
depart with which a custom ha had deal if the bank ha such a file the
examin doe not need to check with each depart to obtain inform the subject
might at on time have had a bank account that later wa close request for inform
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3811
from a bank about a subject should alwai includ a refer to both activ and close
account record of close account ar usual maintain in a separ file
in addit to a signatur card the accountopen file for a person account might
contain a copi of some form of identif eg driver licens the account holder
provid the bank
busi account
in addit to the document requir for open a person account the open
document for a corpor account will includ a copi of the corpor resolut
author the open of a bank account and possibl the compani articl of
incorpor these document should indic who the compani corpor offic ar
and it date of incorpor
for an unincorpor compani to open a bank account the bake institut might
requir the compani to provid a do busi as dba registr fictiti name
registr or busi registr certif gener the requir document
depend on the applic state law
negoti check
cancel check written by a subject or receiv from other provid the fraud examin
with much more than amount paye and endorse of particular interest ar check that
have been cash all bank us a seri of code or symbol imprint on the front of a
check to show that the check ha been cash the specif code us in variou area can
be obtain local
a us techniqu to help examin negoti check is to list the inform from the
check on a spreadsheet either manual or electron check should be list by number
and date on the left with the paye amount and purpos of the check if known to the
right thi will show the subject routin monthli or annual expenditur that can be us
for comput the compar net worth the absenc of a check for a recur payment
for a particular month might indic a cash payment which in turn would indic possibl
undisclos cash incom examin the back of check payabl to cash and note where thei
were cash the depositori stamp can identifi the bank at which the check wa cash
thi inform mai provid a lead to anoth bank account
trace illicit transact investig
3812 2011 fraud examin manual
check 21
with imag exchang and the emerg fraud detect technolog bank will be abl to
know if suffici fund ar in the account whether the custom is who he claim to be
and whether the check is legitim 6
in juli 2003 congress issu final regul regard the avail of fund and
collect of check these regul known as check 21 creat substitut check a
type of negoti instrument that becam the legal equival of paper check thi
provis facilit the effici collect and return of check in electron form by
allevi the collect requir that depositori bank actual send the origin paper
check to collect bank for payment
under check 21 a depositori bank can transfer check inform electron to a
collect bank via a substitut check for present the collect bank is then requir
to take present of the substitut check as long as it meet all the legal requir of
the origin check therefor rather than actual process and send an origin
paper check across citi and state the deposit bank can now collect the substitut
check electron
a substitut check is a paper reproduct of the origin check that state thi is a legal
copi of your check you can us it the same wai you would us the origin check upon
transfer present or return a bank warrant that the substitut check submit is an
accur depict of the physic check and that no depositori bank drawe drawer or
endors will be ask or requir to pai a check that ha alreadi been paid essenti thi
legend on the substitut check inform consum of their right to expedit recredit of
an amount charg if there is a disput item and the origin or substitut copi is
necessari to prove the valid of the charg on the account under thi law the valid of a
charg becom an issu when a consum is charg twice for a check the substitut check
is illeg or the origin check wa not properli copi dure the imag process
furthermor check 21 place the risk of loss associ with substitut check on the
reconvert bank that first transfer present or return the substitut check
6 robertson bill and ken gahr whitecollar crime fighter vol 6 no 1 check 21 blackjack for check fraud
fighter ridgefield ct white collar crime101 llc 2004
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3813
although the reconvert bank can alloc such loss among themselv thei mai remain
liabl under warranti claim indemn or recredit claim
trace check
trace check is facilit by the us of bank identif symbol fraud examin do
not have to understand the intern bookkeep procedur us by bank the concept of
bank identif symbol howev is of interest all check print for bank
institut contain an aba transit number these number repres an identif code
develop by the american banker associ the aba transit number enabl a check
to be rout to the bank of origin in the process of rout a trail is left
magnet ink charact recognit
magnet ink charact recognit micr is a machin languag and is a check design
standard to which all bank must conform numer inform is print in magnet ink
on the bottom of bank check and other document thi code is electron scan by
comput that convert the magnet ink notat into electron impuls readabl by a
comput micr inform is print in group call field the first field on the left
on bank check is the feder reserv check rout code and the next is the aba transit
number these number also appear in the upper right corner of the check
the account number field show the drawer assign account number at the bank when
the check is process through the bank an addit field is ad on the right for the
amount of the check the dollar amount of the check should alwai equal the encod
micr amount these two figur should be compar to make sure that the subject did not
alter the return check all check draft and similar item that ar not encod with
magnet ink cannot be clear through the feder reserv system without special handl
prefix number of citi in numer order
when the aba establish the citi and state prefix number system it did so by the
geograph locat of the reserv citi in exist at the time the prefix number
identifi citi and state document for exampl number 1 through 49 as seen in the
follow exampl were given to the most popul reserv citi and major bank
center at the time the rest of the number 50 through 99 were assign to the state from
east to west the princip number 50 60 70 80 and 90 were given to the main collect
financi center new york pennsylvania illi noi missouri and california the number
befor and after each princip number were gener design to nearbi state
trace illicit transact investig
3814 2011 fraud examin manual
prefix number of citi and state
149 reserv citi
5099 state
5058 eastern state
59 alaska american samoa guam hawaii puerto rico and the virgin island
6069 southeastern state
7079 central state
8088 southwestern state
9099 western state
reserv citi major bank center and state prefix number
1 new york ny 34 tacoma wa 68 virginia
2 chicago il 35 houston tx 69 west virginia
3 philadelphia pa 36 st joseph mo 70 illinoi
4 st loui mo 37 fort worth tx 71 indiana
5 boston ma 38 savannah ga 72 iowa
6 cleveland oh 39 oklahoma citi ok 73 kentucki
7 baltimor md 40 wichita ks 74 michigan
8 pittsburgh pa 41 sioux citi ia 75 minnesota
9 detroit mi 43 lincoln ne 76 nebraska
10 buffalo ny 44 topeka ks 77 north dakota
11 san francisco ca 45 dubuqu ia 78 south dakota
12 milwauke wi 46 galveston tx 79 wisconsin
13 cincinnati oh 47 cedar rapid ia 80 missouri
14 new orlean la 48 waco tx 81 arkansa
15 washington dc 49 muskoge ok 82 colorado
16 lo angel ca 50 new york 83 kansa
17 minneapoli mn 51 connecticut 84 louisiana
18 kansa citi mo 52 main 85 mississippi
19 seattl wa 53 massachusett 86 oklahoma
20 indianapoli in 54 new hampshir 87 tennesse
21 louisvil ky 55 new jersei 88 texa
22 st paul mn 56 ohio 89
23 denver co 57 rhode island 90 california
24 portland or 58 vermont 91 arizona
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3815
25 columbu oh 59 al as gu hi pr vi 7 92 idaho
26 memphi tn 60 pennsylvania 93 montana
27 omaha ne 61 alabama 94 nevada
28 spokan wa 62 delawar 95 new mexico
29 albani ny 63 florida 96 oregon
30 san antonio tx 64 georgia 97 utah
31 salt lake citi ut 65 maryland 98 washington
32 dalla tx 66 north carolina 99 wyom
all bank in an area serv by a feder reserv bank or branch carri the rout symbol of
the feder reserv bank or branch the feder reserv rout symbol frr
encompass the first four digit of the ninedigit rout number thi rout symbol
identifi where the feder reserv bank is locat the first two number of the frr
design the feder reserv district in which the bank is locat as shown below the 12
feder reserv district and number ar as follow
01boston ma
02new york ny
03philadelphia pa
04cleveland oh
05richmond va
06atlanta ga
07chicago il
08st loui mo
09minneapoli mn
10kansa citi ks
11dalla tx
12san francisco ca
the next two number design the specif bank locat of the feder reserv branch a
thrift institut is design when 2 is ad to the first digit of the frr for exampl
if there is a thrift institut in the first district boston the design would be 21 if
the thrift institut is in a district that ha a doubl digit such as san francisco the
design becom 32 the next four number of the rout number sequenc ar
7 al alaska as american samoa gu guam hi hawaii pr puerto rico vi virgin island
trace illicit transact investig
3816 2011 fraud examin manual
alwai uniqu to the financi institut and the last number of the nine digit rout
number is a digit deriv from an algorithm calcul
deposit ticket
the deposit ticket is the princip sourc document for credit the custom account
deposit ar first record on the deposit ticket or slip that usual segreg currenc
coin and check the check ar list separ in mani local the depositor write
the aba number or the name of the maker of the check on the deposit ticket either of
these might help to identifi the sourc of the check in other local the bank write the
aba number on the deposit ticket and in some bank no identifi data is enter on the
deposit ticket regardless of the detail contain on a deposit ticket bank recordkeep
system allow deposit to be identifi and trace to their sourc
in work with deposit ticket the fraud examin must rememb that sometim the
depositor split the deposit mean onli part of the check is actual deposit in these
instanc the custom either receiv cash or request that part of the proce be appli
to a note or interest due to the bank in some instanc it might be import to determin
the total amount of cash and check present for deposit befor deduct when thi is
the case the fraud examin should inquir from the bank how split deposit ar handl
deposit item can be broken down into two type onu item and clearinghous item
onu item
an onu item is a check or draft that is present for payment where the depositori bank is
also the payor bank for exampl a check written by a custom of on bank is deposit by
the paye at anoth branch of the same bank the bank should be abl to trace the sourc
of ani onu item the sourc might be loan proce certif of deposit wire transfer
bank check or check from other deposit at that bank if the deposit is the proce from
a loan obtain and analyz the loan file examin of the loan file is discuss later in thi
chapter if the deposit came from a wire transfer trace the wire transfer to the origin
bank to see where the fund for the wire transfer origin thi search could lead to other
account other wit coconspir or offshor transact
bank check such as cashier check and monei order could be an indic of smurf
oper smurf is the process by which a subject structur a deposit into sever
transact each less than 10000 to avoid file a currenc transact report as requir
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3817
under the bank secreci act as the video portion of thi cours make clear smurf is a
veri common techniqu for avoid report requir look for larg number of
cashier check in even amount deposit on a regular basi
clearinghous item
clearinghous item ar those that must clear through other local bank and ar therefor sent
to a local clearinghous for process and thei includ those item that ar sent to outof
town bank such as feder reserv bank becaus track down these item will involv
obtain record from thirdparti bank the trace process might be more time
consum and will probabl requir legal process
to determin whether an item is an onu item or a clearinghous item first look to see
whether the bank on which the check wa drawn is the same as the bank in which it wa
deposit if the name ar not the same check the endors on the back of the check
if the item ha a differ bank endors or a feder reserv bank endors it is
a clearinghous item the endors should contain the name of the process bank or
it transit number
wire transfer
a wire transfer is a method of transfer monei from on bank to anoth these transfer
ar process by bank and by wire remitt compani such as western union and
moneygram
like other transact bank keep record of wire transfer the record will identifi who
sent the wire where it wa sent the date and the amount if the transfer wa to a bank in
the unit state the bank should have a record of the account number of the account into
which the fund were deposit if the wire wa sent offshor howev trace the transfer
depend on the law and polici of the countri and the receiv institut
intrabank transfer
other depart within a bank can credit the depositor account for fund collect such
as the proce of loan or item held by the bank for collect item held by the bank for
collect ar not alwai deposit to the custom account but ar sometim remit
directli to the custom
trace illicit transact investig
3818 2011 fraud examin manual
save account
these ar refer to as time deposit becaus sometim thei ar not as readili avail to the
custom as deposit to a check account fund in a save account might be subject to a
30dai notic of withdraw
certif of deposit
certif of deposit cd ar interest bear invest product that provid limit access
to the monei invest and a modest rate of interest cd ar intend to be held until
matur at which time the monei mai be withdrawn togeth with the accru interest
mani bank impos penalti on monei with drawn from a cd befor matur
bank statement
a bank statement is a summari of all the transact of a bank account bank statement
ar provid for all type of bank account includ check account monei market
account save account cap account us by those who often deal in secur
transact and other
bank statement ar help becaus thei contain import inform in gener the
detail on a bank statement includ the name and address of the bank the name and address
of the account holder the account number the open balanc a record of all debit
transact eg cash withdraw from a teller automatedtel machin atm cash
withdraw atm payment check payment onlin payment debit card payment bank
fee etc a record of all credit transact eg direct transfer cash deposit check
deposit etc and the close balanc
bank statement summar the financi activ of the account holder for a specif period
usual a month if a credit card is ti to the account the bank statement also reflect
credit card balanc but usual not specif transact
todai bank statement ar mail to account holder or ar access onlin some bank
still return origin check along with the bank statement to the account holder other
provid page with smaller facsimil of the front and back of each check
gener bank statement contain a wealth of inform in most bank statement
financi activ in the account is shown along with a ti credit card balanc typic
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3819
bank statement show numer type of transact includ check electron check
and electron fund transfer as thei ar charg against the account
other exchang instrument
exchang instrument ar vehicl by which the bank transfer fund and these instrument
includ cashier check bank draft travel s check bank monei order and certifi
check bank exchang instrument ar often purchas with currenc therefor thei mai
be good sourc of inform about a subject currenc transact
cashier check
cashier check ar issu and certifi by a bank with itself as the drawer these item ar
call treasur check when issu by a trust compani thei ar frequent an excel
lead to other bank account stock real properti and other asset becaus cashier check
can be held indefinit subject sometim purchas cashier check instead of keep
larg amount of currenc on hand in reconstruct a subject transact with cashier
check be sure that all check ar account for becaus subject sometim exchang
previous purchas check for new on
bank check such as cashier check can be extrem time consum and expens to
locat unless you know the date and number of the check howev if the subject ha
deposit a bank check into hi account or purchas a bank check us a check from hi
account then copi of bank check ar much easier to obtain becaus the subject account
record will reveal the date and number of the bank check
bank draft
bank draft ar check drawn by the issu bank on it account with anoth bank often
thi other account is in the geograph area where the purchas desir to make a
payment bank draft also can be us when a subject doe not want to carri a larg amount
of cash
travel check
travel check ar check issu in predetermin amount by the american express
compani and sever larg us bank local bank purchas them from issu compani
of us bank and then sell them to the public travel check requir two signatur of
the purchas on when purchas and the other when cash travel check ar trace
trace illicit transact investig
3820 2011 fraud examin manual
by their serial number the issu compani usual keep record of travel check sent
to it by the sell bank travel check do not expir
the local bank that sold the check might keep a copi of the sale order that list the serial
number if the number ar not avail the issu bank might be abl to suppli the
inform if it is known when the check were purchas cancel check can be
obtain from the american express compani or from other issu bank a target can
purchas larg amount of travel check from on bank and place them in anoth to
avoid arous suspicion by deposit cash
it is import to note howev that travel check ar declin in us accord to the
feder reserv usag of travel check ha declin each year sinc their peak in the mid
1990
bank monei order
bank monei order ar similar to cashier check but usual ar for small amount like
cashier check monei order mai be resort to by subject reluct to us cash
certifi check
certifi check ar custom check stamp with the pai bank guarante that the
maker signatur is genuin and that there is enough monei avail in the holder account
to cover the amount to be paid certifi check ar liabil of the bank and when paid
ar kept by the bank these check ar immedi charg against the custom account
by debit memorandum some bank permit custom to retriev the origin check by
surrend the debit memorandum
loan record
loan record can provid import inform regard a subject with loan record the
collater that secur them and the result of bank credit investig a bank ha a
wealth of inform when a bank make a commerci loan to an individu it requir
detail statement of asset and liabil from the borrow the loan file also might
includ the result of credit inquiri regard pai habit loan amount and present
unpaid balanc a bank credit depart gener maintain the follow basic record
the credit or loan file thi file includ the loan applic financi statement and
gener econom histori of the custom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3821
the liabil ledger thi contain the custom past and present liabil to the bank
these sheet also contain inform such as the loan date note number amount of the
loan interest rate due date and payment
the collater file a complet descript of the item pledg as secur for loan
record of such collater can provid valuabl inform about a subject asset
indic of unusu loan includ loan in odd amount or loan that were not deposit
into the subject bank account loan that show unusu repay also should be trace
lumpsum payment and oddamount payment ar unusu acceler payment or larg
paydown on the balanc might indic sudden wealth
loan record also might reveal collus between the bank and the subject for instanc if
the record show that a loan repay is long overdu or the loan ha an extend rollov
collus might exist also loan made in contravent to the bank normal loan or a loan
that appear to be in excess of the individu abil to repai suggest a special
relationship between the bank and the subject
loan proce might be deposit into hidden account or hidden account might be us
for loan payment loan might be secur by hidden asset or cosign by previous
unknown cohort altern the subject might have taken out the loan for someon els
trace the ultim disposit of the proce will uncov those lead
trace the disposit of loan proce is similar to trace deposit transact the
proce could have been deposit within the bank into the subject account or someon
els account or thei might be us to purchas a certif of deposit the fund might
have been sent to the wire transfer depart for transmitt to anoth bank more
commonli the proce will be given to the custom in the form of a bank check the
bank should be abl to trace the check to determin where it wa deposit or cash the
loan proce might have been us to financ an asset the down payment for which came
from illeg fund trace the sourc of loan payment will provid some lead for instanc
the payment might be made from a previous unknown account payment made by a
thirdparti might reveal a cohort or a kickback or bribe scheme
the loan applic should contain a financi statement or it equival on which the
subject mai identifi other account and asset the file might also contain tax return credit
trace illicit transact investig
3822 2011 fraud examin manual
agenc report and note of interview by the loan offic the secur for the loan if ani
might be a hidden asset
mortgag loan file
mortgag loan file often contain the most detail financi statement submit by the
subject the loan file should identifi the titl compani that handl the close the
homeown insur carrier the close attornei and perhap the real estat broker the
titl compani file often contain copi of the cashier check us for the down payment
which can identifi new account
the homeown insur polici might contain a rider that list the homeown valuabl
asset such as jewelri or fur perhap with apprais and purchas receipt the close
attornei will have mani of the same materi found in the titl compani file the real
estat broker might keep copi of person check us for deposit and provid
inform about other real estat transact by the subject dont forget to look for
acceler or lump sum payment on the mortgag balanc
check credit loan
check credit is anoth loan servic that more and more bank ar offer under a check
credit plan the bank agre to extend credit to a custom up to a maximum amount if the
amount of the check is not in the custom a ccount the result overdraft is set up as a
loan the bank then bill the custom for the loan anoth plan is a special check
account that is us onli up to a predetermin amount under a loan agreement the
outstand balanc is treat as an instal loan by the bank copi of loan agreement
and statement under both plan can be obtain from the bank file
credit card record
bank ar increasingli do busi in credit card under bank credit card plan the
cardhold can charg purchas at store restaur and other place that agre to accept
the charg under most plan the cardhold can elect to pai the entir balanc in on
payment or to pai in instal under arrang similar to a loan account
the credit card record that ar import to the econom crime investig ar the
applic for a card and the bank copi of monthli statement sent to the cardhold
credit card applic requir a consider amount of financi inform and some of
the inform mai be the same as that found on an applic for a bank loan in todai
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3823
environ credit card mai be ti to bank account and mai not requir a separ
applic
credit card statement also contain a great deal of import inform gener these
statement contain the name of the credit card issuer the cardhold account number a
summari of the transact on the account payment inform and a list of all the
transact that occur dure that month bill cycl ie purchas payment credit
cash advanc and balanc transfer
bank collect depart record
the bank collect depart which is normal involv in collect amount due on
instal contract and note can be us to collect person check usual in larg
amount and with special instruct thu circumv the normal recordkeep
associ with check account such a transact will not be reflect on the target
regular check account statement but will appear in the collect depart record a
copi of the check also will be microfilm
safedeposit box record
safedeposit box ar privat vault space rent by bank to custom becaus state law
differ the natur of the relationship vari between a bank and the safedeposit box holder
bank keep no record of safedeposit box content and rare know what the box contain
the rental contract record identifi the renter the person or peopl who have access to the
box their signatur and the date of the origin agreement and later renew thei also
might contain other identifi inform includ the name of the initi bank
offic the offic name could be signific if the subject who might have us an alia
in rent the box must be identifi
record show access to the box vari from bank to bank but gener thei contain the
signatur of the peopl enter the box and usual the date and time of entri the
entri record ar file in boxnumb order the frequenc of entri and the time and date
of entri might be signific and might correspond to the time and date of deposit or
withdraw from other account or to the purchas and sale of secur properti and in
other situat
becaus the bank record will not show the content of the box the fraud examin can
request permiss to inventori the box with the target present carefulli note and
trace illicit transact investig
3824 2011 fraud examin manual
describ the exact content for exampl legal descript on deed number of insur
polici etc
bank secreci act document
under the bank secreci act bank and other financi institut ar requir to file
currenc transact report suspici activ report and other report detail larg
cash transact or suspici activ see the chapter on monei launder in the
financi transact section of the fraud examin manual for a complet descript of
each report these report will reflect the ident address and social secur number of
the person make the cash transact total amount and certain other inform some
organ ar exempt from the file requir includ certain highvolum cash
busi government agenc and payrol account holder
stock brokerag record
mani stock brokerag hous now offer the same type of servic as bank such as check
write privileg credit card loan against the valu of secur held as well as their
normal secur busi all record pertain to the subject should be request
howev make sure that the request specif includ the follow
applic when a custom open an account he typic will fill out an account
applic that will contain person and financi data such as bank account
custom account card thi card is kept in the broker file for refer it will includ all
transact conduct for the custom
signatur card a signatur card should be on file which will show all those author to
conduct transact on the account
secur receipt these receipt ar issu to a custom when he deliv secur to the
broker for sale
cash receipt these receipt ar issu to a custom when he deliv currenc to the
broker
confirm slip these ar issu to a custom to show the type of transact bui or
sell and the amount involv in the transact
secur deliv receipt thi receipt is sign by the custom when a secur purchas
is deliv to the custom
brokerag account statement thi statement is usual issu monthli and provid
inform on all transact conduct dure the report period it list all
purchas and sale the name of the secur the number of unit the amount per unit
the total amount of the transact the account balanc payment receiv from the
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3825
custom disburs to the custom and the secur that ar held by the
brokerag firm for the custom
concern stock brokerag record the examin is primarili interest in the sourc of the
fund us to purchas secur or deposit to a cash account the subject monthli
account statement which ar somewhat more complex than equival bank statement
reflect these transact thei can be interpret with the help of explanatori materi on
the statement or with the assist of an employe of the firm receipt for stock purchas
and deposit should reflect whether the payment wa in currenc or check and the aba
code of the bank on which the check wa drawn brokerag check issu to the subject
from stock sale proce also should be examin as these might be deposit directli to a
new account or endors over and paid directli to third parti for the purchas of asset
tax return and relat document
person tax return if avail might provid indirect evid of illicit payment such as
profit or loss from previous undisclos busi ventur or interest and dividend on
hidden cd and bank account the return might also reveal deduct and expens
such as real estat tax that can lead to previous unknown fund or asset commerci
bribe ar often report as consult fee or other miscellan incom the target
account and tax prepar should also be interview and their file and work paper
subpoena if possibl
establish a databas
after obtain the relev financi record the examin should establish a databas or
spreadsheet for analysi by place the record into a standard format the fraud
examin will be more easili abl to compar record uncov pattern and extract variou
represent of the data
both spreadsheet and databas have benefit and drawback the benefit of us
spreadsheet includ 1 most individu who work in the financi sector ar familiar with
spreadsheet 2 spreadsheet allow data to be translat easili into bar pie and other
graphic chart 3 thei allow data to be filter and sort easili 4 and spreadsheet allow
for the us of pivot tabl to displai data spreadsheet howev ar restrict to a limit
number of record and mai requir a larg amount of harddriv space for data storag
trace illicit transact investig
3826 2011 fraud examin manual
convers databas ar more effect than spreadsheet when deal with larg set of
record databas offer the follow featur 1 data can be sort and manipul
easili 2 chang to record can automat updat queri and report and 3 relat
tabl and form can be us to reduc data entri time in some environ such as
microsoft offic data can be easili switch from a spreadsheet to a databas and vice
versa for eas of manipul or displai
regardless of the type of program us the inform us is the same the type of
inform retriev from financi record is the data enter into the spreadsheet or
databas each column or field hold some type of inform and thi inform form
the basi for the column us as illustr in the tabl below there ar 16 primari
element that can be pull from bank record an addit field for comment is ad
for miscellan data
1 check number 9 signatori
2 entiti from 10 account number from
3 bank from 11 transact type
4 date written 12 first endors
5 paye 13 transact bank
6 amount written 14 deposit to account
7 amount deposit 15 date of transact
8 memo written 16 comment
17 locat
detail on what goe into each of these field ar provid below
1 check number thi field should contain the number of the financi instrument written on
or deposit to the account the follow item howev will not contain a check
number wire transact autom teller machin transact pointofsal
transact and debit memo a deposit amount would includ a check number unless
the deposit wa cash an incom wire or a credit memo
2 entiti from thi field should contain the name of the compani or person the check is
fromth owner of the account on which the check is written
3 bank from thi field should contain the name of the bank from which the check debit
memo or wire transfer wa issu if desir the aba bank number can also be enter
to identifi the bank sourc of the fund
4 date written thi field should contain the date the check wa written the transact
eg wire transfer or debit memo wa gener or the withdraw wa made thi is
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3827
not the date shown on the bank statement bank statement show the clear date
the date that check clear the bank the clear date can be us if no other date ar
present eg if there is no check copi provid by the bank but the check is list on
the statement
5 paye thi field should contain the name of the payeeth person or entiti to whom
the check wa written
6 amount written thi field should contain the amount written on the face of the check if
there is a discrep between the numer and written amount the bank will usual
honor the written amount check the amount the bank ha imprint on the bottom
righthand side of the check in magnet ink charact recognit micr to determin
which amount the bank us
7 deposit amount thi field should contain the amount of monei credit to the bank
account by a cash or check deposit wire transfer or credit memo thi amount is put
into a field separ from the amount written for eas of separ sort and ad
the amount
8 memo thi field should contain ani notat written on the memo line or box on the
check
9 signatori thi field should contain the name of the person or person who sign the
check as the author signatori when enter the data into thi field initi ar
suffici if the person referenc is clear
10 account number from thi field should contain the account number on which the check
debit memo or wire transfer wa written
11 transact type thi field should contain the type of transact eg check transfer
wire debit memo credit memo deposit atm deposit or withdraw or atm
purchas
12 first endors thi field should contain the name of the first endors the first endors
is the person or person who endors the check ie sign the check on the back as
the endors on check made out to a compani the back of the check mai be
stamp with the compani name bank and account number and no endors signatur
should be shown
13 transact bank thi field should contain the name of the bank the item wa deposit
to or where the check wa cash thi could be the bank from which record have
been subpoena the bank stamp on the back of the check or the bank at which the
check wa cash if the check wa negoti at a nonbank financi institut eg
check cash agenc monei transmitt or casino the name of that compani can be
place here with other specif enter in the comment field
14 deposit to account thi field should contain the account number to which the check wa
deposit it should be note that some bank write the account number on the back of
trace illicit transact investig
3828 2011 fraud examin manual
check when cash thi serv as an identifi for the check casher therefor a bank
account number locat on the back of a check mai not mean that the check wa
deposit into that account rememb to check the front of the check for a cash
stamp
15 date of transact thi field should contain the date the check wa deposit or
negoti
16 comment the comment field is us for other comment about the transact nsf
could be enter into the comment field to signifi that there were nonsuffici fund
to cover the check addit inform about the endors eg driver licens or
alien registr number the name of a secondari endors or note written on the
back of the check by the teller could also be place in the comment field
1 7 locat thi field should be us for transact made at an autom teller machin
or a pointofsal if the locat is import
there ar three rule to follow when enter record into a spreadsheet or databas
enter data as fulli as possibl
be consist in refer to entiti
have all record review for accuraci
enter the data complet will help avoid have to enter data into the record a second
time in the past some user of financi record enter the check and deposit data locat
on the statement first and then enter the inform from cancel check as the
check were obtain thi howev should not be done although transact that ar
found onli on statement can be enter into the databas check and deposit data should be
enter from the check written and deposit slip
when input data consist is import even if check writer have not been
consist in their spell or us of name the enter data must be consist otherwis
the sort result will not be accur if for exampl a differ version of a name is us
the variou name can be place in the comment field
final all record enter should be doubl or triplecheck for accuraci it is prefer
that the review is conduct by someon who did not enter the data becaus it is hard to
catch on own error for exampl on wai to check the amount in a field is by ty
them to the total on the statement
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3829
indirect method of trace financi transact
in contrast to the direct approach method of prove incom which reli on specif
transact the indirect approach reli on circumstanti proof of incom us such as the
net worth analysi
almost all individu and busi entiti determin incom by the specificitem or
specif transact method most entiti engag in legitim pursuit maintain book
and record in which thei record transact as thei occur and their incom comput
ar base upon the total transact dure a given period in fraud examin incom
can usual be establish more readili by the direct approach for thi reason it should be
us whenev possibl
in mani fraud scheme howev a subject book and record ar not made avail to
the examin therefor an indirect approach must be taken us on of the follow
method the net worth analysi asset method the expenditur sourc and applic of
fund method or the bank deposit analysi method although these method ar
circumstanti proof court have approv their us in civil and crimin case on the theori
that proof of a subject unexplain fund or properti might establish a prima faci
understat of incom
element of financi examin techniqu
to examin compani book and record for fraud the fraud examin must know and
understand the environ in which the entiti oper the entiti account system
includ the type of scheme relev to the entiti and the control that ar design to
prevent fraud basic conceal method and variou detect techniqu
the environ
it is critic to understand the busi or govern environ where the entiti
oper to understand the environ you must have a firm grasp of the natur of the
busi the competit the market share the financ structur the vendor supplier
major custom the method of receipt ie cash or on account and disburs the
procur method ie whether good and servic ar obtain through a bid
process or not the gener econom climat and the personnel pool avail to the entiti
it is through the understand of the entiti as an oper enterpris that you can assess
the risk associ with the particular oper the risk and peculiar of the entiti
trace illicit transact investig
3830 2011 fraud examin manual
will help shape the natur of potenti fraud scheme that can be perpetr by the entiti
employe
the account system
understand the basic account system and it integr with the oper of the
busi is import the basic account system includ the system of intern
control is the kei element in provid evid of past present and futur intern fraud
intern fraud that is onbook will appear within the entiti financi record the audit trail
might be obscur but it will exist nonetheless if the intern fraud is offbook then other
evid might with dilig fraud examin techniqu be uncov
all intern fraud ha an impact on the bottom line howev fraud in small amount will be
harder to detect becaus of it immateri amount rel to the financi statement as a
whole if an intern fraud scheme is larg enough it will have an effect on the entiti
financi statement
variou detect techniqu
though there ar mani fraud detect method whatev method is emploi will usual
requir the examin of sourc document mani time these sourc document provid
the evid necessari to prove fraud in a court of law addition in mani case the
sourc document will help establish the intent of the fraud offend
individu or group of document can be examin in sever wai to detect possibl fraud
becaus most intern fraud is continu in natur group of document can be analyz
for except and trend mani time a larg popul must be sampl to determin
with statist valid if document have been alter statist sampl quantifi the risk
of arriv at an incorrect conclus it is gener necessari with larg popul
exampl
fraud examin want to examin sale invoic for proper approv in a compani with 2
billion in annual sale the averag sale inv oic is 15000 by select a valid statist
sampl of sale the examin can project the effect of intern control regard the
approv of the sale invoic assum proper interpret of test result if defici exist
in the control then those result should becom appar in the test result
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3831
statist sampl
if an anomali is found in the financi statement and transact and further investig
is desir it might be appropri to pull a statist sampl by us statist sampl
the examin can look at fewer transact rather than the entir popul
there ar two basic risk associ with statist sampl sampl risk and nonsampl
risk sampl risk is the probabl that the sampl is not repres of the popul
nonsampl risk is the possibl of make the wrong decis nonsampl risk cannot be
quantifi howev fraud examin can control it through adequ plan and
supervis of audit engag
when us statist sampl you must draw a random sampl that is each member of
the popul must have an equal chanc of be select there ar two primari type of
statist sampl attribut and discoveri
sampl for attribut
sampl for attribut is us by auditor or fraud examin look for a deviat
occurr rate deviat error and except ar synonym when perform thi type of
sampl you ar look for the presenc or absenc of a defin condit
exampl
for each sale invoic in the sampl is there a correspond ship order the answer to the
question can onli be ye or no if the control condit is that each sale invoic is not
record until there ha been a ship order attach then ani no respons for a book
sale would repres an error
discoveri sampl
thi is the best type of sampl for audit for fraud becaus it is sampl until on
occurr is found discoveri sampl deal with the probabl of discov at least
on error in a given sampl size if the popul error is a certain percentag thi type of
sampl is direct toward a specif object such as
exampl
if i believ some kind of error or irregular might exist in the record what sampl size will i have to
audit to have assur of find at least on exampl
trace illicit transact investig
3832 2011 fraud examin manual
discoveri sampl is best us when look for thing such as forg check or
intercompani sale that have been improperli classifi as sale to outsid
random sampl
when us the discoverysampl techniqu the select of sampl should be done
randomli for a sampl to be random everi member of the popul must have an equal
opportun of be select
item in the popul can be number and select by refer to a random number
tabl or if the item in the popul alreadi have number such as check number or
invoic number then a random sampl can be select by us a random number
gener from a comput softwar program to select a random sampl 1 identifi a
number for everi item in the popul 2 correspond the random number with each
item in the popul 3 select the rout through the random number tabl and 4 select
the sampl
addition make sure that you consist follow the pattern pick for correspond
random number to item in the popul and that you document the random number
select process in the event the sampl need recheck or addit sampl item need
to be select for test if the sampl is select randomli and the sampl is larg enough
then the sampl should repres the popul
document
fraud will often be conceal in question document miss or alter document ar
some of the princip indic of fraud and such occurr should be thoroughli
investig certain document ar a natur part of the account system howev when
a pattern of these document occur or an unusu quantiti of these document is note
further examin might be warrant
the commonsens test should be appli to ani document that appear to have
question featur under the circumst such as amount too high or too low odd
name time and place and ident name and address fraud can often involv
question journal entri in the record such as inappropri charg to expens
account or inventori for exampl larg journal entri in the inventori account near the
end of the year might point to a coverup of inventori theft
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3833
an overabund number of void might mean that a fraudster is void legitim sale
and pocket the proce excess credit memo might also signal the revers of
legitim sale and the divers of cash too mani late charg might indic that an
account receiv is delinqu becaus it is a fictiti account and therefor will never be
paid stale item on ani reconcili bear watch for exampl stale outstand check
mai indic attempt conceal of embezzl loss or divert cash origin
document such as invoic should be us to author transact becaus photocopi
or duplic document can be subject to manipul and alter
networth method
examin for fraud not onli involv the examin of the entiti book and record it
might also entail the estim of the fraud suspect chang in net worth or expenditur
if fraud is suspect then us either of the networth method might help in establish
evid of a fraud
the networth method or compar networth analysi is us to prove illicit incom
circumstanti by show that a person asset or expenditur for a given period exce
that which can be account for from known or admit sourc of incom the networth
method is a reliabl method for estim a person illgotten gain the method is us
extens by the intern revenu servic especi in drug and monei launder case
the networth method reli on the familiar balanc sheet format readili recogniz in the
busi world and present a complet financi pictur of a subject it is base on the
theori that increas or decreas in a person net worth dure a period adjust for live
expens allow a determin of incom
net worth can be defin as the differ between asset and liabil at a particular point in
time by compar the subject net worth at the begin and end of a period usual a
calendar year the econom crime investig can determin the increas or decreas in net
worth adjust ar then made for live expens to arriv at incom incom includ
receipt deriv from all sourc thu by subtract fund from known sourc salari
wage interest or dividend for exampl fund from unknown or illeg sourc can
be calcul
the court approv us the networth method in the lead suprem court case of
holland v unit state 348 us 121 1954 along with the three companion case smith v
trace illicit transact investig
3834 2011 fraud examin manual
unit state 348 us 147 1954 friedberg v unit state 348 142 1954 and unit state v
calderon 348 us 160 1954 these case outlin broad principl to govern the trial and
review of case base on the networth method of prove incom
the networth method is often us when sever of the subject asset or liabil have
chang dure the period under examin and when the target financi record ar not
avail
an individu asset liabil and live expens can be determin from a varieti of
sourc such as
the subject
inform or sourc
real estat record
judgment and lien record
bankruptci record
state motor vehicl record
loan applic
financi statement
account work paper
lawsuit and deposit
surveil
credit card applic or statement
tax return
insur record
child support and divorc record
employ applic and salari check
companion or associ
cancel check and deposit item
the question might aris regard why item that do not chang should be includ in the
networth statement particularli sinc thei have no bear on the final result the answer is
that a networth statement give a complet financi pictur of the subject and therefor
should be as complet as possibl so that the target will not be abl to contest it on the
ground that item were omit addition the networth statement can be the
foundat for examin of the subject and a complet statement will prove extrem
valuabl at that time
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3835
there ar two basic method of networth comput the asset method and the expenditur
or sourc and applic of fund method thei ar discuss in detail herein
the asset method should be us when the subject ha invest illeg fund to accumul
wealth and acquir asset caus net worth valu of asset over liabil to increas from
year to year the expenditur method is best us when the subject spend illicit incom on
consum such as travel and entertain that would not caus an increas in
net worth
each method ha similar step begin both method by assembl the financi and
behavior profil identifi all major asset and liabil sourc of incom and major
expens dure the relev period the increas if ani in the subject net worth or the
level of expenditur is then compar to the legitim fund avail unaccount fund
might be infer to come from illicit or hidden sourc
the financi profil
the first step is to prepar the financi profil of the suspect the financi profil is
essenti a financi statement with certain modif and addit that show what the
defend own ow earn and spend at ani given point or over a period of time the
profil might yield direct evid of illeg incom or hidden asset or circumstanti
evid thereof by show that the suspect expenditur exceed known sourc of
incom
the financi profil will identifi most illicit fund that ar deposit to account or
expend in signific amount it will not catch rel small currenc transact
particularli if thei were for conceal activ consum or for unusu onetim
expens such as medic bill
determin the target asset liabil incom and expens from the follow sourc
interview
the target
associ
document from financi sourc eg account banker
bank account record
mortgag and loan file
credit card record
trace illicit transact investig
3836 2011 fraud examin manual
tax return
public record
busi file
real estat file
court record
to prepar the financi profil follow the follow six step
step 1
identifi all signific asset held by the suspect an asset is cash on hand or anyth els
of valu that can be convert into cash
cash on hand is coin and currenc bill coin feder reserv note in the subject
possess on the subject person in the subject s resid or other place in a nomine
hand or in a safedeposit box it doe not includ monei in ani account with a financi
institut when us the networth method the item that mai be the most difficult to
verifi is the amount of cash on hand which is usual claim by defend to be suffici
to account for all or part of the unknown sourc of incom to establish a firm start net
worth it must be shown that the target had no larg cash sum for which he wa not given
credit thi is usual done by offer evid that negat the exist of a cash hoard
such evid might includ
written or oral admiss of the subject concern net worth a sign networth
statement or an oral statement as to cash on hand
low earn in preexamin year as shown by record of former employ
andor tax return file by subject
net worth as establish by book and record of the subject
financi statement present for credit or other purpos at a time befor or dure the
period under examin bank loan compani and bond compani ar some of
the better sourc from which to obtain thi type of document
bankruptci befor examin period
prior indebted compromis of overdu debt and avoid of bankruptci
instal bui
histori of low earn and expenditur and check return for insuffici fund a
financi histori cover member of the subject famili also might be help
loss of furnitur and busi becaus of financi reason
receipt of some type of public assist
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3837
step 2
identifi all signific liabil a liabil is an oblig debt aris from an oral or
written promis to pai
step 3
identifi all incom sourc dure the relev time period incom includ monei or other
thing of valu receiv in exchang for servic or good incom is never includ as an
asset loan proce ar not includ as incom but ar treat as an asset that is offset by a
correspond liabil
step 4
identifi all signific expens incur dure the relev period an expens is ani
payment for consum for person or busi reason over the relev time period
expens ar not includ as liabil
step 5
analyz the inform you have collect by us the follow chart
the financi profil
typic asset for each signific asset determin
resid
real estat
bank account
stock and
bond
automobil
insur
cash on hand
jewelri
cloth
collect
pension
home
furnish
boat
when wa it acquir and from whom
how much did it cost
how wa it paid for currenc check cashier
check
what sourc of fund wa us to acquir it
what document exist for the purchas and
where is it
typic liabil for each signific liabil determin
mortgag
other loan
line of credit
credit card
instal purchas
account payabl
what wa the origin amount of the liabil
what is the present balanc due
when wa the liabil incur
what wa the purpos for the loan or debt
how were the proce us and where were thei
deposit
trace illicit transact investig
3838 2011 fraud examin manual
tax and other bill
alimoni and child support
what secur collater if ani wa given for the
debt
what document exist for the transact and
where is it
wa the debt written off as a bad loan for tax
purpos
who wa the creditor or lender
typic sourc of fund
for each sourc of fund determin
salari
gift
rental incom
dividend
interest
sale of asset
insur
proce
commiss
and fee
award
inherit
disabl
payment
what wa the total amount dure a given period
what wa the sourc
how wa it paid for currenc check other mean
when were the fund receiv
where wa it deposit
how wa it spent
what document exist eg w2 or 1099
form and where is it
typic expenditur
for each major expenditur item determin
rent and
mortgag
health cost
interest on
loan
credit card
car payment
travel
cloth
util
food
insur
what wa the total amount spent
how wa it paid for
where were the fund obtai ned to pai the expens
what document exist and where is it
when wa the payment made
the behavior profil
the financi profil might give inaccur or fals neg read unless certain activ
ar identifi which is done through prepar the behavior profil the behavior profil
might also provid evid of a possibl motiv of the crime such as larg debt as well as
addit evid of illicit fund for exampl if the suspect spent signific amount of
cash and had no correspond cash withdraw from hi disclos bank account or no
admit sourc of cash incom he must have other undisclos sourc of incom
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3839
us the financialbehavior profil as a guid request an interview with the suspect pin
down the suspect incom asset and account otherwis the subject might invent
excus or prepar fals testimoni or document to account for the unexplain incom
networth analysi
ani recipi of fund whether honest or suspect ha onli four wai of dispos of
incom save it bui asset pai off debt or spend it
networth analysi begin with the complet of a suspect financi profil through
identif of the suspect asset liabil incom and expens a networth statement
can be determin onc a networth statement is complet through the identif of a
suspect asset liabil incom and expens chang in the suspect net worth can be
compar to hi known incom and differ can be infer to be from unknown
sourc
compar net worth asset method
again the asset method is advis when it is suspect that the subject ha purchas
asset or otherwis increas hi net worth it can be appli for ani number of year but
ideal it is best to start with the year befor the suspect fraudul activ began the
formula is
asset
liabil
net worth
prior year net worth
net worth increas
live expens
incom or expenditur
fund from known sourc
fund from unknown sourc
in comput the compar net worth these issu should be consid
all asset should be valu at cost not fair market valu subsequ appreci or
depreci of asset is ignor
the amount of fund avail to the subject from legitim sourc should be
estim or comput gener the amount of the subject expenditur
trace illicit transact investig
3840 2011 fraud examin manual
particularli hardtodocu live cost such as food and entertain should be
estim conserv to give the subject the benefit of ani doubt in attempt to
estim person live expens you should consult the us bureau of labor statist
thi agenc publish an annual tabl that detail person live expens such as
util food and ga
alwai attempt to interview the subject to identifi all alleg sourc of fund and to
negat defens that he might rais later
to comput the compar net worth us the asset method perform the follow step
establish the start point gener the year befor the target illeg activ begin
thi will be refer to as year on in the follow comput
comput the target net worth at the end of year on identifi all asset held by the
subject valu at cost includ asset acquir earlier and the amount of current
liabil
the differ between the valu of the asset and the liabil is the target net worth at
year on or open net worth
exampl
year on
asset at cost liabil
resid 100000 mort gage balanc 90000
stock and bond 30000 automobil loan
automobil 20000 balanc 10000
total 150000 total 100000
asset 150000
liabil 100000
net worth 50000
comput the target net worth for year two us the same method
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3841
exampl
year two
asset at cost liabil
resid 100000 mortgag balanc 50000
stock and bond 30000
automobil 20000 automobil loan
cd 50000 balanc 0
total 200000 total 50000
asset 200000
liabil 50000
net worth 150000
note that in the exampl the target net wo rth increas by 100000 dure year two
to determin the sourc of such an increas determin the target known incom
dure year two and subtract known expens for year two
exampl
year two
incom expens
salari 30000 mortgag interest
payment
20000
commiss 20000 live expens 10000
total 50000 total 30000
the differ between the target incom and expens equal the increas or decreas in
net worth from year on to year two which can be attribut to known sourc here it is
20000 subtract the increas in net worth fr om known sourc from the total increas in
net worth to determin the amount from unknown sourc
exampl
total increas in net worth 100000
increas attribut to known sourc 20000
dollar from unknown sourc 80000
repeat the abov step for subsequ year as necessari
trace illicit transact investig
3842 2011 fraud examin manual
expenditur method
the expenditur method also known as the sourc and applic of fund method
compar the suspect known expenditur and known sourc of fund dure a given
period of time ani excess expenditur must be the result of incom from unknown
sourc it is close relat to the networth analysi account variat of the same
principl
the tabl below illustr the formula us to comput net worth us the expenditur
method the step ar discuss in greater detail below
expenditur applic of fund
known sourc of fund
fund from unknown sourc
to comput the subject net worth us the expenditur method follow three step first
establish the subject known expenditur for the relev year expenditur includ the
us or applic of fund for ani purpos includ deposit to bank account purchas
of major asset travel and entertain expens and payment of loan and credit card
debt second identifi all sourc of fund avail to the subject includ loan and gift
as well as cash on hand from previou year third comput the differ between the
amount of the suspect expenditur and hi known incom to determin the amount
attribut to unknown sourc
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3843
exampl
subject year on year two
applic of fund
increas in bank balanc 2000 10000
down payment on resid 10000
purchas of automobil 10000
mortgag payment 8000 20000
credit card payment 5000 10000
other expens 15000 30000
total 40000 80000
less known sourc of fund
cash on hand 1000
salari 30000 38000
interest earn on save
account 1000 2000
loan proce 8000
total 40000 40000
fund from unk nown or illeg sourc 0 40000
the follow exampl demonstr how a networth analysi assist prosecutor in their
amend complaint against a fraud suspect
exampl
r peeri ag 40 the execut director of a fivest commiss plan a lowlevel
radioact wast dump wa charg with two ne w charg of feloni theft peeri wa also
charg with on feder count of wire fraud
peeri wa accus of wire 115000 to a person account in georgia and prosecutor
said thei suspect him of take 600000 he wa also charg with two count of us
commiss fund in nebraska to bui car a 1990 bmw valu at 67000 and a
1991 bmw valu at 92000
peeri wa paid 52000 annual he live in a hous valu at 305000 and at the
time of hi arrest had six luxuri car includ jaguar mercedesbenz and bmw
trace illicit transact investig
3844 2011 fraud examin manual
bank deposit analysi method
the bank deposit analysi method is anoth method to prove unknown sourc of fund by
indirect or circumstanti evid like the other indirect method of proof the bank
deposit method comput incom by show what happen to a subject fund it is
base on the theori that if a subject receiv monei he can onli do two thing with it he
can deposit it or he can spend it
thi method is appli when asset and liabil ar fairli constant from year to year and
indic of extravag expenditur ar nonexist but through investig the
suspect known sourc of incom ar be deposit into financi institut
under thi method incom is prove through analyz bank deposit cancel check and
the subject currenc transact adjust for nonincom item ar made to arriv at
incom a basic formula for the bank deposit method is
total deposit to all account
transfer and redeposit
net deposit to all account
cash expenditur
total receipt from all sourc
fund from known sourc
fund from unknown or illeg sourc
the bank deposit method is recommend as a primari method of proof when most of the
subject incom is deposit and the subject book and record ar unavail withheld
incomplet or maintain on a cash basi us of the bank deposit method is not limit to
these circumst howev even though the target book and record might appear to
be complet and accur the method can still be us and there is no requir to
disprov the accuraci of the book and record
the basic sourc of inform for thi analysi includ interview analys of the book
and record and analys of the bank account a thorough interview will determin the
subject expenditur by cash and check identi fy all bank account and determin all loan
and other receipt
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3845
total deposit
total deposit consist not onli of amount deposit to all bank account maintain or
control by the target but also deposit made to account in save and loan compani
invest trust brokerag hous and credit union total deposit also includ the
accumul increas of cash on hand becaus some subject have bank account in
fictiti name or under special titl such as special account no 1 truste account
or trade account the investig should look for thi type of account dure the
investig if a subject list check on a deposit ticket and deduct an amount paid to him
in cash split deposit onli the net amount of the deposit should be us in comput
total deposit
addit item that must be includ in deposit ar properti and note that the subject
receiv in payment for servic the accept practic is to consid these item as
depositori into which fund have been place for futur us
net deposit
all transfer or exchang between bank account as well as fund that ar redeposit ar
nonincom item and ar subtract from total deposit to yield net deposit failur to
elimin these item would result in an overstat of incom
cash expenditur
cash expenditur consist of the total outlai of fund less net bank disburs the total
outlai of fund includ all payment made by cash or check there is no need to determin
which part wa paid by cash and which part by check total outlai includ but ar not
limit to
purchas of capit asset to invest determin from settlement sheet invoic
statement and the like
loan repay determin from loan ledger of bank or other creditor
live expens can be determin from the same sourc present in the net worth
and expenditur section
purchas busi expens less noncash item such as depreci rental expens
and the like
trace illicit transact investig
3846 2011 fraud examin manual
net bank disburs can be determin by the follow formula
net deposit to all account
begin balanc
net bank fund avail
end balanc
net bank disburs
fund from known sourc includ but ar not limit to salari busi profit
insur proce gift receiv loan and inherit fund from known sourc ar
subtract from total receipt or incom to arriv at fund from unknown or
illeg sourc
rebut defens to indirect method of proof
circumstanti evid of excess incom is often met with the defens that the extra fund
came from cash accumul earlier or from other legitim sourc such as loan from
rel to rebut these defens the fraud examin must pin down the amount of cash on
hand at the begin of the relev period through for exampl amount list on
financi statement or claim in interview and do the follow
obtain a financi histori of the target and spous through interview and other mean
show date and place of employ salari and bonus and ani other relat
incom
determin whether the spous had ani separ sourc of fund that were us to
purchas jointli held asset or deposit in joint account if so the spous must be
includ in the financi profil calcul
claim of a prior substanti cash hoard might be rebut by show that the target
live penuri borrow monei made instal purchas incur larg debt
wa delinqu on account had a poor credit rate or file for bankruptci claim that
cash came from famili or other privat loan might be rebut by show that the
alleg lender wa incap of gener the amount supposedli lent the absenc of
ani document reflect the sourc of the alleg loan no bank account
withdraw and the absenc of other sourc of fund avail to the lender
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3847
the networth analysisif record can be obtai nedi a signific tool in document ill
gotten gain with thi as a basi the follow section cover the major scheme us to
commit fraud against compani and government agenc
locat hidden asset
common assethid techniqu
there ar mani techniqu a fraudster might us to hide illgotten gain a target mai
attempt to preserv hi asset by open hidden bank account purchas real estat
through a straw or front or transfer hi asset to other parti or to account that might
escap detect
transfer to famili member or parti under their control
the most common mean of hide asset particularli real estat and busi interest is to
transfer the asset into the hand of anoth parti that will allow the target to maintain
control in mani case the target will transfer the asset to a spous or anoth member of
the spous famili and a husband might make the transfer in hi wife maiden name
such transfer can be identifi through a search of voter registr marriag record and
probat in the spous maiden name transf er to famili member can be detect by
compar the target previou financi statem ent with the most recent on those asset
appear on the oldest statement but not appear on the most recent statement should be
examin close to determin the natur of the transact the purchas ident and the
consider for the sale
children or famili trust
a target might seek to protect asset by transfer them to a children or famili trust from
a person estat these asset would then be protect from judgment or bankruptci
proceed in a court of law if the transfer wa made to defeat creditor howev it can be
set asid by the court
home mortgag paydown
in mani case subject seek to hide their asset from seizur by prepai a signific
portion of their home mortgag by do thi the hider mai successfulli shelter hi asset
in a homestead exempt as allow in texa florida and other state that will surviv
trace illicit transact investig
3848 2011 fraud examin manual
bankruptci or other claim against them by document the mortgag prepay the
fraud examin can often show undisclos or hidden incom from outsid sourc
exampl
a cashier check for 96000 wa found to ha ve been us as a prepay to a home
mortgag by obtain the front and back of the cashier che ck fraud examin were abl
to locat anoth bank account belong to the defend
insur polici
some target mai purchas insur under the term of a whole life or univers life
insur polici the borrow mai make addit payment on the polici these payment
accru at a high interest rate and enhanc the overal valu of the insur polici
a sophist subject might deposit substanti moni into an exist insur polici
think that the fraud examin will not look beyond the face valu of the polici into the
equiti built up by prepay the fraud examin should therefor alwai examin the
financi statement of a target to locat insur polici and examin the equiti in these
polici as a potenti asset
prepaid credit card
mani credit account todai permit the card holder to prepai their account mani peopl
attempt to hide asset have us the prepay option to hide cash from creditor
prepay of credit card account can also be found in cash manag account cma
offer by stock brokerag firm
save bond purchas
drug dealer and tax evad often us save bond purchas as a mean to conceal
their readi cash in sever recent case defend in financi crime have purchas
bond in their individu name their spous name in their maiden name or their
children name
cashier check and travel check
mani crimin purchas cashier check and travel check to hide their financi
deal and reduc the amount of cash thei have to carri by purchas cashier check or
travel check in denomin of less than 10000 which is the threshold for file a
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3849
currenc transact report ctr the crimin can carri negoti financi instrument
that can be exchang almost ani place in the world
comput databas
to begin a computerbas investig determin which record ar avail next
determin how much record check is necessari which record should be focus on and
the locat of concentr area of concentr might includ voter registr
record court record or real estat file
locat asset through subpoena
although examin investig fraud do not have an absolut right to see nonpubl
record those who ar involv in investig involv civil or crimin proceed
might have subpoena power allow them to obtain such record includ bank account
and loan record record from account and tax prepar includ incom tax return
and relat document mortgag compani record telephon record credit card
statement credit report compani record hotel and travel record telex record
overnight packag envelop and passport
locat asset offshor
some target might try to hide their asset offshor often in tax haven and secreci
jurisdict histor some of the most popular offshor jurisdict have been
switzerland the cayman island the netherland antil and panama
to locat offshor asset fraud examin should take all of the follow step
review domest bank account record for wire transfer or other transact involv
offshor bank account
determin whether the subject person travel oversea oversea travel can often be
document from us custom record avail through fincen
attempt to locat the subject travel agenc
attempt to identifi mean emploi to move cash offshor by
us of multipl cashier check
overnight mail envelop
other method
trace illicit transact investig
3850 2011 fraud examin manual
after fund have been trace offshor the examin should look for transfer back to the
unit state a sophist target might us a foreign attornei or bank offic as a truste
or front to purchas asset in the unit state or appoint the truste as manag of a us
busi
subject also might obtain access to their asset offshor by us foreign credit card mani
intern institut now offer mastercard or visa account and all account record ar
maintain in the foreign countri
sophist subject might also obtain foreign passport in a fictiti name if request
some countri offer such passport to peopl who deposit 25000 in the staterun financi
institut
it mai difficult to obtain inform on foreign bank but it is not imposs db
publish sever guid with inform about busi in latin america europ and
other region of the world the us depart of commerc ha foreigncountri expert
who can direct you to sourc of busi inform on ani countri in the world
also with the expans of the internet as a mean of global commun inform
on foreign countri and busi is avail through the internet or through a
commerci databas or onlin servic
in hi book competitor intellig leonard fuld provid a us chapter on locat
inform on foreign busi he suggest the follow resourc as start point
secur broker with expertis in deal with foreign busi
the intern trade commiss
intern trade show
foreign consul
foreign chamber of commerc
foreign magazin and directori
fuld provid a list of consul chamber of commerc magazin and directori in hi
book fuld suggest check euromonei 500 which contain profil of the world top 500
bank or the europa world year book which provid basic data on bank around the world
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3851
the text of newspap such as the new york time or the washington post mai be search
for articl on the foreign bank or the foreign countri involv the text of these and other
larg newspap ar avail through onlin servic such as lexisnexi
if the subject engag in a mailord or retail busi a simpl wai to get inform
about hi bank account is to send him a check ronald l mendel in hi book how to do
financi asset investig suggest bui a small item from the subject by us a check
when the cancel check is return it will provid the name and possibl the account
number of the subject bank he suggest that if the subject doe not engag in mailord
sale the same goal mai be accomplish by send the subject a small refund check
offic of intern affair
the us depart of justic offic of intern affair oia in certain
circumst can offer assist to us fraud examin seek to recov
offshor asset
oia is respons for
extradit request
request for foreign documentari evid bank and busi record and other
offici document
interview and deposit of foreign wit
assist to obtain appear of foreign wit in us court
foreign search and seizur compel handwrit exemplar and
electron surveil
the oia us a number of legal resourc to obtain inform from foreign countri
such as letter rogatori and mutual legal assist treati mlat
letter rogatori
letter rogatori ar formal request by the court of on countri to the court of anoth
countri
the inform need for a letter rogatori request is as follow
the fact of the case show at least a reason suspicion that the offens under
investig might have been commit
the name and identifi inform of peopl or entiti involv in the matter
trace illicit transact investig
3852 2011 fraud examin manual
the name and identifi inform of wit or entiti whose name might be
on bank record if account ar held in other name
the name address and other inform concern bank busi or bank
account number
the offens be investig or prosecut in the unit state to includ penalti
the assist request of the foreign countri whether it is document testimoni
freez of asset etc if you want a foreign magistr to question a wit write out
the question that you want the wit to be ask even if you ask to be present dure
the question
the procedur to be follow how to authent busi document and record for
us in us court
the procedur for make formal request by a letter rogatori is as follow
call the oia team handl the relev part of the world concern the search for
guidanc and assist
draft a letter rogatori follow an exemplar or other materi provid by the oia
have the oia repres review and approv the draft
the prosecutor will then file a motion in feder court for issuanc of a letter rogatori
togeth with a memorandum in support and propos order submit two copi on
for the clerk and on for the foreign court to be sign by the judg
the judg sign both letter rogatori
file on sign letter rogatori with the court clerk
have the court clerk authent the second sign letter rogatori either via apostil
or exemplif certif
have the letter rogatori translat into the proper languag
send the sign letter rogatori and translat to the oia for transmiss through
diplomat channel to the proper foreign govern
the minist of justic in the foreign countri normal present the letter rogatori to
the appropri court
the foreign court determin whether to execut the letter rogatori if the
determin is favor the court then obtain the document testimoni and other
inform
evid result from the execut of the letter rogatori is return through
diplomat channel to the oia
the oia will then forward the inform to the prosecutor
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3853
letter rogatori should be written in simpl nontechn english and should not includ
unnecessari inform that mai confus court in the receiv foreign state avoid us of
the term discoveri similarli to avoid the appear of a fish expedit that mai result
in refus of the foreign countri to execut the request try not to us phrase such as ani and
all document request for document should be as specif as possibl if particular
procedur to be follow by the foreign court ar prefer includ the specif in the
letter rogatori for exampl verbatim transcript place wit under oath or permiss
for us or foreign counsel to attend or particip in proceed if possibl
mutual legal assist treati
mutual legal assist treati mlat ar treati between the unit state and
foreign countri that provid for the exchang of inform and document relat to
narcot monei launder and other financi crime
request for foreign assist under mutual legal assist treati mlat ar usual
quicker and more effici than file letter rogatori the procedur for make formal
request by mlat is as follow
no us court involv is requir
the prosecutor call the oia for guidanc and will send a draft request to the oia for
edit
when the oia director approv the request the oia transmit the request to the
foreign central or compet author
if a translat is requir the request agenc is respons for obtain it
the oia transmit the translat to the request countri
the request countri proper author determin whether the request meet treati
requir and if it doe transmit the request to the appropri record agenc
for execut
the execut author transmit the evid through the proper author to the oia
which forward it to the prosecutor
the fraud examinerprosecutor should inspect the evid for respons and
complet as well as certif of authent of busi record notifi the oia at
onc of ani problem
the unit state current ha bilater mlat in forc with the follow countri
anguilla antigua and barbuda argentina australia austria bahama barbado beliz
belgium brazil british virgin island ca nada the cayman island colombia cypru
trace illicit transact investig
3854 2011 fraud examin manual
czech republ dominica egypt estonia european union finland franc germani
greec grenada hong kong sar hungari india ireland israel itali jamaica japan
korea latvia liechtenstein lithuania luxembourg mexico montserrat morocco the
netherland panama the philippin poland romania russian feder saint kitt and
nevi saint lucia saint vincent and the grenadin south africa spain sweden
switzerland thailand trinidad and tobago turk and caico island turkei unit
kingdom uruguai and venezuela
anoth method of obtain foreign bank or busi record is by obtain a releas and
consent form from the defend execut of such a waiver can be compel by order of
a us court thi procedur is not univers accept particularli in switzerland the
channel island the turk and caico island or the cayman island
public record
of cours a great deal of inform that is us in trace illicit transact particularli
real and person properti file is a matter of public record for more inform see the
sourc of inform and access inform onlin chapter
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3901
report standard
document result is a particularli import function in fraud examin in mani
instanc the written report is the onli evid that the work wa perform case can be
won or lost on the strength of the written report it convei to the litig all the evid
and provid credenc to the fraud examin and to the examin work it forc the
examin to consid hi action dure an investig by requir that thei will be
document it omit irrelev inform therebi allow pertin fact to stand out a
firstrat written report is base on a firstrat examin
prepar
the fraud examin must adequ prepar prior to ani interview or informationgath
process proper prepar entail analyz what is to be expect as an end product it
should also involv have a good idea of what is to be learn from each wit
activ listen is an essenti function of effect report write the fraud examin must
have good listen skill so that the inform is properli assimil evalu and
commun to other listen skill ar lear ned listen involv perceiv what the
respond is actual commun to do so properli you must set asid ani
preconceiv notion and listen object not onli to what is be said but to how it is
said and why the fraud examin should withhold judgment until the entir messag ha
been heard
activ listen often involv particip with the respond dure the informationgath
process particip convei interest in the subject and promot rapport
particip might requir react openli to inform by verbal and nonverb
respons
accuraci of report
written report must be accur becaus an inaccur report will affect the credibl of
the report and the report author each contact an examin make dure the cours of a
fraud examin should be record on a time basi in a memorandum of interview ie a
written record us to document all interview conduct dure the investig
report standard investig
3902 2011 fraud examin manual
although there is no need to recapitul testimoni word for word for accuraci sake the
fraud examin should includ all fact of possibl relev
you should reconfirm date and support inform with the respond it is import
to reconfirm the fact befor the report is written not after attach to the report if ani
should be complet describ inaccuraci and careless error ar inexcus and can
render a report useless
clariti
investig report on fraud examin should convei pertin inform in the
clearest possibl languag if necessari quot the respond directli provid the
quotat doe not distort the context onli convei object fact ie unbias evid that
is not influenc by person feel interpret or prejudic do not editori or
give judgment us complex or technic term in their proper context and where
necessari explain their mean do not us jargon sinc the report might be read by peopl
who ar not familiar with esoter or technic terminolog
imparti and relev
report all fact without bia and everyth relev should be includ regardless of which
side it favor or what it prove or disprov at the outset of a fraud examin the
examin should carefulli determin what inform will be need to prove the case and
attempt to includ onli thi inform a report should includ onli those matter that ar
relev to the examin howev almost everi investig yield much inform of
which the relev is not immedi known in such case it is best to opt for
complet
timeli
timeli of report is extrem import becaus it tend to enhanc the accuraci of
wit testimoni anoth aim of timeli is to preserv the examin memori of the
interview all interview should be transcrib as soon as possibl after the question
upon complet the examin the examin should prepar a final or interim report
whichev is appropri as soon as possibl
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3903
common report mistak
conclus and opinion
in a reportwrit context conclus and opinion ar similar but not ident
conclus ar base on observ of the evid wherea opinion call for an
interpret of the fact
the fraud examin must be veri circumspect about draw conclus in most
situat the conclus from the examin should be selfevid and should not need
to be point out in the report if the conclus ar not obviou the report might need to
be clarifi
the fraud examin must also avoid state opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic specif
prohibit statement of opinion regard guilt or innoc as thi is the job of the judg
or juri see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
opinion regard technic matter ar permit if the fraud examin is qualifi as an
expert in the matter be consid for exampl a permiss expert opinion might be in
regard to the rel adequaci of an entiti intern control anoth opinion might
discuss whether financi transact conform to gener accept account principl
evid
legal standard provid guidelin for handlin g evid and maintain it integr the
fraud examin can avoid problem of evid mainten by simpli documentingin
memorandum formth receipt or releas of all evid
copi document
most evid in fraud case will be in document form when oper under a law court
order that compel a custodian to furnish origin document the examin should copi
those document prefer in the presenc of the custodian then the examin should
furnish the custodian with a receipt describ the document copi or taken a sampl
receipt can be found in the sampl report in the appendix to thi section
safeguard and maintain document
after obtain document the examin should secur them for evid be sure that onli
those peopl with an absolut need for the document can gain access to them for practic
report standard investig
3904 2011 fraud examin manual
purpos it is usual best to copi all document origin document ar usual not
includ in report mark all origin document in a uniqu manner prefer by us
initi and date to avoid defac origin us a small but distinct tick mark or other
form of identifi
when document ar voluntarili furnish leav the origin in place and work with the
copi if origin ar later lost stolen or misplac the copi can normal be introduc
in court under the best evid rule see the law section of the fraud examin manual
dont take shortcut with evid and certainli do not lose or misplac crucial document
it is inexcus for a fraud examin to mishandl evid do so will almost certainli
compromis the case
effect notetak
notetak is a demand and necessari fraud examin skill good report ar base on
good note onc the note have help the examin prepar a memorandum of interview
thei have fulfil their essenti purpos howev some jurisdict requir that note
pertain to crimin matter be retain for evid
the most common type of note take includ manual stenograph and electron
manual notetak is the most usual method it main advantag is that no extra peopl
need to be present dure the interview howev manual notetak can be obtrus and
distract dure question
a stenograph might be present dure the interview to take note rather than a verbatim
transcript thi allow the interview to concentr on the question a potenti
disadvantag of thi method is that the respond might be inhibit by the presenc of
anoth individu
electron notetak commonli entail tape record an interview then summar the
record to reflect the most pertin inform it main advantag ar increas
accuraci and informationgath effici it can be especi help in complic
interview situat or in situat where terminolog is defin or explain
electron notetak ha the disadvantag of requir a duplic of effort in some
instanc an electron record devic can be inhibit in a limit number of situat
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3905
it might be illeg without the respond consent see the law section of the fraud
examin manual for more inform
organ of inform
becaus of the amount of inform and the number of document that might be collect
dure a fraud examin the examin should plan earli and plan well if circumst
permit an inform databas should be establish in the earli phase of the case report
inform can be present either in chronolog order or by transact the option
ar discuss below
chronolog
thi method present fact in the order in which thei were uncov for exampl if an
anonym tip predic the fraud examin the inform receiv would be
present first in the report thereaft the reader would follow the develop of each
step as the case progress
inform from each wit should be present in a chronolog manner if
interview an associ of the target for exampl relai the inform in a fashion that
begin at the point the associ first met the target then proce through the cours of
pertin event that lead to the present
by transact
if a multitud of document support sever instanc of fraud thi inform should be
present by separ individu transact for exampl in a case of intern fraud
involv six differ instanc of embezzl the document and the relat interview
might best be understood if present as a group thereaft detail the remain
transact chronolog
analyz the reader
keep in mind that the fraud examin report will be read by the gener public and the
opposit under no circumst should the examin prepar a communicat ion with the idea that the
inform will not be disclo sed to advers third parti write the report with thi caveat in mind a
fraud examin should stand on it own it should adequ answer the classic question
report standard investig
3906 2011 fraud examin manual
of who what why where when and how if the report is prepar properli the reader
should not have to refer to ani other document to understand the issu
type of reader
fraud examin report will most like be read by the follow individu
compani insid
manag and execut will probabl review report of case involv intern fraud and
misde becaus these document will like be review by peopl outsid the compani as
well thei should not address intern control defici manag issu or other
sensit compani consider instead these matter should be dealt with in a separ
letter or other form of commun
attornei
report will be read by attornei from within the organ and without in report
prepar at the request of counsel mark each page privileg and confidenti thi
procedur will document ani privileg claim discuss below understand howev that
mark the report in such a manner will not necessarili ensur that the privileg will be
sustain
attornei for the defend will like gain access to a report dure the discoveri phase
of civil litig these lawyer will scrutin the report for error omiss andor
misstat you should be certain that the report is accur down to the most seemingli
unimport detail defens attornei will cite the smallest error as evid that the entir
document is inaccur in crimin case prosecut attornei and law enforc
personnel will also review a report these individu will look primarili at evid and
wit statement that will best sustain a crimin prosecut
defend and wit
in either civil or crimin litig the defend will eventu see most if not all of a
report if the case reach court the wit an examin identifi and interview will be
provid with copi of their own statement if not the entir report
press
in some instanc the press might gain access to a report report data might be obtain
from inform disclos dure litig or in some instanc from confidenti sourc
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3907
the press is particularli adept at uncov mistak and incorrect conclus drawn by
the fraud examin
juri
when the case reach trial the juri will usual receiv the entir report for review and
analysi juri normal do not have a back ground in busi and account matter
therefor the report should be as simpl and easi to understand as possibl of all the import
individu who will review the report the member of the juri will by far be the most
import
present the case to prosecutor
if fraud is discov the examin will also have to discuss with the relev individu and
determin whether the case should be present to crimin prosecutor
of cours no matter what the result of a compani fraud examin the compani doe
not prosecut or decid to prosecut an offend individu instead prosecut in
the sens of charg and try a person on crimin charg is exclus the right of the
state and attornei for state or feder govern have the discret to decid whether to
bring crimin charg against a person and with what crime he will be charg
but even though these decis belong to the govern there ar sever reason an
entiti mai wish to prosecut an offend employe for exampl prosecut punish the
employe and hopefulli will deter other employe from engag in similar offens in
addit crimin charg brought against an employe mai help a compani defrai the
loss suffer as a result of fraud similarli prosecut mai aid the victim compani in
pursu civil remedi against an offend employe
even if an entiti establish a solid case against an employe or contractor the prosecutor
might be reluct to bring crimin charg in a fraud case becaus of the time and expens
involv lack of expertis the high standard of proof requir for convict and so on
nevertheless fraud examin can do a number of thing to help their chanc of
prosecut for instanc befor present a case to the polic or prosecutor it will benefit
the fraud examin to develop a relationship with either or both or at least to know enough
about both agenc to know whom to call so that ani submiss of a case is not lost in the
administr netherworld of bureaucraci
report standard investig
3908 2011 fraud examin manual
and gener attornei will take case that enhanc their reput and statist
govern lawyer have high convict rate in the case thei prosecut and thi is due in
part to their reluct to take case thei might lose therefor a prosecutor will be more
like to pursu the case if the evid is strong or if the case involv signific loss
deal with notori or import defend eg prior crimin record and doe not
appear to be unduli complex
furthermor prosecutor like all profession ar veri busi handl enorm caseload
in clog docket around the countri and mani prosecutor have a limit background in
financi matter regardless here ar some basic rule for deal with prosecutor
first examin should never show up at a prosecutor offic with a pile of cancel check
and innuendo about what thei think happen in a case in gener a prosecutor is legal
and ethic bound to proce onli on what he can prove beyond a reason doubt in
court through compet evid note that the law of evid ar differ from
jurisdict to jurisdictiony should have a fundament familiar with these law prior
to present of ani case to the prosecutor
second examin should not approach the prosecutor unless their investig is
complet have all of the relev document been gather ha the examin made all of
hi observ ha the examin interview all necessari wit
third to get the full attent of the prosecut attornei the examin must have hi case
readi to present in an organ and clear packag a fraud examin mai have done a great
job in develop evid but that inform must be commun effect to the
govern which must be convinc that the case is worth the time and effort necessari
to pursu legal action against the wrongdoer
moreov examin can enhanc their chanc of prosecut if
thei have obtain a legal and bind admiss of guilt
thei obtain a commit from the outset for the lawyer to consid prosecut
base on the evid obtain
thei avail themselv to the lawyer for aid in the prosecut
thei followup regularli with the lawyer to ensur their case doe not fall through the
crack
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3909
and if possibl present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who ha
a success track record in whitecollar case
a reput as a hard worker
outlin
outlin of report and memoranda of interview can be help in long or complex fraud
examin report outlin can take mani form depend on the type of inform
on must relai although the follow outlin techniqu is mechan it is easi to master
and well suit to unravel the complex of larg and difficult subject
step on
group natur relat item and write them down on note card and then determin
whether thei ar exactli what is need to meet the demand of the object the reader
and the scope of coverag when thei ar group arrang them in the proper order and
label them with roman numer
exampl
i firstlevel head
a secondlevel head
1 thirdlevel head
a fourthlevel head
1 fifthlevel head
step two
mark each of the note card with the appropri roman numer and capit letter sort the
note card by major and minor head transfer the note to paper convert them to
complet sentenc
step three
polish the rough outlin check to ensur that the subordin of minor head to major
head is logic and sequenti check for uniti stai within the establish scope of
coverag resist the temptat to report irrelev fact check the outlin for
complet scan it to see whether more inform is need
report standard investig
3910 2011 fraud examin manual
style
write each report in a style that is clear concis and to the point poorli construct or
grammat incorrect sentenc can ruin an otherwis flawless fraud examin the
purpos for write a report is to convei inform to a reader therefor it is the
examin respons to commun effect and effici the two cardin sin of
report write ar vagu and wordi common breach of good basic write includ
improperli place or ambigu modifi chang sentenc context
us of technic jargon slang andor colloqui place the burden to understand
on the reader
us of unnecessari highflown verbiag in an attempt to impress the reader
voic
in grammar voic indic the relat of the subject to the action of the verb when the
verb is in the activ voic the subject act when it is in the passiv voic the subject is
act upon
exampl
john doe wrote the report activ
or
the report wa written by john doe passiv
both of the sentenc sai the same thing but each ha a differ emphasi in the first
sentenc emphasi is on the subject john doe wherea in the second sentenc the focu is
on the object the report notic how much stronger and more forc the activ sentenc is
alwai us the activ voic unless there is good reason to us the passiv becaus thei ar
wordi and indirect passiv sentenc ar harder for the reader to understand
exampl
instanc of fraud ar most like to be report by cowork passiv
or
cowork report most instanc of fraud activ
person
person indic whether the written text refer to the writer first person to the reader or
the person for whom the text wa written second person or to an object or third parti
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3911
about whom the text wa written third person person is establish through the us of
person pronoun
exampl
first person i did not find a record of the deposit
second person you did not find a record of the deposit
third person he did not find a record of the deposit
point of view
point of view indic the writer relat to the in format present as reflect in the us
of person the writer usual express point of view in first second or thirdperson
person pronoun the us of the first person indic that the writer is a particip or
observ thi happen to me i saw that the second and third person indic that
the writer is write about other peopl thi happen to you to her to them when
write a report on should never us the writer to replac i or me in a mistaken attempt to
sound formal or dignifi
chang the writer believ that thi examin will be complet by the end
of june
to i believ that thi examin will be complet by the end of june
construct clear sentenc
sentenc that make up a report should be simpl and clear whenev possibl us
uncompl sentenc to state complex idea if reader must cope with a complic
sentenc in addit to a complex idea thei ar like to becom confus common
sentenc structur mistak to avoid ar discuss below
rambl sentenc
sentenc that contain more inform than the reader can comfort absorb ar known
as rambl sentenc s the remedi for a rambl sentenc is to divid it into two or more
sentenc put the main messag of the rambl sentenc into the first of the revis
sentenc
chang the payment to which a subcontractor is entitl should be made
promptli in order that in the event of a subsequ contractu disput
report standard investig
3912 2011 fraud examin manual
the gener contractor might not be held in default of contract by virtu
of nonpay
to pai subcontractor promptli then if a contractu disput should occur
the gener contractor cannot be held in default for nonpay
runon sentenc
a runon sentenc is two or more sentenc without proper punctuat to separ them run
on sentenc can be correct by creat two sentenc or by join the two claus with a
semicolon if thei ar close relat
chang the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract runon sentenc
to the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract period
or
to the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract semicolon
omit verb
do not omit a requir verb
chang i never and probabl never will locat the miss file
to i never locat and probabl never will locat the miss file
omit subject
do not omit a subject
chang he regard price fix as wrong but until abolish by law he engag
in it as did everyon els
to he regard price fix as wrong but until it wa abolish by law he
engag in it as did everyon els
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3913
unnecessari compound sentenc
avoid compound sentenc contain claus that have littl or no logic relationship
chang the ledger contain sever exam ple of alter data entri and it is
usual store in the compani safe
to the ledger contain sever exampl of alter data entri it is usual
store in the compani safe
misplac modifi
a modifi a word a phrase or a claus is misplac when it modifi or appear to
modifi the wrong word or phrase
chang i almost locat all the miss file
to i locat almost all the miss file
possibl confus in sentenc of thi type can be avoid by place the modifi
immedi befor the word it is intend to modifi
chang all businessmen ar not talent in mathemat the implic is that
no businessman is talent in mathemat
to not all businessmen ar talent in mathemat
paragraph structur
state a paragraph main point in it first sentenc subsequ sentenc should support and
clarifi that main point for the purpos of report write paragraph should be short
reader can be daunt by long complic paragraph that contain multipl issu note
also that short paragraph result in more white space on the page make the document
more readabl
report structur
report format vari wide some organ especi government investig
bodi us report form so that case inform is provid in a consist manner
report standard investig
3914 2011 fraud examin manual
suggest standard format
fraud examin report ar not on size fit all item obvious no format can cover
everi specif case compani or situat howev a standard format is a good place to
start the acf recommend the follow be includ in most report a sampl report is
includ in the appendix to thi section
background
the background section should gener be about two paragraph it should state veri
succinctli why the fraud examin wa conduct eg an anonym tip wa receiv
an anomali wa discov dure an audit monei or properti wa miss
you mai also state who call for the examin and who assembl the examin
team
execut summari
for a simpl fraud examin the execut summari should be no more than four or five
paragraph for a more complex case the summari mai reach a page or two in length
in thi section you should also summar what action you perform dure the fraud
examin such as review document interview wit or conduct analys or
test it provid the reader with an overview of what you did dure the examin
process
at the end of thi section you should summar the outcom of the examin for
exampl 50000 in check wa deposit into an account own by bob wilson when
confront with thi inform wilson state that he had onli borrow the monei and
meant to pai it back
scope
thi section should consist of onli on paragraph explain what the scope of the fraud
examin wa for exampl determin whether inventori wa misappropri from
the warehous or determin why monei is miss from the bank account
approach
thi section give a brief descript of the follow item
fraud examin team member
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3915
procedur gener what document were review or what test were conduct
individu interview
it provid a handi refer to who wa involv in the fraud examin what the team
review what test or analys were conduct and what individu the team interview
find
thi section contain the detail of the fraud examin it will gener consist of sever
page in thi section you should describ what task you perform and what you found
provid enough detail so that the reader understand what occur but not so much detail
that the reader begin to lose interest or becom bog down in the detail the reader
want to know how mani invoic were forg who wa involv how thei did it and what
proof you have
if the find section is long you mai wish to us subhead for particular topic or
individu to make it easier for the reader to stai organ
the inform can be present either chronolog or by topic whatev make it
easier for the reader to follow
summari
thi section should be on or two paragraph and should succinctli summar the result
of the fraud examin it should be similar to the outcom state at the end of the
execut summari section
impact
here you should describ how the fraud affect the victim organ in thi section you
can provid an estim of the dollar loss or ani other time of tangibl or intang
damag alreadi suffer or that mai occur in the futur
recommend
thi section is option there mai be instanc in which you wish to discuss remedi
measur or specif recommend in a separ document if you do wish to includ
thi section you should state what followup action is necessari or recommend includ
remedi measur such as a review of intern control introduct of a hotlin or
increas secur
report standard investig
3916 2011 fraud examin manual
report document
the basic report document ar
memoranda
exhibit document or enclosur
index
cover page
transmitt letter
the longform report will consist of copi of these document the linda reed collin
case studi report includ in the appendix to thi section illustr thi approach
the heart of the document is the memorandum of interview and on memorandum
should be prepar for each offici contact onc all the memoranda of interview ar
complet thei ar typic assembl in chronolog order and index
memoranda
us memoranda to document all interview and other pertin inform discov
dure the examin each memorandum should contain the follow inform where
appropri
head
file number or control number
name of person report
case name or subject
subject of memorandum
date
detail of fact
interview wa voluntari
indic that on provid on ident
the wit wa inform of the natur of the inquiri
date of inquiri
how the interview wa conduct in person by telephon etc
if the interview wa electron record
fact learn dure inquiri
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3917
cover page or letter
a cover page summar the examin salient point the cover page should be direct and
succinct if a report is submit to an outsid agenc such as law enforc or outsid
counsel a cover letter should accompani it the cover letter should recapitul
inform in the report and summar the princip weak it is not necessari to list
all wit onli those most valuabl
exhibit
as a gener rule copi of exhibit should be includ in the report and not attach
separ howev bulki file includ work paper and similar exhibit might be
attach separ and refer to in the bodi of the report the chain of custodi should be
maintain over origin document
form
a complet fraud examin report must document everi step of the inform
gather process becaus the orderli and legal present of evid requir the
examin to organ a great deal of inform the examin should us the form
avail to facilit thi task see appendix as a gener rule these form ar kept in the
file and not includ in the report unless necessari these form includ the follow item
consent to search
a consent to search form document the fact that a person ha been inform of hi
constitut right state that
the premis cannot be search without a search warrant
the person can refus to consent to such a search
the signatur on the bottom of the form subject and wit indic that the person is
voluntarili give the examin written permiss to search the premis and to remov
whatev paper document or other properti he might desir
receipt for properti
a receipt for properti form is a multipurpos document us to list item of evid that have
been receiv return or releas thi form includ the follow inform
date of transfer
properti owner name
owner address
report standard investig
3918 2011 fraud examin manual
descript of item
signatur line receiv by and receiv from
telephon record consent
a telephon record consent form stipul where when and with whom telephon
convers can be record thi form state that the subject ha grant permiss
without threat or promis of ani kind and it must be sign by the subject and wit
be caution that the form alon doe not make the conduct illeg or legal see the law
section of the fraud examin manual for inform on the intercept of
commun
advic of right
an advic of right form effect mirand an individu that is it inform a
person that
he mai remain silent in the face of question
whatev the person sai can be us against him in a court of law
if he request an attornei will be appoint for him befor question
he mai stop answer question at ani time whether an attornei is present
if mirand is applic thi form should be sign and wit
consent to record
a consent to record form document the fact that an individu ha given the examin
permiss to record specif convers thi form must be sign and wit
it detail
the name of the individu
hi address
the locat of the convers
who might record the convers
the name of the subject with whom the individu might convers
the date of the convers
custom consent and author for access to financi record
thi form author a financi institut to disclos the custom own record to the
examin or other specif list individu it must be sign by the account holder
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3919
evid control log
in the case of signific item of evid it might be advis to prepar an evid control
log a form that document
the evid control center locat
the bank safedeposit box locat
other evid locat
the signatur of person place in or remov evid from repositori
the reason why evid wa move
the file case number
the time and date author individu enter and depart evid repositori
sign statement
the verbal confess should be reduc to a short and concis written statement the
interview should prepar the statement and present it to the confessor for hi signatur
the statement should be prepar befor the confessor leav the interview there should
be no attempt to make the statement long and it should rare exce two or three
handwritten page the follow point should be cover in everi sign statement
voluntari of confess
the gener law of confess requir that thei be complet voluntari thi should be set
forth specif in the first paragraph with the date of the interview
intent
there is no such thing as an accident fraud or crime both requir as part of the element
of proof the fact that the confessor knew the conduct wa wrong and intend to commit
the act thi can best be accomplish by us precis languag in the statement that clearli
describ the act eg i wrongfulli took asset from the compani that werent mine versu i
borrow monei from the compani without tell anyon
as a gener rule strong emot word such as lie and steal should be avoid as the
confessor might balk at sign the statement still the word must be precis follow
ar suggest word
report standard investig
3920 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
instead of us
lie
i knew the statementact wa untru
steal
i wrongfulli took the properti of for my
own benefit
embezzl
i wrongfulli took s properti which had
been entrust to me and us it for my own
benefit
fraud
i knowingli told an untru statement
and heshethei reli on it
approxim date of offens
unless the exact date of the offens ar known the word approxim must preced ani
date of the offens if the confessor is unsur about the date languag to that effect
should be includ
approxim amount of loss
includ the approxim loss make sure thei ar label as such it is satisfactori to
state a rang probabl not less than or more than
approxim number of instanc
rang ar also satisfactori for the number of instanc the number is import becaus it
help establish intent by show a repeat pattern of activ
willing to cooper
it make it easier for the confessor when he perceiv that the statement includ languag
portrai him in a more favor light the confessor can convert that natur tendenc by
emphas cooper and willing to make amend
exampl
i am will to cooper in hel ping undo what i have done i promis that i will try to repai
whatev damag i caus by my action
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3921
excus claus
the confessor moral excus should be mention the interview should ensur the
excus claus word doe not diminish legal respons
exampl
wrong
i didnt mean to do thi thi impli a lack of intent
right
i wouldnt have done thi if it had not been for press financi problem i didnt mean to
hurt anyon
confessor read the statement
the confessor must acknowledg that he read the statement and he should initi all the
page of the statement it might be advis to insert intent error in the statement so
that the confessor will notic them the error ar cross out the correct inform is
insert and the confessor is ask to initi the chang whether thi step is advis
depend on the likelihood that the confessor will attempt to retract the statement or claim it
wa not read
truth of statement
the written statement should state specif that it is true thi add weight to it
howev the languag should also allow for mistak
exampl
thi statement is true and complet to the best of my current recollect
kei point in sign statement
there is no legal requir that a statement must be in the handwrit or word of the
declar becaus the examin usual know how to draft a valid statement to let a
confessor draft the statement is gener not a good idea a statement word should be
precis
declar should read and sign the statement without undu delai do not ask the
confessor to sign the statement instead sai pleas sign here although there is no legal
requir it is a good idea to have two peopl wit the sign of a statement
report standard investig
3922 2011 fraud examin manual
there should not be more than on written statement for each offens if fact ar inadvert
omit thei can later be ad to the origin statement as an addendum for legal
purpos prepar separ statement for unrel offens thi rule appli becaus the
target might be tri more than onceonc for each offens preserv all note taken dure
an interview especi those concern a confess have access to pertin note can
aid in a crossexamin regard the valid of a sign statement stenograph note if
ani also should be preserv onc a conf ession is obtain substanti it through
addit investig if necessari
visual aid
occasion the fraud examin might includ visual aid prepar either as part of the
report or to be us as exhibit at trial visual aid should be kept simpl sever differ
type of visual aid ar discuss below
linknetwork diagram
link network show the relationship between peopl organ and event differ
symbol ar us to repres differ entiti a squar can symbol an organ a
circl a person a triangl an event and so fo rth it doesnt matter which symbol you us as
long as you us them consist confirm connect between entiti can be
repres by a solid line or enclosur within anoth symbol specul or presum
relationship can be indic by broken line to achiev it intend purpos a graphic
should alwai be clear dont cross line if possibl
exampl
smith is vicepresid of the abc corporat ion and presid of the def corpor a
subsidiari of abc jone is gener partner in the first and second partnership brown and
green ar limit partner in the first partn rship brown and black ar limit partner in
the second partnership black is also a gener partner in the third partnership smith also
might have an interest in the first partnership
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3923
link network diagram
abc corpor
def corpor
presid
vp
smith
first
partnership
second
partnership
third
partnership
jone
gen partner
black
gen partner
brown
ltd partner
green
ltd partner
black
ltd partner
brown
ltd partner
matric
a matrix is a grid that show the relationship or point of contact between a number of
entiti known contact can be differenti from presum contact by mean of a bullet
l or a circl m
a matrix can be us to identifi the direct and frequenc of telephon traffic between
suspect parti
report standard investig
3924 2011 fraud examin manual
thi inform can also be repres in chart form
4501011 5502022 6503033 7504044 8505055
t otal
out go in g
call
4501011 x 1 3 4
5502022 x 2 2
6503033 8 7 x 8 9 32
7504044 1 1 x 2
8505055 8 x 8
tot al
incomin g
call
9 8 14 8 9
timeflow diagram
the follow chart show the relationship of signific event in the order in which
thei occur
4501011 55020221
85050557504044
65030331
8
3 7 2
1
9
8
8
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3925
summari of wit statement
reduc volumin testimoni and wit statement to summari form in order to identifi
inconsist statement and to permit quick review to identifi pertin passag indic
briefli the topic be cover at a given point and provid a synopsi of the statement see
exampl below
summari of evid
linda reed collin
page topic testimoni
5 collin hire 61xx personnel file
5
collin promot to
purchas 118xx
personnel file
8
collin and nagel friend de la garza interview
15 check to orion robinson interview
30 indebted of collin public record
keep the synopsi as succinct as possibl too much detail will impair the summari util
the examin or someon familiar with the fact and issu in the case should prepar the
summari not an assist who doe not know what might or might not be relev the
summari can also be us as a basi for a chronolog
report standard investig
3926 2011 fraud examin manual
an exampl of a report of a fraud examin is includ in the appendix to report
write the fraud examin typic will also prepar other written document includ
but not limit to engag contract and opinion letter
engag contract
certifi fraud examin ar sometim hire for specif engag the examin
should alwai prepar an engag letter so that he and the client have a clear
understand of the object of the assign if the term of the engag ar
defin in a contract ani later disput becom easier to resolv
accord to the code of profession ethic a certifi fraud examin
will onli accept assign for which there is a reason expect that the work
will be complet with profession compet
will obtain evid or other document to establish a reason basi for ani
opinion render
will disclos all materi matter discov dure the cours of an examin that if
omit could caus a distort of the fact
the engag letter should be written with these standard in mind the first question
on must answer in prepar a contract is who is on client ha on been engag by
the plaintiff the defend or their counsel often the engag letter will be address
to attornei thi can be either corpor or outsid counsel
there ar two primari form of engag letter the long form and the short form the
long form spell out the detail of what examin techniqu you intend to follow while
the short form doe not see the sampl report in the appendix to thi section for exampl
of each type of engag contract
element of the engag contract
engag letter have four basic part op ning bodi long or short term and close
in the open paragraph state the purpos of the engag be specif as to whether the
letter is an engag or a propos letter the bodi of the letter will follow either the long
form or the short form
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3927
the long form
the long form is similar to an engag letter prepar for specificscop examin
perform by auditor the examin describ the procedur in detail and limit the scope
of an examin to the procedur defin it is not recommend for us in engag
requir the investig of fraud alleg and a conclud opinion on the exist
of fraud
at the onset the examin might not know what procedur will be necessari to resolv the
alleg consequ it is difficult to describ with ani precis the anticip
procedur befor the examin begin
the short form
the shortform engag letter outlin the gener scope of the engag for
exampl it might describ that the servic will includ an investig of a fraud alleg
receiv over the hotlin by an anonym tip or by an audit anomali
the short form might also confirm if the examin ha access to ani personnel or
document deem necessari to carri out the assign thi type of engag
letter is best us for work that will ultim requir an opinion on a fraud alleg
becaus the examin will not know the natur of the alleg fraud at the onset it is best to
not limit the examin scope
term
the term paragraph includ the fee either flat rate or hourli and the method of payment
thi is an excel time to ask for a retain and to describ the bill procedur also
address the issu of outofpocket expens if travel is requir discuss the anticip cost
of travel and the number of trip
close
in the close section thank the addresse for the opportun to work with him provid a
phone number where you can be reach and ani special instruct such as cell phone
and fax number ask the addresse to sign on copi and return it in the envelop dont
forget to suppli a signatur plate for the return letter and a selfaddress stamp
envelop
report standard investig
3928 2011 fraud examin manual
opinion
the certifi fraud examin is often ask for an opinion about the exist of fraud he
might be engag to perform fraud deterr servic or to resolv a fraud alleg
in the former instanc the opinion will address the strength and weak of the
client current fraud deterr system and includ recommend to strengthen that
system if specif instanc of possibl fraudul conduct ar uncov those should also
be address
in the latter situat the examin must be attent to the certifi fraud examin
code of profession ethic in that
no opinion shall be express regard the gu ilt or innoc of ani person or parti
there ar three possibl outcom of a fraud examin evid wa obtain that
support the alleg of fraud evid wa gather that doe not support such an
alleg and inconclus evid wa ga there in the first outcom the opinion will
vari depend on whether the perpetr confess to the alleg crime in the second
outcom the examin can state that the evid doe not support the fraud charg the
examin is not abl to declar that there wa no fraud in the final outcom the examin
can state that the evid is inconclus it neither support nor refut the alleg
exampl of opinion appear in the appendix
fraud examin checklist
it is often help to prepar todo list or checklist of the document to be examin and
the potenti wit to be interview for refer a sampl checklist is locat in the
appendix it is not intend to cover all aspect of the examin but rather to provid
the examin team with assist in plan the investig
2011 fraud examin manual 31001
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
ye
no
1 fulli debrief all inform and wit
2 document the alleg in write
3 identifi all possibl scheme or indic of fraud
4 develop fraud theori
5 notifi legal counsel and discuss whether to proce
6 obtain record and file all pertin inform and
document in the file
7 determin the potenti loss
8 identifi potenti wit
9 determin if an error or mistak wa made
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
31002 2011 fraud examin manual
ye
no
10 review intern control
11 develop an investig plan
12 determin the type of evid need to pursu
13 identifi indic show intent
14 review payrol record and cancel check
identifi all bank account
identifi number of exempt
identifi who might be endors check
15 review person expens report
identifi unusu high expens
identifi credit card us
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
2011 fraud examin manual 31003
ye
no
identifi where suspect entertain client
identifi duplic submiss
16 perform backgroundasset check
driver licens violat
motor vehicl registr record
regulatori licens
vital statist
build permit
busi file
fictiti name indic
busi licens
corpor record
limit partnership
sec file
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
31004 2011 fraud examin manual
ye
no
counti and state record
crimin
civil
domest
probat
real estat
feder court file
crimin
civil
bankruptci
consum credit record
busi report servic
17 determin who should be interview
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
2011 fraud examin manual 31005
ye
no
18 develop interview approach
19 perform financi analysi
vertic analysi
horizont analysi
ratio analysi
ration
industri analysi
networth analysi
20 will an undercov oper be us
plan develop
approv receiv
oper complet
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
31006 2011 fraud examin manual
ye
no
21 will surveil be us
plan develop
personnel set up
surveil curtail
22 develop other inform
23 us mail cover
24 perform link analysi
25 identifi comput that might be link to investig
identifi expertis need
data download
data print
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
2011 fraud examin manual 31007
ye
no
26 perform forens analysi
handwrit
typewrit
review alter document
ink analysi
document restor
27 interview conduct
interview document
sign statement receiv
identifi other wit to interview
interviewe know how to get in touch with on
28 complet document and report to manag
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
31008 2011 fraud examin manual
ye
no
29 notifi manag
30 employe termin
receiv identif badg or delet from system
notifi secur not to allow access to corpor
premis
person belong identifi and arrang made for
employe to collect
31 report written
head
summari
memorandum
pertin correspond
document of interview
pertin evid includ
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
2011 fraud examin manual 31009
ye
no
index
cover page
report approv by supervisor
32 appoint made with law enforc agenc
33 followup contact made with investig
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
document to be examin to do date receiv
31010 2011 fraud examin manual
account record
balanc sheet
incom statement
statement of cash flow
bank statement
expens account
comput password
other
personnel record
date of employ
sign ethic agreement conflictofinterest statement
current address
prior address
spous name
maiden name
children name
prior employ
prior supervisor
insur inform cover depend
employe evalu perform review
garnish
vacat schedul
other
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
document to be examin to do date receiv
2011 fraud examin manual 31011
person record
bank statement
tax return
insur polici
mortgag record
brokerag statement
credit card statement
telephon record
other busi record
invest
vehicl inform
diari calendar
public recordsperson
civil file
state
feder
crimin file
state
feder
properti tax record
by name
by address
tax lien
financ
other
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
document to be examin to do date receiv
31012 2011 fraud examin manual
judgment
garnish
domesticrel record
divorc
properti settlement
financi statement
tax return
deposit
probat record
us bankruptci file
financi statement
bank statement
properti ownership
educ verif
universitycolleg
profession licens
ucc file
corpor record
compani name
individu incorpor
assum name index
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
document to be examin to do date receiv
2011 fraud examin manual 31013
vehicl own
lienhold
boat own
lienhold
aircraft own
lienhold
public recordsbusi
util record
ucc file
tax receipt
tax lien
who actual pai the tax
post offic box applic
civil file
state
feder
assumednam index
corpor charter bylaw
busi credit histori
db
better busi bureau
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
document to be examin to do date receiv
31014 2011 fraud examin manual
other
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
2011 fraud examin manual 31015
neutral wit
name
phone
date
contact
interview
complet
report
date
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
31016 2011 fraud examin manual
advers wit
name
phone
date
contact
interview
complet
report
date
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
2011 fraud examin manual 31017
coconspir
name
phone
date
contact
interview
complet
report
date
appendix a
fraud examin checklist
case name
case no
31018 2011 fraud examin manual
suspect
name
phone
date
contact
interview
complet
report
date
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31101
sampl fraud examin report
bailei book incorpor
follow ar two form of fraud examin report
on is a shortform report that summar the issu present the step taken and the
inform found
the second sampl is a longform report that contain the substant work produc dure
the fraud examin includ copi of relev document and memoranda of wit
interview
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31102 2011 fraud examin manual
sampl fraud examin report
short form
to hal b marlow
chief execut offic
from loren d bridg
certifi fraud examin
re examin of potenti asset misappropri
date mai 23 2009
i background
on januari 28 2010 the fraud examin unit at bailei book receiv an anonym
telephon call on it fraud hotlin from an unidentifi man who claim that he wa a
former supplier to bailei the caller alleg certain improprieti in the bid and
procur process
base upon thi initi predic a fraud examin wa conduct which includ
review of relev record and interview of appropri personnel
ii execut summari
the fraud examin commenc when loren d bridg cfe receiv a telephon call
from an unidentifi man who said that he had been a longterm supplier to bailei for
sundri offic suppli and paper the caller said that ever sinc linda reed collin had
taken over as purchas manag he had been gradual squeez out from do
busi with bailei
linda reed collin ha been emploi in the purchas depart of bailei book sinc
june 1 2005 she wa promot to purchas manag effect novemb 8 2007
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31103
the fraud examin team review select purchas from 2007 to 2008 and
conduct interview of kei particip and bailei employe who we believ mai have
inform regard the misappropri of asset the team review purchas
guidelin personnel file of interviewe and variou financi document relat to both
bailei book and linda reed collin
after obtain suffici document the team interview linda reed collin who
gave a full sign confess to her misde
iii scope
the object of the fraud examin team wa as follow
determin the exist of a possibl misappropri of asset of bailei book
incorpor the examin is predic upon an anonym telephon call alleg
improprieti on the part of linda reed collin bailei purchas manag
iv approach
fraud examin team member
loren d bridg cfe bailei book tonya vincent cfe bailei book
procedur
as part of the examin of thi matter the team took the follow action
obtain review and analyz memoranda pertain to the anonym call
describ previous
obtain review and analyz bailei book financi document includ
purchas record invoic and cancel check
obtain review and analyz record from the st augustin counti courthous
regard civil action in which edward j collin and linda reed collin were name
record from the florida secretari of state offic regard collin marin
corpor record of chattel mortgag held by linda reed collin and edward j
collin financi record from dun bradstreet regard collin marin corpor
and public record regard the financi condit of linda reed collin and edward j
collin
conduct surveil activ in order to determin whether the two kei individu in
the matter were involv in an illicit relationship
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31104 2011 fraud examin manual
individu interview the follow individu were interview in person by member of
the fraud examin team
mark w steinberg cpa chief financi offic bailei book
roger donald mcguir purchas agent bailei book
mari rodriguez de la garza purchas agent bailei book
sara louis dawson former employe bailei book
thoma c green attornei sharp green and langfrom pa
lincoln s wyzokowski gener counsel bailei book
becki robinson account payabl clerk bailei book
erni quinci warehous manag bailei book
david levei director of sale jerrico intern paper compani
jame r nagel sale repres orion corpor
owen stetford chief financi offic orion corpor
linda reed collin purchas manag bailei book
v find
base on the document review inform collect and interview conduct dure
the cours of the fraud examin the team find as follow
did the fraud examin team determin the exist of a possibl
misappropri of asset of bailei book incorpor
ye the document and inform review and interview conduct by the fraud
examin team dure the cours of the examin indic that linda reed collin
togeth with jame r nagel did knowin gly embezzl approxim 197773 from bailei
book over four year dure the fraud examin the team analyz financi
document and conduct interview to corrobor the statement of an anonym caller
the follow is a summari of the evid and inform support the fraud
examin team find
on januari 28 2010 an anonym call wa receiv by the fraud hotlin at bailei book
incorpor from a former supplier to bailei book the caller alleg that after linda
reed collin took over as purchas manag in 2007 she elimin him as a supplier a
subsequ review of purchas made by bailei book from 2007 to 2009 show that a
continu increas share of the compani paper busi wa be given to orion
corp even though orion submit written bid in onli 63 percent of the case
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31105
on februari 1 2010 mark w steinberg cf o of bailei book inc wa interview the
purpos of the interview wa to inform him of the propos fraud examin obtain hi
approv and secur inform from him regard the purchas process at bailei
book in addit to summar hi respons regard purchas at bailei book
mr steinberg state that in decemb 2007 he sent a memo to all the divis head at
bailei book inform them that all purchas over 50000 would from then on requir at
least three written bid
we next examin the personnel record a review of linda reed collinss file show onli
that she had been consist rate except by her supervisor in annual review
on februari 4 2010 an interview wa conduct with roger donald mcguir purchas
agent at bailei book after summar the purchas process at bailei book he state
that he had no knowledg of ani improprieti commit by ms collin
the next interview conduct wa with mari rodriguez de la garza a cowork of ms
collinss in the purchas depart at ba ilei book dure the interview ms de la
garza state that regard the purchas process it is sometim not practic to obtain
bid such as in emerg situat or when thei ar short on time she went on to reveal
that she had suspect ms collin wa have an affair with jame r nagel the salesman
for orion corp in addit ms de la garz a said she believ that ms collin and her
husband were have marit and financi problem she also mention that sara louis
dawson a former employe under ms collin had left on bad term
the next interview wa with sara louis daw on who want to consult with her attornei
befor make an offici statement ms dawson attornei thoma c green later
contact the fraud examin team to let them know that ms dawson wa interest in
make a statement but onli in exchang for an indemn against all claim aris out of
her cooper after meet with mark steinberg and lincoln s wyzokowski gener
counsel at bailei book ms dawson and mr green propos wa accept
on march 3 2010 ms dawson made her statement which includ the follow
after ms collin wa promot to purchas manag she began favor orion corp
for paper purchas
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31106 2011 fraud examin manual
on two occas in 2009 ms collin author iz prepay on substanti purchas
from orion even though ms dawson had complain about orion poor qualiti and
servic later ms dawson found out that the order were never receiv
other vendor had complain of be squeez out of busi with bailei book
after ms collin becam manag
ms dawson refer the team to becki robinson in account payabl for further
inform about the order ms robinson wa interview and provid copi of the two
prepaid invoic to orion corp the amount of which were 102136 and 95637 in
addit ms robinson said that erni quinci in receiv would be abl to verifi if the
two shipment had ever been receiv
on april 8 2010 erni quinci the warehous manag at bailei book wa interview
and verifi that the two shipment in question were never receiv the next dai copi of
the two check given to ori on corp for payment of the good that were never receiv
were examin
an interview with david levei from jerrico intern paper compani yield the
follow inform
at the time levei began at jerrico bailei book wa a major custom of their but
sinc then their sale to bailei had dwindl
levei attempt to reviv busi with bailei book but by then rumor were
circul about an inappropri relationship between mr nagel of orion corp and
ms collin
accord to levei mr nagel had a bad reput in the industri
ms de la garza phone the team on april 13 2010 to let them know that ms collin had
plan to meet mr nagel at the bar at the ho tel atlant that afternoon the team set up
surveil of their meet and report that ms collin and mr nagel met at 555 pm
and order drink thei held hand under the tabl kiss and left the bar at 702 pm to
go to room 652
a review of st augustin counti record show that edward j collin ms collinss
husband wa a defend in three civil action the circumst of the action indic
that the collins were have financi troubl
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31107
a review of the florida secretari of state record show that the collins were the
incorpor of collin marin corpor
a review of ucc file show that the collins had three lien in their name
a networth analysi wa perform on the collins base on inform assembl from
public record it show unexplain incom of 31632
in an april 19 2010 interview mr nagel state that hi relationship with ms collin wa
pure profession and deni ani improprieti regard orion busi with bailei
book mr nagel also refus to provid ani of orion financi inform pertain to
the two invoic in question
on april 21 2010 owen stetford the cfo of orion corp wa interview and state he
wa unabl to provid ani copi of actual financi inform but that orion had no
record of ani receipt of payment for the invoic in question nor ani record that such
order had been place or ship in addit mr stetford said that orion had no
corpor account at florida marin nation bank the bank at which the check from
bailei book were deposit mr stetford also state that the correct corpor name is
orion corpor not orion paper compan y as the endors indic
on mai 1 2010 mr nagel wa again interview after be confront with question
and evid regard the two payment and the bank account to which thei were
deposit mr nagel voluntarili gave a statement attest to hi involv with ms
collin in the embezzl of fund from bailei book he attest to the follow
in 2009 ms collin told mr nagel that she would approv the payment of invoic
to orion corp for product that would not be deliv ms collin author the
payment of two invoic in the amount of 102136 and 95637 but no product
wa ship on the invoic ms collin and mr nagel establish a bank account
in the name of orion paper compani at florida marin nation bank and divid
the proce of the invoic equal
on mai 1 2010 ms collin voluntarili gave a statement which includ the follow
ms collin state that start in 2008 she accept monei from mr nagel to
ensur that orion corp recei ved preferenti treatment in suppli bailei book
with stationeri and paper product on those occas she wa awar that bailei
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31108 2011 fraud examin manual
book wa not obtain the best product at the lowest possibl price from orion in
other word the price charg wa substanti higher than market valu
ms collin state that on two occas in 2009 she author the payment of
invoic for 102136 and 95637 wi thout ani receipt of merchandis
ms collin estim that she had receiv in excess of 150000 in connect with
mr nagel
vi summari
thi report reflect that linda reed collin a purchas agent for bailei book inc
furnish a sign statement on mai 1 2010 in dicat she had accept at least 197773 in
commerci bribe and other illicit incom in a conspiraci with jame r nagel an account
repres for orion corporati on st augustin florida
the statement made by collin ar corrobor by the documentari evid and the
interview of other wit as describ herein
vii impact to bailei book
over the cours of four year linda reed collin in partnership with jame r nagel
misappropri an estim 197773 from bailei book incorpor
addit amount were lost due to bailei overpai for merchandis sold to it by nagel
those amount have not been calcul
viii recommend
it is the polici of bailei book to report such matter to the appropri author and to
assist in crimin prosecut a full review of intern control should be conduct to
determin how such incid can be detect in the futur
end of report
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31109
sampl fraud examin report
long form
bailei book incorpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32082
person and confidenti
mai 23 2010
lt jason fishbeck
st augustin polic depart
382 harbor view circl
st augustin fl 32084
re linda reed collin file 084422
dear lt fishbeck
attach is my report of a fraud examin date mai 23 2010 with respect to the abov
caption matter
the report reflect that collin a purchas agent for bailei book inc furnish a sign
statement on mai 1 2010 indic she had accept at least 197773 in commerci
bribe and other illicit incom in a conspiraci with jame r nagel an account repres
for orion corpor st augustin orion is a supplier of paper and relat product to
bailei book
if prove in judici proceed collin and nagel could be in violat of titl 7 section
323a of the florida crimin code commerci briberi
it is the polici of bailei book to report such matter to the appropri author and to
assist in crimin prosecut accordingli we would be will to suppli assist
document and expertis to your depart in the resolut of thi case
if i might be of assist pleas do not hesit to call
sincer
loren d bridg
certifi fraud examin
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31110 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32082
person and confidenti
mai 23 2010
mr hal b marlow
chief execut offic
bailei book incorpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32082
re linda reed collin
dear mr marlow
we have conduct a fraud examin concern a possibl misappropri of asset of
bailei book incorpor thi examin wa predic upon an anonym telephon
call alleg improprieti on the part of lind a reed collin bailei purchas manag
our examin wa conduct in accord with law fraud examin techniqu
which includebut ar not limit toexa minat of book and record voluntari
interview with appropri personnel and other such evidencegath procedur as
necessari under the circumst
dure the pendenc of thi examin ms collin and her confeder jame r nagel
of orion corpor voluntarili furnish sign statement indic that thei
misappropri at least 197773 to their person benefit
base upon the result of our examin and the confess of ms collin and
mr nagel these action if prove in a court of law could constitut a violat of crimin
andor civil law
veri truli your
loren d bridg
certifi fraud examin
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31111
bailei book incorpor
execut summari
confidenti
linda reed collin ha been emploi in the purchas depart of bailei book sinc
june 1 2005 she wa promot to purchas manag effect novemb 8 2007
on januari 28 2010 the fraud examin unit at bailei book receiv an anonym
telephon call from an unidentifi man who claim that he wa a former supplier to
bailei the caller alleg certain improprieti in the bid and procur process
base upon thi initi predic a fraud examin wa conduct which includ
review of relev record and interview of appropri personnel the fraud examin
reveal multipl purchas by bailei book from orion corpor the amount of which
ha increas significantli from 2007 to the present
interview of bailei personnel indic that ms collin might have a person relationship
with mr nagel an account repres of orion corpor on mai 1 2010 nagel
and collin were interview both furnish voluntari sign statement indic that
thei had appropri at least 197773 from bailei by establish a fictiti vendor to
which bailei check were direct the check purport to be for suppli purchas by
bailei when in fact no suppli or other item were purchas for thi amount nagel and
collin us the proce for their person benefit
as reflect by the attach letter date mai 23 2010 base on all the evid collin and
nagel could be in violat of florida crimin andor civil law
loren d bridg
certifi fraud examin
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31112 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
index to report
item page
memorandum of predic 1
review of select purchas 2
interview of mark w steinberg 4
purchas guidelin 5
review of personnel file 6
interview of roger donald mcguir 7
interview of mari rodriguez de la garza 8
interview of sara louis dawson 10
convers with thoma c green attornei 11
meet with mark w steinberg 12
interview of sara louis dawson 13
interview of becki robinson 15
orion invoic 16
orion invoic 17
interview of erni quinci 18
review of check payabl to orion 1 9
david levei interview 22
interview of mari rodriguez de la garza 23
surveil log 24
interview of confidenti sourc 25
review of counti record 26
review of state record 27
review of chattel mortgag 28
review of dun bradstreet record 29
review of public record 30
interview of jame r nagel 31
interview of owen stetford 32
interview of jame r nagel 33
statement by jame r nagel 34
interview of linda reed collin 35
statement by linda reed collin 36
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31113
bailei book incorpor
memo of predic
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject anonym telephon call
date januari 28 2010
on januari 28 2010 at approxim 1012 am i receiv a telephon call from an
unidentifi man who said that he had been a longterm supplier to bailei for sundri offic
suppli and paper
the callerwho refus to reveal hi identitysaid that ever sinc linda reed collin had
taken over as purchas manag he had been gradual squeez out from do
busi with bailei the caller declin to furnish addit inform
base on the predic suppli abov a fraud examin is be commenc
page 1
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31114 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of select purchas from 2007 to 2009
date januari 30 2010
attach is a schedul of purchas prepar from individu vendor file the purchas
reflect that orion corp ha recei ved an increas share of the paper busi from bailei
over the last sever year but ha submit written bid in onli 63 percent of the case
over that period
page 2
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31115
bailei book incorpor
select purchas 2007 2009
page 3
increas
decreas
increas
decreas
increas
decreas
item
date of
previou
yr
previou
yr
prev 2 yr
vendor purchas purchas 2007 2008 2009 last bid 2008 2009 2007 2008 2007 2009
armour book mrd 683409 702929 810100 120108 152 29 185
burdick sundri lrc 62443 70959 76722 na 81 136 229
canon magazin mrd 1404360 1957601 2 361149 110308 206 394 681
deboi inc paper lrc 321644 218404 121986 060808 441 321 621
elton book book rdm 874893 781602 649 188 072108 169 107 258
fergeson book rdm 921666 1021440 1567811 090808 535 108 701
guyford magazin mrd 2377821 286898 8 3262490 100808 137 207 372
hyman inc suppli lrc 31640 40022 46911 102208 172 265 483
intertec book rdm 821904 898683 959604 111808 68 93 168
jerrico paper lrc 486401 111923 93499 080408 165 770 808
julianborg magazin mrd 431470 589182 371920 020708 369 366 138
king
featur
magazin mrd 436820 492687 504360 111808 24 128 155
lycorp sundri lrc 16280 17 404 21410 na 230 69 315
medallian book rdm 61227 410163 121508 5699
northwood book rdm 861382 99212 1 120707 152 1000
orion corp paper lrc 86904 416777 803493 110207 928 3796 8246
peterson suppli lrc 114623 na
quick suppli lrc 96732 110441 110308 142
robertson book rdm 2361 912 3040319 3516811 120108 157 287 489
steel magazin mrd 621490 823707 482082 110308 415 325 224
telecom sundri lrc 81406 10119 3 146316 na 446 243 797
union bai book rdm 4322639 4971682 5368114 120308 80 150 242
victori magazin mrd 123844 141909 143286 060908 10 146 157
william sundri lrc 31629 35111 42686 na 216 110 350
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31116 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of mark w steinberg cpa
chief financi offic
date februari 1 2010
mark w steinberg cpa chief financi offi cer of bailei book wa interview in hi
offic room 836 6200 bayshor st augustin fl the purpos of the meet wa to
advis mr steinberg of the propos fraud ex amin to obtain hi approv of the
propos plan and to secur basic inform from him on the purchas function
mr steinberg wa advis of the natur of the anonym alleg and the result of our
initi vendor review he also wa inform of our plan to review personnel file and other
intern compani document and to discreetli interview select compani personnel he
agre to the abov ask that we conduct our examin quickli and in the least
disrupt manner possibl he agre that ms collin and the purchas depart
would not be notifi of the examin until decid otherwis
mr steinberg ha been with bailei book in corpor sinc 1994 previous he wa
assist vice presid for financi affair fr om 1994 to 2002 he report directli to mr
hal b marlow presid and ceo of the compani
as cfo all oper divis includ purchas report to him it is hi respons
to establish and supervis the monitor of intern control within the oper divis
in gener bailei follow the polici of obtain bid on as mani purchas as possibl he
point out that the competit natur of the retail book industri requir constantli
obtain the maximum product for the minimum cost he ha reiter to manag on
mani occas the necess of cut cost
guidelin for purchas procedur ar set forth in mr steinberg memorandum to all
divis head and supervisor date decemb 12 2007 the memo call for purchas to
obtain bid on all purchas of more than 50000 howev purchas of more than
10000 gener ar expect to be bid unless a justifi reason not to exist a copi of
the memo wa provid by mr steinberg and is attach the copi provid ha been
initi and date and is maintain in the evid file room 874 bailei book
page 4
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31117
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to linda reed collin purchas manag
from mark w steinberg chief financi offic
subject purchas guidelin
date decemb 12 2007
the purpos of thi memo is to establish guidelin for major purchas
effect at onc purchas will obtain at least three written bid for item of more than
50000 in all case bid also should be obtain for purchas amount start at 10000
where practic
these bid should be maintain in the file for document purpos
if the lowest bid is not select a memo of justif should be prepar and approv by
me befor ani purchas is made you ar to be especi concern with miscellan and
sundri item becaus these item ar not price competit
ani deviat from the abovest polici must be approv by me
page 5
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31118 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of personnel file
date februari 4 2010
franci morri personnel manag provid the personnel file of linda reed collin
mari rodriguez de la garza and roger mc guir for review pertin data includ
mari rodriguez de la garza
sept 15 2005 mari rodriguez de la garza hire as administr assist at annual
salari of 20000
sept 14 2006 merit salari increas to 22000 annual
sept 17 2007 merit salari increas to 24500 annual
aug 2 2008 transfer and promot to purchas agent at salari of 27000
aug 4 2009 merit salari increas to 30000 annual
roger mcguir
feb 20 2006 roger donald mcguir hire as purchas agent at salari of 28000
feb 22 2008 merit salari increas to 31000 annual
linda reed collin
june 1 2005 linda reed collin hire as purchas agent at salari of 28500
june 3 2006 merit salari increas to 31250 plu particip in incent plan
nov 8 2007 promot to purchas manag r salari increas to 36000 annual
plu incent
nov 10 2008 merit salari to 39500 annual plu incent
nov 11 2009 merit salari to 43000 annual plu incent
the personnel file reflect that ms collin wa consist rate as except by her
supervisor in annual review she ha execut annual conflict of interest questionnair
for 2005 through 2009 indic that she and her spous edward collin had no outsid
employ invest or interest with compani do busi with bailei book
the file did contain a copi of ir form 668w notic of levi on wage salari and other
incom date june 2 2006 indic that ms collin and her spous ow feder tax of
5321909 an ir releas of levi indic that the amount due had been paid in full
wa file decemb 18 2009
page 6
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31119
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of roger donald mcguir
date februari 4 2010
roger donald mcguir purchas agent bailei book wa interview at hi offic
room 537 6200 bayshor st augustin florida after be advis of the ident of the
interview and the natur of the inquiri mc guir voluntarili provid the follow
inform
he ha been emploi by bailei book sinc 2006 he is a purchas agent whose function
is to purchas the book inventori purchas polici guidelin requir him to obtain bid
for all purchas over 50000 he said that bid ar submit in substanti all of hi
purchas of book and that he estim somewher between 80 and 90 percent of hi
purchas ar preced by bid
whenev he deviat from select the low bidder for a product he write a memo of
justif to the file with approv from hi manag thi doe not happen on mani
occas the reason for not obtain bid for product includ 1 emerg purchas
2 solesourc purchas and 3 time pressur mcguir is awar that the other purchas
made by mari rodriguez de la garza and linda reed collin ar made under the same
guidelin
he is not awar of favorit regard vendor mcguir ha receiv pressur from
variou vendor from time to time exampl includ the hard sell that mani vendor try
with purchas agent and occasion effort by the vendor to get paid earli so thei can
earn and collect their commiss everi now and then a vendor will attempt to give him a
gratuiti such as a free case of liquor or a small gift howev mcguir sai he avoid ani
ti to the vendor as such ar prohibit by bailei employe guidelin
he is unawar of ani other purchas employe make ani except to purchas
polici mcguir think a great deal of hi cowork mari rodriguez de la garza and
linda reed collin he doe not know whether thei have accept gift or gratuiti from
vendor mcguir think it is somewhat unusu that ms collin reserv purchas
function for herself sinc her is primarili a manag function he cannot explain why
she ha reserv thi duti he onc volunt to take over her account but she said she
would prefer to handl some of the purchas function herself to keep her hand in the
busi
page 7
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31120 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of mari rodriguez de la garza
date februari 5 2010
ms de la garza wa interview at her offic in room 436 bailei build 6200
bayshor st augustin florida after be advis of the ident of the interview and
the natur of the inquiri ms de la garza vo luntarili provid the follow inform
she ha been emploi at bailei book sinc 2005 in 2008 she wa promot and
transfer to the purchas depart ms de la garza function is to overse the
purchas of magazin and period she report directli to linda reed collin the
purchas manag the other employe in the depart is roger donald mcguir
ms de la garza said that she is familiar with oper guidelin of the purchas
function she is requir to get bid for all purchas of more than 50000 and whenev
possibl for purchas for less than that amount as a rule the purchas ar bid for all
item 10000 and more
in some instanc it is not practic or possibl to obtain bid thi is especi the case with
sundri purchas in addit whenev shortag of merchandis occur and time is of the
essenc bid ar not sought for approxim the last year she ha observ that orion
corpor a supplier of paper to bailei book ha receiv most if not all of the paper
busi the salesman for orion jim nagel seem to be veri persuas in deal with
linda reed collin ms de la garza boss
when ask if there were ani vendor who receiv preferenti treatment ms de la garza
hesit she final said that someth wa bother her and she did not know how to
discuss it
when ask to explain ms de la garza said that she wa concern that ani inform
she would offer might get back to ms collin and that she did not want to bring up fals
accus she said that there were sever thing that do not seem right
page 8
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31121
first she said that ms collin and her husband edward had not been get along for the
past year or two edward ha a charter boat busi that ha experienc seriou financi
problem and she knew that ms collin and he had been argu over monei
she ha seen ms collin come to work sever morn in the last few month with red
ey and it appear that she had been cry on on or two occas when ms collin
ha arriv upset she had telephon nagel and ms de la garza think nagel comfort
her
ms de la garza isnt sure about the relationship between nagel and ms collin but she
doe know that thei ar good friend she is fairli certain that thei have had lunch togeth
on numer occas their friendship ha been the subject of gossip and specul the
offic think that thei ar have an affair
ms de la garza know that nagel ha recei ved favor treatment as a vendor sever
month ago exact date not recal she heard ms collin call account payabl and chew
someon out who did not want to handcut a check for nagel she doe not rememb the
exact circumst but she said that dure the time she ha work at bailei ms collin
ha never hurri up a payment for a vendor with the except of nagel
ms de la garza doe not believ ms collin is do anyth illeg she think howev
that ms collin judgment might be cloud by mr nagel whom she describ as a veri
goodlook and charm man
when ask if anyon els had ani knowledg of the busi or person relationship
between ms collin and mr nagel ms de la garza repli that sara louis dawson had
work on the orion account befor she left bailei book within the last sever month
she believ ms dawson had a fall out with ms collin which prompt her to quit
page 9
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31122 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of sara louis dawson
date februari 5 2010
sara louis dawson wa interview at her resid 2051 wisconsin av apt 16 st
augustin florida on a confidenti basi after be advis of the ident of the
interview and the natur of the inquiri she voluntarili provid the follow inform
ms dawson advis that she did not wish to answer ani question she said that her
employ at bailei book wa a close chapter in her life which she did not wish to
reopen she describ her relationship with linda reed collin as strain she said that
she wish she could be of assist becaus certain thing at bailei just werent right
but she had to get on with her life
after further discuss with ms dawson in which the import of her cooper wa
emphas she agre to speak to her brotherinlaw an attornei about whether she
should provid ani inform she insist that ani commun with her includ
thi interview be kept strictli confidenti
page 10
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31123
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject telephon convers with thoma c green
attornei
date februari 6 2010
thoma c green an attornei with the law firm of sharp green and langfrom pa 6600
bayshor parkwai st augustin call me at my offic at 1000 am on the abov date
mr green said he had been contact by sara louis dawson who had been refer by
anoth attornei regard our request for an interview
mr green said he had interview ms dawson and that her inform would be most
help to our inquiri mr green said he would not permit us to interview ms dawson
unless the compani provid her with an indemn against all claim aris out of her
cooper and agre to pai hi attornei fee to attend the interview
mr green would not provid ani detail about the natur of ms dawson inform he
reiter that we would not be disappoint
page 11
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31124 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject meet with mark w steinberg cfo and
lincoln s wyzokowski gener counsel
date februari 6 2010
after discuss the fact mr steinberg and mr wyzokowski agre to provid an
indemn agreement to sara louis dawson for her cooper in the fraud examin
regard the purchas function of bailei book incorpor wyzokowski agre to
prepar the indemn agreement and to set up the interview of ms dawson through her
attornei
page 12
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31125
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
tonya vincent cfe
subject interview of sara l dawson
date march 3 2010
sara louis dawson wa interview at the offic of her attornei thoma c green at
suit 400 6600 bayshor parkwai st augustin mr green wa present for the entir
interview after preliminari discuss about the natur of the inquiri ms dawson
voluntarili provid the follow inform
ms dawson wa emploi at bailei book inco rporat in the purchas depart
from februari 2006 through januari 2010 her duti includ the purchas of magazin
and period as well as sundri and paper product in that capac she work for linda
reed collin from novemb 2007 until ms dawson left the compani
after ms collinss promot she began to favor orion in paper purchas orion price
were high and the qualiti of servic wa margin deliveri often were late or incomplet
requir ms dawson to expend consider time and effort in followup call and
correspond
on two occas near the end of 2009 ms collin direct her to make substanti
purchas from orion and to author prepay the order were not bid and price
quot were higher than avail from other more reliabl supplier bailei book also had
a polici against prepay of order
ms dawson complain to ms collin about orion past perform and suggest that
other vendor be allow to bid ms collin respond that the paper wa need now that
there wa no time for bid and that the price differenti wa insignific ms collin also
said that prepay wa necessari so that orion could rush the order
ms dawson said that in fact there wa no urgent need for the paper but that base on
past experi with ms collin she believ it wa fruitless to resist and she compli with
her instruct
page 13
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31126 2011 fraud examin manual
shortli thereaft she check with the receiv depart and learn that the order had
not been receiv she advis ms collin who seem unconcern ms dawson then
prepar a letter for ms collinss signatur requ sting immedi shipment of the order ms
collin declin to send the letter sai it wa not necessari as orion had assur her the
shipment would be receiv shortli
a few week later ms collin stop by ms dawson offic and close the door ms
collin told her that becaus of orion excel servic and loyalti to bailei book
she want futur purchas from them to be on a nobid basi ms collin also instruct
ms dawson to prepai anoth order in excess of 100000 from orion
ms dawson doe not rememb the exact date or amount but suggest becki robinson
in account payabl might be abl to provid more inform
ms dawson knew that the previou orion order had not yet been ship and inform
ms collin ms collin becam nervou and jitteri and insist she wa mistaken she
again instruct ms dawson to place the order ms dawson said she would need approv
from higher up and an argument ensu she did not place the order or talk to ms collin
again at that time ms dawson said she decid to look for new employ becaus her
job had becom too stress
ms dawson also advis that other vendor includ jerrico had complain about be
squeez out by bailei book ms dawson thought that jerrico price and servic were
superior to orion but ms collin would not take their product ms dawson through mr
green agre to further interview as necessari
page 14
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31127
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of becki robinson
date april 8 2010
becki robinson account payabl clerk bailei book incorpor wa interview at
her offic room 513 bailei build 6200 bayshor st augustin florida after be
advis of the ident of the interview and the natur of the inquiri she voluntarili
provid the follow inform
she ha been emploi by bailei book incorpor sinc januari 2004 and ha alwai
work in the account payabl depart her job is to review invoic for process
befor payment she check the invoic mathemat and extens see whether
merchandis ha been receiv and verifi that the invoic ha been approv for payment
by the depart head
ms robinson maintain the invoic cancel check ar maintain by treasuri she
think in ms deborah roth offic she provid copi of two invoic paid to orion
corpor the document provid by her were initi date and secur in the
evid file maintain in room 874 bailei book corpor copi of the abov
referenc document ar attach hereto
a review of the invoic provid reflect a notat on invoic date novemb 16 2009
and decemb 5 2009in the amount of 102136 and 95637 respectivelythat
payment wa made befor the merchandis wa receiv ms robinson recal that ms
collin call her on two occas and said that orion wa experienc cash flow
problem and to keep them as a vendor it would be necessari to give them the monei up
front
when ms robinson told linda reed collin that she wa not suppos to approv payment
befor the merchandis had been receiv ms collin got agit and told ms robinson
i am the senior purchas offici and i am tell you to do what i sai ms robinson
did as she wa instruct but did not follow up to see if the paper had been receiv ms
robinson did not report these incid
ms robinson said that erni quinci in receiv would be abl to tell whether the two
shipment abov had been receiv
page 15
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31128 2011 fraud examin manual
orion
orion corpor
2600 industri drive
st augustin florida 32086
novemb 16 2009
invoic
bailei book incorpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32082
1075 packag of 80 lb standard
white paper 95m 102136
term net 30 dai
page 16
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31129
orion
orion corpor
2600 industri drive
st augustin florida 32086
decemb 5 2009
invoic
bailei book incorpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32082
1006 packag of 80 lb standard
white paper 95m 95637
term net 30 dai
page 17
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31130 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of erni quinci
date april 8 2010
mr erni quinci warehous manag of bailei book wa interview at hi offic room
114 bailei build 6200 bayshor st augustin after be advis of the ident of the
interview and the natur of the inquiri mr quinci voluntarili furnish the follow
inform
a review of hi outstand invoic show that two orion invoic date novemb 16
and decemb 5 2009 have not been receiv in the warehous he rememb that
shortli after receiv the invoic in 2009 he call ms robinson who refer him to
linda reed collin mr quinci then call ms collin about not have receiv the paper
and she told him not to worri about it that thei had an understand with the supplier that
the paper would be deliv later
mr quinci thought that thi situat wa unusu sinc no other shipment had been paid
for in advanc he ha been bailei book warehous manag for 12 year
page 18
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31131
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject check payabl to orion paper compani
date april 9 2010
margaret oboyl treasur offic bailei book incorpor provid copi of the
check describ below a review of bailei book incorpor cancel check
number 10106 and 10107 reflect the follow
check no 10106
date decemb 12 2009
amount 102136
payment for orion invoic date novemb 16 2009
endors for deposit to the account of orion paper compani
account no 025269999 stamp
bank to which deposit florida marin nation bank st
augustin
date deposit decemb 14 2009
check no 10107
date decemb 12 2009
amount 95637
payment for orion invoic date decemb 5 2009
endors for deposit to the account of orion paper compani
account no 025269999 stamp
bank to which deposit florida marin nation bank st
augustin
date deposit decemb 14 2009
copi of the front and back ar attach and thei have been initi and date
page 19
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31132 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book corpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32085
10106
pai to the order of
dollar
first nation bank
1001 main street
st augustin fl 32080
f o r
00135 11490272210106 8967
3 5099
48 9
orion 102 13600
on hundr two thousand on hundr thirti six and no1 0 0
margaret oboyl
for deposit onli orion paper compani acct no 025269999 florida marin nation
al bank
st augustin
dec 14 2009
orion invoic 1116 0 9
dec 12 2 0 09
page 20
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31133
bailei book corpor
6200 bayshor drive
st augustin fl 32085
1 0 1 0 7
pai to the order of
dollar
first nation bank
1001 main street
st augustin fl 32080
for
001355 11490272210107 8967
3 5099
48 9
orion95 63700
nineti five thou ad six hundr thirti seven and no100
margaret oboyl
for deposit onli orion paper compani acct no 025269999 florida marin nation bank
st augustin dec 14 2009
orion invoic 12509
dec 12 2009
page 21
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31134 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of david levei
jerrico intern paper compani
date april 9 2010
david levei director of sale jerrico intern paper compani 2901 island av
philadelphia pa 19530 wa interview by telephon at hi offic after be advis of
the ident of the interview he provid the follow inform on a voluntari basi
mr levei assum hi present posit in 2003 at that time bailei book incorpor
wa a major custom with sale in excess of 500000 annual sinc then the volum ha
consist dwindl
in januari 2009 mr levei met with carl sa nderson the owner of jerrico and discuss
how to reviv the bailei book account both mr levei and mr sanderson had heard
rumor in the industri that jim nagel of orion corpor wa take care of linda
reed collin bailei purchas manag nagel ha a veri poor reput in the industri
and wa caught pai off on anoth account sever year ago mr levei declin to
provid ani further detail or to identifi the sourc of hi inform
as a result of their meet mr sanderson and mr levei decid to test the water at
bailei book by submit a bid at cost for a substanti quantiti of delux bond and
standard white to see if we could open the door the offer wa made at the end of
januari 2009 and wa not accept sinc then jerrico doe not even bother to bid and
expect no further signific sale to bailei book
page 22
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31135
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject interview of mari rodriguez de la garza
date april 13 2010
ms mari rodriguez de la garza phone and said that she had overheard a telephon
convers between ms collin and mr nage l she heard ms collin arrang to meet mr
nagel for drink thi afternoon after work collin is suppos to meet nagel at the bar at
the hotel atlant in st augustin accordingli a physic surveil wa establish as
set forth in the follow log
page 23
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31136 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject surveil log
date april 13 2010
on april 13 2010 commenc at 450 pm surveil wa establish at the hotel
atlant 6583 bayshor st augustin florida the result of the surveil ar as follow
time event
450 pm establish surveil in loung
555 pm linda reed collin and white male arriv at loung and order drink
collin and unidentifi male hold hand at tabl
620 pm collin and unidentifi male order anoth drink
627 pm unidentifi male and collin kiss at the tabl
640 pm break surveil termin
644 pm surveil reinstitut twosom still at bar
702 pm observ white male pai for drink in cash twosom leav
hold hand and proce to room 652 at hotel atlant both
enter
932 pm collin and male leav room 652 male get into a late model
chevrolet silver in color florida licens mnx782 and depart
collin get into a nissan z licens nrc130 and depart
935 pm surveil termin
page 24
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31137
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject anonym telephon call
date april 16 2010
a telephon call wa receiv advis that edward j collin and hi wife linda reed
collin had the follow debt with the below establish as of march 14 2010
account total balanc monthli payment
st augustin bank 46482 2361
sear 2378 281
marin save 110232 1377
bailei credit union 14826 787
mastercard 10041 397
american express 5990 balanc
norwood corpor 3892 461
balli fashion 1436 124
total fix payment 5788
the caller advis that edward j and linda reed collin had held a joint check account
sinc 2000 at sunshin feder bank the account had an averag balanc of less than
1000 and wa frequent overdraw n no other account were locat
page 25
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31138 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of record
st augustin counti courthous
date april 17 2010
record of the st augustin counti courthous reflect the follow inform
regard edward j collin and linda reed collin as of april 11 2010
1 edward j collin is a defend in three civil action as follow
a bertram yacht incorpor vs edward j collin and collin marin corpor case
number 004435 bertram su collin individu and the corpor for
nonpay of 13874 plu interest and attornei fee the suit wa file april
23 2008 and alleg that collin took deliveri of a marin winch on march 4
2007 and that the amount is unpaid the suit is still pend attornei for the
plaintiff is sherri t marshal cummin and marshal vero beach florida
b bradford l jenkin vs edward j collin et al case number 010964 thi suit
alleg that on june 27 2009 jenkin paid a deposit for collinss charter boat
the mistress and cancel within the period provid by the contract collinss
check refund the 3500 wa return for insuffici fund collin did not
make the check good
c bayview bank vs edward j collin and collin marin corpor case number 01
5412 collin wa su on april 21 2009 for nonpay of a work capit
note with a current balanc off 31423 the note is unpaid
page 26
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31139
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of record
secretari of state
date april 17 2010
the secretari of state offic tallahasse florida record reflect the follow
inform about collin marin corpor
the corpor wa form on juli 23 2000 li ted as incorpor ar edward j collin
jame b vicker and linda reed collin offi cer ar the same regist agent is frank
r bledso attornei at law 764 fr ont street st augustin florida
the corpor charter wa suspend on februari 15 2008 for failur to pai 324 in
franchis tax to the state
page 27
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31140 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of record
chattel mortgag
date april 17 2010
a review of chattel mortgag in st augustin counti florida reflect the follow
record concern linda reed collin and edward collin as of decemb 31 2009
ori ginal
date file lien holder properti amount of lien
31207 st augustin bank 2006 merced 350sl 65000
61208 bailei credit union 2007 nissan z 21505
71709 norwood corpor stereo equip 8500
page 28
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31141
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of record
dun bradstreet
date april 17 2010
record of dun bradstreet reflect the follow inform about collin marin
corpor as of decemb 31 2008
2006 2007 2008
sale 302000 257000 193000
total asset 157000 146000 118000
total liabil 104000 161000 183000
net incom 41000 13000 63000
page 29
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31142 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
subject review of financi condit of linda reed
collin and edward j collin from public
record
date april 18 2010
a review of the financi condit of linda reed collin and edward collin assembl
from public record reflect the follow for the year of 2008
incom net
linda reed collin 35400
edward j collin
total incom 35400
expens
hous payment 16524
automobil payment
06 merced 28332
07 nissan 9444
stereo equip 5532
food estim 4800
util estim 2400
total expens 67032
unexplain incom 31632
page 30
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31143
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
tonya vincent cfe
subject interview of jame r nagel
date april 19 2010
jame r nagel sale repres ori on corpor wa interview at hi offic
room 5214 2600 industri drive st augustin florida after be advis of the ident
of the interview and of the natur of the inquiri mr nagel voluntarili provid the
follow inform
he ha been a salesman for orion sinc octob 1999 he sell stationeri and paper stock
to a varieti of busi enterpris includ bailei book incorpor bailei is not hi
largest account
mr nagel acknowledg that he know linda reed collin he sai their relationship is
pure profession and he ha never social with her he emphat deni ani
improprieti of ani kind and sai he ha never offer ani gratuiti or kickback to
collin
mr nagel claim the price he charg bailei ar competit and that if bailei is pai
higher price it is becaus thei ar get better product he wa present with two
invoic date 111608 and 12508 which reflect the payment for product that were
not receiv nagel claim he doe not know anyth about ani miss product and that
bailei record were in error he deni ask for payment in advanc to help the cash flow
of orion corpor
mr nagel deni our request to review orion book and record pertain to the
111608 and 12508 invoic sai the inform wa none of your busi and
proprietari he refus to answer ani further question without hi attornei be
present
page 31
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31144 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
tonya vincent cfe
subject interview of owen stetford
date april 21 2010
owen stetford chief financi offic orion corpor wa interview in hi offic at
2600 industri drive st augustin florida clifford karchmer orion gener counsel
also attend the meet
we advis mr stetford and mr karchmer of the natur of our inquiri and request their
cooper we had earlier ask mr stetford to produc copi of orion record
pertain to sale to bailei book when we telephon to set up the interview
mr stetford said that orion corpor wa form in 1971 by hi grandfath and that the
compani is close held mr stetford further state that orion is commit to the highest
level of busi integr that bailei book is a valu custom and that he is anxiou to
cooper as far as permit by compani counsel
regard our request to review orion record pertain to sale to bailei book and in
particular the invoic date novemb 16 and decemb 5 2009 mr stetford said that he
would be unabl to provid us with access to the origin record on the advic of counsel
howev he said he person review the record and told us that orion had no record
of ani receipt of payment for the abov invoic nor ani record that such an order had
been place or ship
mr stetford further advis after review our copi of the cancel bailei book check
payabl to orion for the abov invoic that orion doe not maintain ani corpor
account at florida marin nation bank furthermor the correct corpor name is
orion corpor not orion paper compani as the endors indic
mr stetford emphat state that neither he nor ani other corpor offic wa awar of
or condon ani improp activ regard their sale he said that he would direct mr
nagel to answer ani question regard sale to bailei book incorpor
in thi regard we again ask for permiss to examin orion record particularli the
account receiv record for the period novemb 2007 through march 2010 mr
karchmer said that he would take our request under advis
page 32
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 31145
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
tonya vincent cfe
subject interview of jame r nagel
date mai 1 2010
jame r nagel wa interview at the offic of hi attornei conrad vanc of the law firm
vanc selig and reisman suit 1000 1601 harbor drive st augustin mr nagel wa
present with copi of the check endors orion paper compani and ask about the
bank account to which thei were deposit after hesit for sever moment he quietli
admit to conspir with linda reed collin to have bailei book pai the fake invoic
at the conclus of the interview mr nagel voluntarili execut the attach statement
the origin of thi statement ha been wit by bridg and vincent and is maintain
in the evid file room 874 bailei book corpor 6200 bayshor st augustin
florida 32082
page 33
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31146 2011 fraud examin manual
st augustin florida
mai 1 2010
i jame r nagel furnish the follow free and voluntari statement to loren d bridg and tonya
vincent of bailei book incorpor no threat or promis of ani kind have been us to induc
thi statement
sinc 1999 i have been a sale repres emploi by ori on corpor sinc 2002 i have
been respons for paper sale to bailei book incorpor
in about januari 2008 linda reed collin manag of purchas to ld me that she would requir a
commiss on all sale to bailei book by orion i advis my boss donald l marsh sale
manag of ms collinss demand mr marsh and i reluctantli agre to make the payment becaus
we believ that it would otherwis be imposs to make ani sale to bailei book no other
person at orion wa inform of ms collinss demand
the payment to ms collin bega n about februari 2008 ms collin to ld me that she would inflat
the price paid to orion in order to cover the kickback thereaft approxim 51000 wa paid
to ms collin by orion corpor check payabl to market research inc ms collin told me
that market research inc wa a compani she had establish the check were record on
orion book as consult fee and were approv by mr marsh and me
in about octob 2009 ms collin told me that she would approv the payment of invoic to
orion for product that would not have to be de liver ms collin thereaft author the
payment of two invoic in the amount of 102 136 and 95637 which were paid by bailei book
incorpor in decemb 2009 no product wa ship on these invoic ms collin and i
establish a bank account in the name of orion paper compani at florida marin nation bank
and equal divid the proce of the abovement invoic ms collin prepar my check
which were then deposit to my person check account at flagler nation bank in st
augustin i spent the proce on bill neither mr marsh nor ani other person at orion wa awar
of the abov activ
i make thi statement in order to express my regret for have engag in the aforement
conduct and promis to make restitut to the extent possibl i knew my conduct wa wrong but i
felt it wa justifi at the time i will try to pai ani loss that have occur as a result of my
activ
i have read thi statement consist of thi page i now sign my name below in the presenc of the
undersign wit becaus the statement is true and correct to the best of my knowledg
wit
loren d bridg jame r nagel
signatur
tonya vincent
page 34
investig appendix sampl fraud examin report
2011 fraud examin manual 3 1147
bailei book incorpor
memorandum
to file 084422
from loren d bridg cfe
tonya vincent cfe
subject interview of linda reed collin
date mai 1 2010
ms linda reed collin wa interview on mai 1 2010 by loren d bridg and tonya
vincent she voluntarili provid the attach sign statement the origin of thi
statement ha been wit by bridg and vinc ent and is maintain in the evid file
room 874 bailei book corpor 6200 bayshor st augustin florida 32082
page 35
sampl fraud examin report investig appendix
31148 2011 fraud examin manual
st augustin florida
mai 1 2010
i linda reed collin furnish the follow free and voluntari statement to loren d bridg and
tonya vincent of bailei book incorpor no threat or promis of ani kind have been us to
induc thi statement
i am senior purchas agent for bailei book incorpor and have been emploi by bailei
book sinc 2005 my job is to overse the purchas of merchandis and other suppli for bailei
book incorpor as part of my job i am to ensur that bailei book incorpor receiv the
highest qualiti product at the lowest possibl cost
commenc in approxim februari 2008 and continu through the current time i have
accept monei from jame nagel sale repres for orion corpor st augustin
florida nagel offer me monei to ensur that hi compani receiv preferenti treatment in
suppli bailei book with stationeri and paper product
on those occas that i accept monei i wa awar that bailei book incorpor wa not
obtain the best product at the lowest possibl price the price charg for product deliv
dure the time i accept monei wa substanti higher than market valu
in novemb and decemb 2009 i author the payment of invoic of 102136 and 95637
respect these invoic were paid without the receipt of ani merchandis nagel and i
subsequ split the proce of these invoic equal between us
i estim that i have receiv in excess of 150000 in connect with mr nagel i am not sure that
anyon at orion corpor knew of our arrang no on at bailei book had knowledg of
or particip in my scheme
i am awar that my conduct is illeg and violat bailei book polici i particip in thi
scheme becaus my husband and i were have sever financi problem due to hi busi we
us the proce of my conduct to pai off sever person and businessrel debt that were
past due i am truli sorri for my conduct and i promis to repai ani result damag
i have read thi statement consist of thi page i now sign my name below becaus thi statement
is true and correct to the best of my knowledg
wit
loren d bridg linda reed collin
signatur
tonya vincent
page 36
investig appendix sampl form
2011 fraud examin manual 31201
sampl form
consent to search
date
locat
i have been inform of my constitut right not to have a
search made of the premis hereinaft mention without a search warrant and of my right to
refus to consent to such a search herebi author
and to conduct a complet search of my
premis locat at the abov mention individu ar
author by me to take from my premis ani letter paper materi or other properti that thei
might desir
thi written permiss is be given by me voluntarili and without threat or promis of ani
kind
sign
wit
thi is to certifi that on at
the individu describ abov conduct a search of
i certifi that noth wa remov from my custodi
sign
wit
sampl form investig appendix
31202 2011 fraud examin manual
consent to search
on date item list below were
receiv from
return to
releas to
name
street address
citi
descript of
item s
receiv by
receiv from
investig appendix sampl form
2011 fraud examin manual 31203
telephon record consent
date
locat
i
name
herebi
address
author and
employe of
to instal a record devic on a telephon
compani name
locat at
locat
for the purpos of record ani convers i might have on that telephon with
on or around
name of subject date
i have given thi written permiss without threat or promis of ani kind
signatur
wit
sampl form investig appendix
31204 2011 fraud examin manual
consent to record
date
locat
i
name
herebi author
address
and
repres of to place a bodi record on
compani name
my person for the purpos of record ani convers with
that i might have on or around
name of subject date
i have given thi written permiss voluntarili and without threat or promis of ani
kind
signatur
wit
investig appendix sampl form
2011 fraud examin manual 31205
custom consent and author for access to financi record
i name of custom attach to thi form herebi
author the
name and address of financi institut
to disclos these financi record
to
name of person
for the follow purpos
i understand that thi author can be revok by me in write at ani time befor my
record as describ abov ar disclos and that thi author is valid for no more than three
month from the date of my signatur
date signatur of custom
address of custom
wit
note if a govern author is request the financi record the right to financi privaci act mai appli and
addit notic and disclosur mai be requir
engag contractsopinion letter investig appendix
31206 2011 fraud examin manual
bailei book incorpor
evid control log
bank safe deposit box
name of bank
evid control center
locat
repositori
offic safevault
locat
other locat
file cabinet etc
1
signatur of person place evid in or
remov from repositori if entri to facil
for other reason briefli state in column 2
2
reason
3
file case no
enter
time date
depart
time date
investig appendix engag contractsopinion letter
2011 fraud examin manual 31301
engag contract opinion letter
fraud polici review propos
date
mrm
depart
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud detect and deterr review
dear mrm
pursuant to our discuss xyz associ x yz is pleas to present thi propos to
the abc compani the compani to perform a review of the compani polici and
procedur to detect and deter fraud
thi review is design to assist in determin the compani procedur concern
adequ fraud detect and deterr method thi review cannot be reli upon to
provid assur that fraud doe not or will not exist within the compani rather it is
design to highlight weak if ani in the exist system a potenti review by xyz
would also provid manag with recommend for a proactiv fraud deterr
program
the fee for these servic will be plu ex pens which includ but ar not limit
to travel telephon photocopi and facsimil charg on half of the fee is due upon
sign thi letter and the other half upon deliveri of the report all expens will be bill at
the conclus of each month and ar due upon receipt ani invoic remain outstand
for more than 30 dai will be subject to a rebil charg
pleas review thi propos if thi propos meet with your approv pleas sign and return
on copi along with your check for in the enclos envelop if you have ani
question pleas do not hesit to call thank you
sincer your
engag contractsopinion letter investig appendix
31302 2011 fraud examin manual
fraud examin propos
date
esq
legal depart
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud examin
dear mrm
pursuant to our discuss xyz associ xyz present thi propos to the abc
compani the compani to perform a fraud examin as a result of certain alleg
that have come to the attent of the compani
our examin will be conduct in accord with law fraud examin techniqu
which includ but ar not limit to examin of book and record voluntari
interview of appropri personnel and other such evidencegath procedur as
necessari under the circumst we cannot provid assur that fraud if it exist will
be uncov as a result of our examin
the fee for thi examin will be per hour plu expens which includ but ar
not limit to travel telephon photocopi and facsimil charg a retain of
is due upon sign thi letter all expens will be bill at the conclus of each
month and ar due upon receipt ani invoic remain outstand for more than 30 dai
will be subject to a rebil charg the hourli rate will be appli against the retain onc
the retain reach a fulli appli statu an addit retain of will be requir
we estim the entir engag will not be more than exclud ani testimoni
requir ani deposit or court appear will be bill at the rate of per
hour all outstand invoic must be paid befor ani testimoni appear
pleas review thi propos if it meet with your approv pleas sign and return on copi
along with your check for in the enclos envelop if you have ani question
pleas do not hesit to call thank you
sincer your
investig appendix engag contractsopinion letter
2011 fraud examin manual 31303
fraud polici review opinion
date
mrm
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud detect and deterr review
dear mrm
pursuant to your request xyz associ xyz ha perform a review of the polici
and procedur of the abc compani the compani for the purpos of review their
adequaci to detect and deter fraud
thi review doe not provid assur that fraud doe not or will not exist have
complet the follow step we have determin that in order to strengthen it fraud
detect potenti the compani procedur need improv in the area outlin
herein
part of the purpos of an intern control system is to assur that the asset of the compani
ar properli safeguard from employe or outsid misappl in addit an adequ
system of intern control contain detect method so that if misappropri take
place the irregular will come to the attent of those who can remedi the situat and
take suitabl action against it an adequ system of intern control is not design to
prevent or detect a collus fraud scheme among employe andor manag our
review includ some the follow procedur
in thi section brie fly describ the main procedur follo wed for exampl
a we read the compani polici and procedur manual
b through interview with personnel kei to the oper at the compani we
determin if the exist polici and procedur were be follow
c we chart the current flow of busi transact as thei ar be record at the
compani
d we compar the flow of transact approv and record with the polici and
procedur manual
engag contractsopinion letter investig appendix
31304 2011 fraud examin manual
page 2
the follow discrep were note in abc system of intern control
in thi section explain briefli the differ between the establish intern
control and those procedur follow by the compani personnel
base on our review we recommend the follow chang be institut in the compani
intern account control system
in thi section make your recommend
in addit to the abov recommend we suggest the compani consid the follow
proactiv approach to fraud deterr
in thi section suggest proactiv step such as
an intern audit structur report to the board of director
activ inquiri of fraudul transact
hotlin
annual conflict of interest statement
annual review of employe expens account etc
thi report is not intend for gener circul or public nor is it to be reproduc
for ani purpos other than that outlin abov xyz doe not assum ani respons or
liabil for loss occas to on or other as a result of the circul public
reproduct or us of our report contrari to the condit of thi paragraph the valid
of our report is predic on the extent to which full honest and complet disclosur wa
made by all parti
we will be in contact soon to discuss the detail of thi report in the meantim pleas feel
free to call with question
sincer your
investig appendix engag contractsopinion letter
2011 fraud examin manual 31305
evid doe not support alleg
date
esq
law depart
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud examin
dear mrm
we have conduct a fraud examin concern a possibl misappropri of asset
of compani name thi examin wa predic upon inform result from a
routin audit of the compani book by the compani intern auditor
our fraud examin wa conduct in accord with law fraud examin
techniqu which includ an examin of book and record voluntari interview of
appropri personnel and other such evidencegath procedur as necessari under the
circumst
becaus of the natur of fraud no assur can be given that fraud doe not exist
howev base on the result of our examin we have found no evid to support
the conclus that the asset in question were misappropri
sincer
engag contractsopinion letter investig appendix
31306 2011 fraud examin manual
evid support alleg
date
esq
law depart
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud examin
dear mrm
we have conduct a fraud examin concern a possibl misappropri of asset
of compani name thi examin wa predic upon inform result from a
routin audit of the compani book by the compani intern auditor
our fraud examin wa conduct in accord with law fraud examin
techniqu which includ an examin of book and record voluntari interview of
appropri witnessespersonnel and other such evidencegath procedur as necessari
under the circumst
base on the result of our fraud examin we find that there is suffici evid to
support the conclus that asset in the am ount of were misappropri from the
compani bank account and that mrm appropri these asset for hisher
person benefit
pleas call me to set up a meet at your earliest conveni so we can present you with
the detail of the evid we gather dure our fraud examin
sincer
investig appendix engag contractsopinion letter
2011 fraud examin manual 31307
inconclus evid
date
esq
law depart
compani name
address
citi state zip code
re fraud examin
dear mrm
we have conduct a fraud examin concern a possibl misappropri of asset
of compani name thi examin wa predic upon inform result from a
routin audit of the compani book by the compani intern auditor
our examin wa conduct in accord with law fraud examin techniqu
which includ an examin of book and record voluntari interview of appropri
personnel and other such evidencegath procedur as necessari under the
circumst
the result of our examin ar inconclus becaus of the natur of fraud no
assur can be given that fraud doe not exist howev base on our examin there
is current insuffici evid to support the conclus that the asset in question were
misappropri
sincer
2011 fraud examin manual 4101
