2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 6 — Check Tampering Schemes


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 6 — Check Tampering Schemes  
• Forged maker schemes involve forging an authorized signature on a company check.  
• Forged endorsement schemes consist of forging the signature endorsement of an 
intended recipient of a company check. 
• Altered payee schemes involve changing the payee designation on the check to the 
perpetrator or an accomplice. 
• Authorized maker schemes occur when employees with signature authority write 
fraudulent checks for their own benefit. 
  
1. Are unused checks stored in a secure container with limited access? 
Blank checks, which can be used for forgery, should be stored in a secure area such as a 
safe or vault. Security to this area should be restricted to authorized personnel. 
 
2. Are unused checks from accounts that  have been closed promptly destroyed?  
Companies should promptly destroy all unused checks from accounts that have been closed. 
 
3. Are electronic payments used where possible to limit the number of paper checks issued? 
Companies can minimize the possibility of check tampering and theft by using electronic 
payment services to handle large vendor and financing payments. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.847 
4. Are printed and signed checks mailed immediately after signing?  
Printed and signed checks should be mailed immediately after signing.  
 
5. Are new checks purchased from reputable check vendors? 
All new checks should be purchased from reputable, well-established check producers.  
 
6. Do company checks contain security features to ensure their integrity?  
Companies can reduce their exposure to physical check tampering by using checks 
containing security features, such as high-resolution microprinting, security inks, and 
ultraviolet ink. 
 
7. Has the company notified its bank to not accept checks over  a predetermined maximum amount?  
Companies should work in a cooperative effort with banks to prevent check fraud, 
establishing maximum dollar amounts above which the company’s bank will not accept 
checks drawn against the account. 
 
8. Has the company established positive pay controls with its bank by supplying the bank with a daily list of 
checks issued and authorized for payment?  
One method for a company to help prevent check fraud is to establish positive pay controls 
by supplying its banks with a daily list of checks issued and authorized for payment. 
 
9. Is the employee who prepares the check prohibited from signing the check?  
Check preparation should not be performed by a signatory on the account. 
 
10. Are detailed comparisons made between the payees  on the checks and the payees listed in the cash 
disbursements journal?  
Companies should perform detailed comparisons of the payees on the checks and the payees 
listed in the cash disbursements journal. 
 
11. Are employees responsible for handling and coding checks periodically rotated?  
Periodic rotation of personnel responsible for handling and coding checks can be an 
effective check disbursement control.  
 
  
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.848   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
12. Are bank reconciliations completed immedi ately after bank statements are received?  
Companies should complete bank reconciliations immediately after bank statements are 
received. The Uniform Commercial Code states that discrepancies must be presented to the 
bank within 30 days of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liable. 
 
13. Are bank statements and account reconciliations independently audited to confirm accuracy?  
Bank statements and account reconciliations should be independently audited for accuracy. 
 
14. Are cancelled checks independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries?  
Cancelled checks should be independently reviewed for alterations and forgeries. 
 
15. Are checks for a material amount matched to the supporting documentation?  
Checks for material amounts should be matched to the supporting documentation. 
 
16. Are voided checks examined for irregularities and to ensure they haven’t been processed? 
The list of voided checks should be verified against physical copies of the checks. Bank 
statements should be reviewed to ensure that voided checks have not been processed. 
 
17. Are missing checks recorded and stop payments issued? 
Missing checks may indicate lax control over the physical safekeeping of checks. Stop 
payments should be issued for all missing checks. 
 
18. Do questionable payees or payee ad dresses trigger review of the corresponding check and support 
documentation? 
Questionable payees or payee addresses should trigger a review of the corresponding check 
and support documentation. 
 
19. With the exception of payroll, are checks issued to employees reviewed for irregularities? 
Checks payable to employees, with the exception of regular payroll checks, should be closely 
scrutinized for schemes such as conflicts of interest, fictitious vendors, or duplicate expense 
reimbursements. 
 
20. Are two signatures required for check issuance? 
Requiring dual signatures on checks can reduce the risk of check fraud. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.849 
21. Are all company payments made by check or other recordable payment device?  
Making payments by check or other recordable payment device can reduce the risk of 
disbursement frauds. 
 
22. Are handwritten checks prohibited?  
Handwritten checks are especially vulnerable to check fraud and should be prohibited. 
 



:


modul 6 check tamper scheme
forg maker scheme involv forg an author signatur on a compani check
forg endors scheme consist of forg the signatur endors of an
intend recipi of a compani check
alter paye scheme involv chang the paye design on the check to the
perpetr or an accomplic
author maker scheme occur when employe with signatur author write
fraudul check for their own benefit
1 ar unus check store in a secur contain with limit access
blank check which can be us for forgeri should be store in a secur area such as a
safe or vault secur to thi area should be restrict to author personnel
2 ar unus check from account that have been close promptli destroi
compani should promptli destroi all unus check from account that have been close
3 ar electron payment us where possibl to limit the number of paper check issu
compani can minim the possibl of check tamper and theft by us electron
payment servic to handl larg vendor and financ payment
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4847
4 ar print and sign check mail immedi after sign
print and sign check should be mail immedi after sign
5 ar new check purchas from reput check vendor
all new check should be purchas from reput wellestablish check produc
6 do compani check contain secur featur to ensur their integr
compani can reduc their exposur to physic check tamper by us check
contain secur featur such as highresolut microprint secur ink and
ultraviolet ink
7 ha the compani notifi it bank to not accept check over a predetermin maximum amount
compani should work in a cooper effort with bank to prevent check fraud
establish maximum dollar amount abov which the compani bank will not accept
check drawn against the account
8 ha the compani establish posit pai control with it bank by suppli the bank with a daili list of
check issu and author for payment
on method for a compani to help prevent check fraud is to establish posit pai control
by suppli it bank with a daili list of check issu and author for payment
9 is the employe who prepar the check prohibit from sign the check
check prepar should not be perform by a signatori on the account
10 ar detail comparison made between the paye on the check and the paye list in the cash
disburs journal
compani should perform detail comparison of the paye on the check and the paye
list in the cash disburs journal
11 ar employe respons for handl and code check period rotat
period rotat of personnel respons for handl and code check can be an
effect check disburs control
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4848 2011 fraud examin manual
12 ar bank reconcili complet immedi at after bank statement ar receiv
compani should complet bank reconcili immedi after bank statement ar
receiv the uniform commerci code state that discrep must be present to the
bank within 30 dai of receipt of the bank statement in order to hold the bank liabl
13 ar bank statement and account reconcili independ audit to confirm accuraci
bank statement and account reconcili should be independ audit for accuraci
14 ar cancel check independ review for alter and forgeri
cancel check should be independ review for alter and forgeri
15 ar check for a materi amount match to the support document
check for materi amount should be match to the support document
16 ar void check examin for irregular and to ensur thei havent been process
the list of void check should be verifi against physic copi of the check bank
statement should be review to ensur that void check have not been process
17 ar miss check record and stop payment issu
miss check mai indic lax control over the physic safekeep of check stop
payment should be issu for all miss check
18 do question paye or paye ad dress trigger review of the correspond check and support
document
question paye or paye address should trigger a review of the correspond check
and support document
19 with the except of payrol ar check issu to employe review for irregular
check payabl to employe with the except of regular payrol check should be close
scrutin for scheme such as conflict of interest fictiti vendor or duplic expens
reimburs
20 ar two signatur requir for check issuanc
requir dual signatur on check can reduc the risk of check fraud
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4849
21 ar all compani payment made by check or other record payment devic
make payment by check or other record payment devic can reduc the risk of
disburs fraud
22 ar handwritten check prohibit
handwritten check ar especi vulner to check fraud and should be prohibit
