2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 14 — Conflicts of Interest


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 14 — Conflicts of Interest  
• Purchase schemes involve the overbilling of a company for goods or services by a 
vendor in which an employee has an undisclosed ownership or financial interest. 
• Sales schemes involve the underselling of company goods by an employee to a company 
in which the employee maintains a hidden interest. 
  
  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.865 
1. Are there periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee information, such as addresses and 
telephone numbers? 
Organizations should conduct periodic comparisons of vendor information with employee 
information, such as addresses and telephone numbers. 
 
2. Are vendors who employ former company employees under in creased scrutiny? 
Vendors who employ former company employees should be under increased scrutiny for 
potential conflicts of interest. 
 
3. Does the organization have a reporting procedure for personnel to report their concerns about vendors 
receiving favored treatment? 
Organizations should provide personnel with a confidential system for reporting concerns 
about vendors receiving favored treatment. 
 
4. Are employees required to complete an annual disclo sure document that includes business ownership, 
income, and investment information? 
Employees should be required to provide annual disclosures that list business ownership, 
income, and investment information. 
 
5. Does the organization require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits?  
Organizations should require vendors to sign an agreement allowing vendor audits. 
 
6. Are vendor audits conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, and  
receiving departments? 
Vendor audits should be conducted by someone independent of the purchase, sales, billing, 
and receiving departments. 
 



:


modul 14 conflict of interest
purchas scheme involv the overbil of a compani for good or servic by a
vendor in which an employe ha an undisclos ownership or financi interest
sale scheme involv the undersel of compani good by an employe to a compani
in which the employe maintain a hidden interest
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4865
1 ar there period comparison of vendor inform with employe inform such as address and
telephon number
organ should conduct period comparison of vendor inform with employe
inform such as address and telephon number
2 ar vendor who emploi former compani employe under in creas scrutini
vendor who emploi former compani employe should be under increas scrutini for
potenti conflict of interest
3 doe the organ have a report procedur for personnel to report their concern about vendor
receiv favor treatment
organ should provid personnel with a confidenti system for report concern
about vendor receiv favor treatment
4 ar employe requir to complet an annual disclo sure document that includ busi ownership
incom and invest inform
employe should be requir to provid annual disclosur that list busi ownership
incom and invest inform
5 doe the organ requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
organ should requir vendor to sign an agreement allow vendor audit
6 ar vendor audit conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill and
receiv depart
vendor audit should be conduct by someon independ of the purchas sale bill
and receiv depart
