2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/FRAUD RISK ASSESSMENT/The Fraud Risk Assessment Tool/MODULE # 15 — Fraudulent Financial Reports


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Fraud Risk Assessment


:


MODULE # 15 — Fraudulent Financial Reports  
• Fictitious revenue schemes involve recording fictitious revenue from the sale of goods  
or services. 
• Improper timing schemes involve recording revenues or expenses in improper 
accounting periods. 
• Understating liabilities schemes involve concealing or understating liabilities and 
expenses, capitalizing expenses, or expensing capital expenses. 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.866   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
• Improper disclosure schemes involve the improper disclosure of material information, 
such as contingent liabilities, significant events, management fraud, related-party 
transactions, or accounting changes. 
• Improper asset valuation schemes involve the improper valuation of inventory, accounts 
receivable, fixed assets, intangibles, or other assets. 
 
1. Are the organization’s accounting records in proper form? 
Organizations should maintain accounting records in proper form. 
 
2. Does the organization employ an adequate number of accounting employees? 
The accounting department should be adequately staffed to allow for proper segregation  
of duties. 
 
3. Does the organization have an effective internal audit staff? 
An effective internal audit staff can focus on high-risk areas for fraud and can identify new 
vulnerabilities, measure the effectiveness of internal controls, and signal that fraud 
prevention is a high priority for the company. 
 
4. Are proper internal controls established and maintained? 
Organizations should establish and enforce an internal control system. 
 
5. Does the organization embrace the concept of internal controls?  
Embracing the concept of internal controls requires that senior managers and employees 
understand why internal controls are important and what adopting such measures means  
to them. 
 
6. Are senior managers visible in their support of internal controls?  
Senior managers should be visible in their support of internal controls. 
 
7. Are the organization’s financial goals and objectives realistic? 
Unrealistic financial goals and objectives can result in managers and employees committing 
fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
8. Does the organization consistently achieve its financial goals and objectives? 
Any failure to meet financial goals and objectives should be researched. 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.867 
9. Is the organization’s reported financial performance stable or increasing? 
Management should investigate any unstable or decreasing financial performance. 
 
10. Does the company have stable relationships with its banks?  
The company should strive to have stable relationships with its banks. 
 
11. Are there unrealistic changes or increases in financial statement account balances?  
Management should determine the reasons for any unrealistic changes or increases in 
financial statement account balances. 
 
12. Are the account balances realistic given the nature, age, and size of the company?  
Management should investigate any unrealistic account balances. 
 
13. Do actual physical assets exist in the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements?  
An inventory of physical assets should be conducted to verify that the physical assets exist in 
the amounts and values indicated on the financial statements. 
 
14. Have there been significant changes in the nature of the or ganization’s revenues or expenses?  
The organization should determine the reasons for any significant changes in the nature of 
its revenues or expenses. 
 
15. Do one or a few large transactions account for a si gnificant portion of any a ccount balance or amount?  
Situations in which one or a few large transactions account for a significant portion of any 
account balance or amount should be researched. 
 
16. Are there significant transactions that occur near the end of a period that positively impact results of 
operations, especially transactions that are unusual or highly complex? 
Any significant transactions that occur near the end of a period and positively impact results 
of operations should be scrutinized for legitimacy, especially if the transactions are unusual 
or highly complex. 
 
17. Are financial results fairly consistent across periods? 
The company should be able to explain any variances in financial results across periods. 
 
Fraud Risk Assessment  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.868   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
18. Is there an inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth?  
Any inability to generate cash flows from operations while experiencing earnings growth 
should be investigated. 
 
19. Is there significant pressure to obtain additional capital necessary to stay competitive? 
Insufficient working capital can place undue pressure on management to manipulate 
financial results.  
 
20. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that involve unusually 
subjective judgments or uncertainties?  
Significant estimates, especially those that involve unusually subjective judgments or 
uncertainties, should be reviewed for reasonableness. 
 
21. Are reported assets, liabilities, revenues, or expenses based on significant estimates that are subject to 
potential significant change in the near  term in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the 
organization?  
Significant estimates that are subject to potential significant change in the near term  
in a manner that may have a financially disruptive effect on the organization should  
be scrutinized. 
 
22. Is the company experiencing unusual ly rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that 
of other companies in the same industry? 
Unusually rapid growth or profitability, especially when compared with that of other 
companies in the same industry, is a red flag of fraud and should be investigated. 
 
23. Is the organization highly vulner able to changes in interest rates?  
The organization should increase review of its financial reporting during periods of  
high vulnerability. 
 
24. Are there unrealistically aggressive sa les or profitability incentive programs?  
Unrealistically aggressive sales or profitability incentive programs can place undue pressure 
on employees and result in employees committing fraudulent acts in order to meet them. 
 
25. Is there a threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover?  
A threat of imminent bankruptcy, foreclosure, or hostile takeover places a company at 
increased risk for fraudulent activity to occur. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Fraud Risk Assessment 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.869 
26. Is there a high possibility of ad verse consequences on significant pend ing transactions, such as business 
combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported? 
A high possibility of adverse consequences on significant pending transactions, such as 
business combinations or contract awards, if poor financial results are reported can place 
extreme pressure on management to manipulate results. 
 
27. Is there a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally guaranteed significant 
debts of the entity?  
The existence of a poor or deteriorating financial position when management has personally 
guaranteed significant debts of the entity can result in management committing fraudulent 
acts in order to protect itself from financial harm. 
 
28. Does the firm continuously operate on a crisis basis or without a careful budget ing and planning process? 
A careful budgeting and planning process can help a firm to monitor progress toward its 
goals, control spending, and predict cash flow and profit. 
 
29. Does the organization have difficulty collecting receivables or have other cash flow problems? 
Management should determine the reasons for any collection or cash flow problems. 
 
30. Is the organization dependent on one or two key products or services, especially products or services that 
can become quickly obsolete? 
Dependence on one or two key products can place tremendous pressure on a company, 
exposing it to increased risk of fraud. 
 
31. Do the footnotes contain information about complex issues? 
Any complex issues should be explained in the footnotes. 
 
32. Are  there adequate disclosures in the financials and footnotes?  
Generally accepted accounting principles concerning disclosures require that financial 
statements (1) include all relevant and material information in the financials or footnotes and 
(2) not be misleading. 
 
 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Ethics for Fraud Examiners 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   4.901 



:


modul 15 fraudul financi report
fictiti revenu scheme involv record fictiti revenu from the sale of good
or servic
improp time scheme involv record revenu or expens in improp
account period
underst liabil scheme involv conceal or underst liabil and
expens capit expens or expens capit expens
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4866 2011 fraud examin manual
improp disclosur scheme involv the improp disclosur of materi inform
such as conting liabil signific event manag fraud relatedparti
transact or account chang
improp asset valuat scheme involv the improp valuat of inventori account
receiv fix asset intang or other asset
1 ar the organ account record in proper form
organ should maintain account record in proper form
2 doe the organ emploi an adequ number of account employe
the account depart should be adequ staf to allow for proper segreg
of duti
3 doe the organ have an effect intern audit staff
an effect intern audit staff can focu on highrisk area for fraud and can identifi new
vulner measur the effect of intern control and signal that fraud
prevent is a high prioriti for the compani
4 ar proper intern control establish and maintain
organ should establish and enforc an intern control system
5 doe the organ embrac the concept of intern control
embrac the concept of intern control requir that senior manag and employe
understand why intern control ar import and what adopt such measur mean
to them
6 ar senior manag visibl in their support of intern control
senior manag should be visibl in their support of intern control
7 ar the organ financi goal and object realist
unrealist financi goal and object can result in manag and employe commit
fraudul act in order to meet them
8 doe the organ consist achiev it financi goal and object
ani failur to meet financi goal and object should be research
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4867
9 is the organ report financi perform stabl or increas
manag should investig ani unstabl or decreas financi perform
10 doe the compani have stabl relationship with it bank
the compani should strive to have stabl relationship with it bank
11 ar there unrealist chang or increas in financi statement account balanc
manag should determin the reason for ani unrealist chang or increas in
financi statement account balanc
12 ar the account balanc realist given the natur ag and size of the compani
manag should investig ani unrealist account balanc
13 do actual physic asset exist in the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
an inventori of physic asset should be conduct to verifi that the physic asset exist in
the amount and valu indic on the financi statement
14 have there been signific chang in the natur of the or ganiz revenu or expens
the organ should determin the reason for ani signific chang in the natur of
it revenu or expens
15 do on or a few larg transact account for a si gnific portion of ani a ccount balanc or amount
situat in which on or a few larg transact account for a signific portion of ani
account balanc or amount should be research
16 ar there signific transact that occur near the end of a period that posit impact result of
oper especi transact that ar unusu or highli complex
ani signific transact that occur near the end of a period and posit impact result
of oper should be scrutin for legitimaci especi if the transact ar unusu
or highli complex
17 ar financi result fairli consist across period
the compani should be abl to explain ani varianc in financi result across period
fraud risk assess fraud prevent and deterr
4868 2011 fraud examin manual
18 is there an inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
ani inabl to gener cash flow from oper while experienc earn growth
should be investig
19 is there signific pressur to obtain addit capit necessari to stai competit
insuffici work capit can place undu pressur on manag to manipul
financi result
20 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that involv unusu
subject judgment or uncertainti
signific estim especi those that involv unusu subject judgment or
uncertainti should be review for reason
21 ar report asset liabil revenu or expens base on signific estim that ar subject to
potenti signific chang in the near term in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the
organ
signific estim that ar subject to potenti signific chang in the near term
in a manner that mai have a financi disrupt effect on the organ should
be scrutin
22 is the compani experienc unusu ly rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that
of other compani in the same industri
unusu rapid growth or profit especi when compar with that of other
compani in the same industri is a red flag of fraud and should be investig
23 is the organ highli vulner abl to chang in interest rate
the organ should increas review of it financi report dure period of
high vulner
24 ar there unrealist aggress sa le or profit incent program
unrealist aggress sale or profit incent program can place undu pressur
on employe and result in employe commit fraudul act in order to meet them
25 is there a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov
a threat of immin bankruptci foreclosur or hostil takeov place a compani at
increas risk for fraudul activ to occur
fraud prevent and deterr fraud risk assess
2011 fraud examin manual 4869
26 is there a high possibl of ad vers consequ on signific pend ing transact such as busi
combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report
a high possibl of advers consequ on signific pend transact such as
busi combin or contract award if poor financi result ar report can place
extrem pressur on manag to manipul result
27 is there a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person guarante signific
debt of the entiti
the exist of a poor or deterior financi posit when manag ha person
guarante signific debt of the entiti can result in manag commit fraudul
act in order to protect itself from financi harm
28 doe the firm continu oper on a crisi basi or without a care budget ing and plan process
a care budget and plan process can help a firm to monitor progress toward it
goal control spend and predict cash flow and profit
29 doe the organ have difficulti collect receiv or have other cash flow problem
manag should determin the reason for ani collect or cash flow problem
30 is the organ depend on on or two kei product or servic especi product or servic that
can becom quickli obsolet
depend on on or two kei product can place tremend pressur on a compani
expos it to increas risk of fraud
31 do the footnot contain inform about complex issu
ani complex issu should be explain in the footnot
32 ar there adequ disclosur in the financi and footnot
gener accept account principl concern disclosur requir that financi
statement 1 includ all relev and materi inform in the financi or footnot and
2 not be mislead
fraud prevent and deterr ethic for fraud examin
2011 fraud examin manual 4901
