2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Protections for Corporate Whistleblowers Under Sarbanes-Oxley 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act establishes broad protections for corporate whistleblowers. There 
are two sections of the Act that address whistleblower protections: Section 806 deals with 
civil protections and section 1107 establishes criminal liability for those who retaliate against 
whistleblowers.  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.225 
CIVIL LIABILITY WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 806, which is codified at 18 U.S.C. § 1514A, creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it only protects employees of publicly traded 
companies. Section 806 makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. To trigger section 806 protections, the employee must 
report the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a 
member of Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also 
protected against retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a 
proceeding filed, or about to be filed, relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or 
SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections not only cover retaliatory acts by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
If a public company is found to have violated Sarbanes-Oxley section 806, the Act provides 
for an award of compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties 
include reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages, 
including litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
CRIMINAL SANCTION WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION  
Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107—codified at 18 U.S. C. § 1513 — makes it a crime to knowingly, 
with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for providing truthful 
information relating to the commission or possible commission of any federal offense. This 
protection is only triggered when information is provided to a law enforcement officer. It 
does not apply to reports made to supervisors or to members of Congress, as is the case 
under Sarbanes-Oxley section 806.  
 
In general, the coverage of Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107 is much broader than the civil 
liability whistleblower protections of Sarbanes-Oxley section 806. While the Sarbanes-Oxley 
section 806 protections apply only to employees of publicly traded companies, Sarbanes-Oxley 
section 1107’s criminal whistleblower protections cover all individuals (and 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.226  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
organizations) regardless of where they work. Also, Sarbanes-Oxley section 806 only applies 
to violations of securities laws or SEC rules and regulations, whereas Sarbanes-Oxley section 
1107 protects individuals who provide truthful information about the commission or 
possible commission of any Federal offense.  
 
Violations of Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and 
up to 10 years in prison for individuals. Corporations that violate the Act can be fined up to 
$500,000.  
 



:


protect for corpor whistleblow under sarbanesoxlei
the sarbanesoxlei act establish broad protect for corpor whistleblow there
ar two section of the act that address whistleblow protect section 806 deal with
civil protect and section 1107 establish crimin liabil for those who retali against
whistleblow
law the law relat to fraud part 1
2011 fraud examin manual 2225
civil liabil whistleblow protect
sarbanesoxlei section 806 which is codifi at 18 usc 1514a creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 806 make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud to trigger section 806 protect the employe must
report the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a
member of congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also
protect against retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a
proceed file or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or
sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect not onli cover retaliatori act by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
if a public compani is found to have violat sarbanesoxlei section 806 the act provid
for an award of compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti
includ reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag
includ litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction whistleblow protect
sarbanesoxlei section 1107codifi at 18 us c 1513 make it a crime to knowingli
with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for provid truth
inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani feder offens thi
protect is onli trigger when inform is provid to a law enforc offic it
doe not appli to report made to supervisor or to member of congress as is the case
under sarbanesoxlei section 806
in gener the coverag of sarbanesoxlei section 1107 is much broader than the civil
liabil whistleblow protect of sarbanesoxlei section 806 while the sarbanesoxlei
section 806 protect appli onli to employe of publicli trade compani sarbanesoxlei
section 1107 crimin whistleblow protect cover all individu and
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2226 2011 fraud examin manual
organ regardless of where thei work also sarbanesoxlei section 806 onli appli
to violat of secur law or sec rule and regul wherea sarbanesoxlei section
1107 protect individu who provid truth inform about the commiss or
possibl commiss of ani feder offens
violat of sarbanesoxlei section 1107 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and
up to 10 year in prison for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to
500000
