2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Bribery of Public Officials and Witnesses (18 U.S.C. § 201)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Bribery of Public Officials and Witnesses (18 U.S.C. § 201) 
Section 201 is the principal federal anti-corruption statute, and applies to virtually any U.S. 
official, juror, or witness. The section contains two separate offenses: bribery of public 
officials and illegal gratuities. 
 
BRIBERY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS (18 U.S.C. § 201(b)) 
Section 201(b) makes it a crime for anyone to bribe a public official. More specifically, it 
prohibits giving or receiving something of value for the purpose of influencing the 
performance of an official act. Under section 201(b), bribery is punishable by up to 15 years 
imprisonment, fine, and disqualification from holding public office. 
 
The elements of an official bribery offense under section 201(b) are as follows: 
• Giving or receiving 
• Anything of value 
• With intent to corruptly influence 
• An official act 
 
GRATUITIES (18 U.S.C. 201(c)) 
Section 201(c) prohibits giving a government employee something of value because of his 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.248  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
official position. The illegal gratuity statute is a lesser-included offense of bribery. As stated, 
a bribe is a payment made with the purpose of influencing (changing) official conduct. A 
gratuity is a payment made to reward or compensate an official for performing duties he 
lawfully is required to perform. Moreover, unlike the bribery offense, there is no requirement 
for the government to prove that the gratuity was given for the purpose of influencing any 
official act. Illegal gratuity violations carry only a maximum two-year term, fine, or both. 
 
The elements of an illegal gratuities offense under section 201(c) are as follows: 
• Giving or receiving 
• Anything of value 
• For or because of 
• An official act 
 



:


briberi of public offici and wit 18 usc 201
section 201 is the princip feder anticorrupt statut and appli to virtual ani us
offici juror or wit the section contain two separ offens briberi of public
offici and illeg gratuiti
briberi of public offici 18 usc 201b
section 201b make it a crime for anyon to bribe a public offici more specif it
prohibit give or receiv someth of valu for the purpos of influenc the
perform of an offici act under section 201b briberi is punish by up to 15 year
imprison fine and disqualif from hold public offic
the element of an offici briberi offens under section 201b ar as follow
give or receiv
anyth of valu
with intent to corruptli influenc
an offici act
gratuiti 18 usc 201c
section 201c prohibit give a govern employe someth of valu becaus of hi
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2248 2011 fraud examin manual
offici posit the illeg gratuiti statut is a lesserinclud offens of briberi as state
a bribe is a payment made with the purpos of influenc chang offici conduct a
gratuiti is a payment made to reward or compens an offici for perform duti he
lawfulli is requir to perform moreov unlik the briberi offens there is no requir
for the govern to prove that the gratuiti wa given for the purpos of influenc ani
offici act illeg gratuiti violat carri onli a maximum twoyear term fine or both
the element of an illeg gratuiti offens under section 201c ar as follow
give or receiv
anyth of valu
for or becaus of
an offici act
