2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Anti-Kickback Act of 1986 (41 U.S.C. §§ 51–58)


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Anti-Kickback Act of 1986 (41 U.S.C. §§ 51–58) 
The Anti-Kickback Act outlaws the giving or receiving of anything of value for the purpose 
of improperly obtaining or receiving favorable treatment in connection with U.S. 
government contracts. The Act provides both civil and criminal penalties for violations. 
Criminal violations can be punished by a fine, up to 10 years in prison, or both. Civil 
penalties up to twice the amount of the kickback also may be assessed. Additionally, the 
United States may offset the amount of any kickback against the amount owed on the prime 
contract. 
 
ELEMENTS OF ANTI-KICKBACK ACT VIOLATIONS 
Under the Act, it is prohibited for: 
• Any person to 
• Knowingly and willfully 
• Offer or solicit kickbacks or any type of government contract or subcontract 
 
AUDIT OF RECORDS AND PREVENTION PROCEDURES 
The Anti-Kickback Act also provides for inspection by the Inspector General with access to 
books and records, and section 57 requires that the prime contractor have in place in its 
operations reasonable procedures to prevent and detect kickbacks. If a contractor has 
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation, the contractor is required to 
report the possible violation. The contractor also is required to cooperate fully with any 
federal agency investigation. 
 
According to the congressional notes following the statute, “reasonable procedures to detect 
and prevent kickbacks” include: 
• Educational programs for employees and subcontractors 
• Policy manuals 
• Special procurement and audit procedures 
• Ethics policies 
• Applicant screening 
• Reporting procedures 
 



:


antikickback act of 1986 41 usc 5158
the antikickback act outlaw the give or receiv of anyth of valu for the purpos
of improperli obtain or receiv favor treatment in connect with us
govern contract the act provid both civil and crimin penalti for violat
crimin violat can be punish by a fine up to 10 year in prison or both civil
penalti up to twice the amount of the kickback also mai be assess addition the
unit state mai offset the amount of ani kickback against the amount ow on the prime
contract
element of antikickback act violat
under the act it is prohibit for
ani person to
knowingli and willfulli
offer or solicit kickback or ani type of govern contract or subcontract
audit of record and prevent procedur
the antikickback act also provid for inspect by the inspector gener with access to
book and record and section 57 requir that the prime contractor have in place in it
oper reason procedur to prevent and detect kickback if a contractor ha
reason ground to believ that there ha been a violat the contractor is requir to
report the possibl violat the contractor also is requir to cooper fulli with ani
feder agenc investig
accord to the congression note follow the statut reason procedur to detect
and prevent kickback includ
educ program for employe and subcontractor
polici manual
special procur and audit procedur
ethic polici
applic screen
report procedur
