2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Fraud by Bank Personnel and Receivers


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Fraud by Bank Personnel and Receivers  
FALSE ENTRIES (18 U.S.C. § 1006) 
Section 1006 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code is a typical conflict of interest prohibition. It 
makes it a crime for “officers, agents, or employees” of financial institutions to defraud 
financial institutions or the U.S. government by making false entries or withdrawing or 
transferring funds without authorization. The penalties are severe — up to 30 years in prison 
and/or a fine of up to $1,000,000. 
 
To prove illegal participation under section 1006, the government must prove: 
• The defendant was an officer, agent, or employee of a lending institution authorized by 
and acting under the laws of the United States 
• Direct or indirect receipt of some benefit from the transaction in question 
• The defendant knowingly and willfully made, or caused to be made, a false entry 
concerning a material fact in a book, report, or statement of the institution 
 
CONCEALMENT OF ASSETS FROM A RECEIVER (18 U.S.C. § 1032) 
Section 1032 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code makes it a crime for a conservator or receiver of a 
financial institution to conceal or impede the recovery of funds or property. 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.260  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
THEFT, EMBEZZLEMENT, AND MISAPPLI CATION (18 U.S.C. §§ 656, 657) 
Section 656 of Title 18 of the U.S. Code is the principal federal bank embezzlement statute. 
It prohibits theft, embezzlement, and misapplication of a bank’s funds by its officers, 
directors, or employees. The essential elements of a typical section 656 violation are: 
• The defendant was an officer, director, agent, or employee of 
• A federally insured bank 
• Who willfully 
• Embezzled, abstracted, purloined, or willfully misapplied funds of the bank 
• With the intent to injure or defraud the bank 
 
The terms abstract, purloin, and misapply as used in the statute are largely repetitive and in 
normal usage mean to take or to convert bank funds for one’s own use or the use of a third-
 party for improper purposes without the bank’s knowledge or consent.  
 
Section 657 prohibits the embezzlement of funds from designated federally connected 
lending, credit, and insurance organizations. The basic elements of a violation are the same 
as those in section 656. 
 



:


fraud by bank personnel and receiv
fals entri 18 usc 1006
section 1006 of titl 18 of the us code is a typic conflict of interest prohibit it
make it a crime for offic agent or employe of financi institut to defraud
financi institut or the us govern by make fals entri or withdraw or
transfer fund without author the penalti ar sever up to 30 year in prison
andor a fine of up to 1000000
to prove illeg particip under section 1006 the govern must prove
the defend wa an offic agent or employe of a lend institut author by
and act under the law of the unit state
direct or indirect receipt of some benefit from the transact in question
the defend knowingli and willfulli made or caus to be made a fals entri
concern a materi fact in a book report or statement of the institut
conceal of asset from a receiv 18 usc 1032
section 1032 of titl 18 of the us code make it a crime for a conserv or receiv of a
financi institut to conceal or imped the recoveri of fund or properti
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2260 2011 fraud examin manual
theft embezzl and misappli cation 18 usc 656 657
section 656 of titl 18 of the us code is the princip feder bank embezzl statut
it prohibit theft embezzl and misappl of a bank fund by it offic
director or employe the essenti element of a typic section 656 violat ar
the defend wa an offic director agent or employe of
a feder insur bank
who willfulli
embezzl abstract purloin or willfulli misappli fund of the bank
with the intent to injur or defraud the bank
the term abstract purloin and misappli as us in the statut ar larg repetit and in
normal usag mean to take or to convert bank fund for on own us or the us of a third
parti for improp purpos without the bank knowledg or consent
section 657 prohibit the embezzl of fund from design feder connect
lend credit and insur organ the basic element of a violat ar the same
as those in section 656
