2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Bribery, Gratuities, and Conflicts of Interest, Generally


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Bribery, Gratuities, and Conflicts of Interest, Generally (18 U.S.C. §§ 201–208) 
These statutes prohibit a wide variety of activities which can be described generally as 
corruption. Such activities include giving or receiving a bribe or gratuity to or from a public 
official, as well as engaging in a conflict of interest. Section 201 is the principal federal anti-
 corruption statute. It applies to virtually any U.S. official and contains two separate offenses: 
bribery of public officials and illegal gratuities. In relation, section 208 prohibits a federal 
government employee from acting on a matter in which he has a conflict of interest. See the 
“Federal Corruption Statutes” section for more information. 
 
BRIBERY OF PUBLIC OFFICIALS (18 U.S.C. § 201(B)) 
In general, section 201(b) prohibits giving or receiving something of value for the purpose of 
influencing the performance of an official act. Bribery is punishable by up to 15 years 
imprisonment, fines, and disqualification from holding public office.  
 
GRATUITIES (18 U.S.C. § 201(C)) 
Gratuities include giving a government employee something of value because of his official 
position. However, unlike the bribery offense, there is no requirement for the government to 
prove that the gratuity was given for the purpose of influencing any official act. Illegal 
gratuity violations carry only a maximum two-year term, fine, or both. 
 
CONFLICT OF INTEREST (18 U.S.C. § 208) 
This statute prohibits those situations in which a government employee engages in activities 
that create a conflict between his personal interests and his duty to protect and serve the 
interests of the government. Violations of section 208 can result in civil penalties for the 
government employee (not exceeding $50,000 per violation, as well as two times the amount 
of compensation he received or was offered) and the government contractor (not exceeding 
$500,000 per violation in addition to two times the amount of compensation the contractor 
received or offered). It also imposes criminal penalties (up to five years imprisonment 
and/or a fine).  
 
Anti-Kickback Act of 1986 (41 U.S.C. §§ 51–58) 
The Anti-Kickback Act prohibits government contractors from soliciting, accepting, or 
attempting to solicit or accept any kickbacks in connection with government contracts. The 
Act provides both civil and criminal penalties for violations. Criminal violations can be 
punished by a fine, up to 10 years in prison, or both. Civil penalties up to twice the amount 
of the kickback also may be assessed. Additionally, the United States may offset the amount 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.276  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of any kickback against the amount owed on the prime contract. 
 



:


briberi gratuiti and conflict of interest gener 18 usc 201208
these statut prohibit a wide varieti of activ which can be describ gener as
corrupt such activ includ give or receiv a bribe or gratuiti to or from a public
offici as well as engag in a conflict of interest section 201 is the princip feder anti
corrupt statut it appli to virtual ani us offici and contain two separ offens
briberi of public offici and illeg gratuiti in relat section 208 prohibit a feder
govern employe from act on a matter in which he ha a conflict of interest see the
feder corrupt statut section for more inform
briberi of public offici 18 usc 201b
in gener section 201b prohibit give or receiv someth of valu for the purpos of
influenc the perform of an offici act briberi is punish by up to 15 year
imprison fine and disqualif from hold public offic
gratuiti 18 usc 201c
gratuiti includ give a govern employe someth of valu becaus of hi offici
posit howev unlik the briberi offens there is no requir for the govern to
prove that the gratuiti wa given for the purpos of influenc ani offici act illeg
gratuiti violat carri onli a maximum twoyear term fine or both
conflict of interest 18 usc 208
thi statut prohibit those situat in which a govern employe engag in activ
that creat a conflict between hi person interest and hi duti to protect and serv the
interest of the govern violat of section 208 can result in civil penalti for the
govern employe not exceed 50000 per violat as well as two time the amount
of compens he receiv or wa offer and the govern contractor not exceed
500000 per violat in addit to two time the amount of compens the contractor
receiv or offer it also impos crimin penalti up to five year imprison
andor a fine
antikickback act of 1986 41 usc 5158
the antikickback act prohibit govern contractor from solicit accept or
attempt to solicit or accept ani kickback in connect with govern contract the
act provid both civil and crimin penalti for violat crimin violat can be
punish by a fine up to 10 year in prison or both civil penalti up to twice the amount
of the kickback also mai be assess addition the unit state mai offset the amount
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2276 2011 fraud examin manual
of ani kickback against the amount ow on the prime contract
