2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 1)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud/Federal Acquisition Regulation


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Federal Acquisition Regulation 
The Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) is the system of regulations that govern the 
government’s procurement of goods and services. It does not regulate the purchasing 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 1)  Law 
2.278  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
activities of private sector firms. The FAR is found in Chapter 1 of Title 48 of the Code of  
Federal Regulations (CFR), and the official electronic version is available at 
www.arnet.gov/far. 
 
Among other things, FAR regulates disclosure requirements for government contractors and 
provides administrative remedies against persons or entities that commit government 
contract fraud.  
 
MANDATORY DISCLOSURE RULE (FAR 3.1003(A)(2)) 
On December 12, 2008, a major revision to the FAR went into effect. Among other things, 
the revised FAR provisions require all government contractors to disclose “credible 
evidence” of criminal fraud, conflict of interest, bribery, or gratuity violations found in Title 
18, as well as violations of the civil False Claims Act. Furthermore, the mandatory disclosure 
rules require that the contractor make reports to two different offices: the inspector general 
and the affected contracting officer. In addition, the mandatory disclosure rules make the 
failure to disclose violations a basis for suspension and debarment.  
 
ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES 
To help ensure that the government is dealing only with responsible contractors, the 
government uses suspension and debarment of contractors for certain offenses. The current 
regulations governing the debarment and suspension of federal government contractors are 
set forth in subpart 9.4 of the FAR.  
 
Suspension and debarment are administrative sanctions that disqualify contractors from 
government contracting and subcontracting. Suspension refers to an action taken by a 
suspending official to temporarily disqualify a contractor from government contracting. The 
government may suspend a contractor upon “adequate evidence” that the party has 
committed certain civil or criminal offenses. 
 
Debarment is defined as the action taken by a debarr ing official to exclude a contractor from 
government contracting for a specified period. Debarment actions require that this sanction 
be established by a “preponderance of the evidence” that the person engaged in conduct 
warranting debarment. 
 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.301 



:


feder acquisit regul
the feder acquisit regul far is the system of regul that govern the
govern procur of good and servic it doe not regul the purchas
the law relat to fraud part 1 law
2278 2011 fraud examin manual
activ of privat sector firm the far is found in chapter 1 of titl 48 of the code of
feder regul cfr and the offici electron version is avail at
wwwarnetgovfar
among other thing far regul disclosur requir for govern contractor and
provid administr remedi against person or entiti that commit govern
contract fraud
mandatori disclosur rule far 31003a2
on decemb 12 2008 a major revis to the far went into effect among other thing
the revis far provis requir all govern contractor to disclos credibl
evid of crimin fraud conflict of interest briberi or gratuiti violat found in titl
18 as well as violat of the civil fals claim act furthermor the mandatori disclosur
rule requir that the contractor make report to two differ offic the inspector gener
and the affect contract offic in addit the mandatori disclosur rule make the
failur to disclos violat a basi for suspens and debar
administr remedi
to help ensur that the govern is deal onli with respons contractor the
govern us suspens and debar of contractor for certain offens the current
regul govern the debar and suspens of feder govern contractor ar
set forth in subpart 94 of the far
suspens and debar ar administr sanction that disqualifi contractor from
govern contract and subcontract suspens refer to an action taken by a
suspend offici to temporarili disqualifi a contractor from govern contract the
govern mai suspend a contractor upon adequ evid that the parti ha
commit certain civil or crimin offens
debar is defin as the action taken by a debarr ing offici to exclud a contractor from
govern contract for a specifi period debar action requir that thi sanction
be establish by a preponder of the evid that the person engag in conduct
warrant debar
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2301
