2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/The Evolution of Mortgage Lenders and Brokers


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


The Evolution of Mortgage Lenders and Brokers 
MORTGAGE LENDERS  
Today, the secondary market has overtaken deposit gathering as the source of funding for 
mortgage lending. Loans are sold in the secondary market at origination, thereby providing 
the bank with a steady supply of capital needed to make additional loans. Without the need 
for a lot of capital (deposits on the books), mortgage lenders started to evolve.  
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.303 
Consequently, a smaller percentage of bankers are keeping their loans than in the past. Even 
large commercial banks with lending authority and capital now sell the mortgage loan 
transactions they originate and close. Few banks wish to rely on depositors’ money to fund 
mortgage loans.  
 
Additionally, many mortgage lenders are non-depository institutions rather than locally 
headquartered depository banks. Mortgage lenders do not take deposits. Instead they rely on 
the stability the secondary market has provided to purchase loans at origination, and to repay 
the bank monies to use for future mortgage loan originations. 
 
MORTGAGE BROKERS 
Historically, mortgage loans were originated by the loan officer at the bank. Mortgage 
lenders, however, started relying on third-party originators (TPOs) to broker their loan 
products. Brokers could be paid a commission rather than a salary, an option that worked 
well for minimally capitalized mortgage lenders.  
 
As a result, the industry has seen the evolution of mortgage brokers.  
 
As markets for mortgages became more competitive, banks with their own retail loan 
officers also started employing these third-party wholesale originators. Today, mortgage 
brokers are the largest distributors of mortgage products for mortgage lenders and banks. It 
is estimated that two-thirds of all originations are from wholesale TPO mortgage brokers 
rather than retail loan officers. 
 



:


the evolut of mortgag lender and broker
mortgag lender
todai the secondari market ha overtaken deposit gather as the sourc of fund for
mortgag lend loan ar sold in the secondari market at origin therebi provid
the bank with a steadi suppli of capit need to make addit loan without the need
for a lot of capit deposit on the book mortgag lender start to evolv
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2303
consequ a smaller percentag of banker ar keep their loan than in the past even
larg commerci bank with lend author and capit now sell the mortgag loan
transact thei origin and close few bank wish to reli on depositor monei to fund
mortgag loan
addition mani mortgag lender ar nondepositori institut rather than local
headquart depositori bank mortgag lender do not take deposit instead thei reli on
the stabil the secondari market ha provid to purchas loan at origin and to repai
the bank moni to us for futur mortgag loan origin
mortgag broker
histor mortgag loan were origin by the loan offic at the bank mortgag
lender howev start reli on thirdparti origin tpo to broker their loan
product broker could be paid a commiss rather than a salari an option that work
well for minim capit mortgag lender
as a result the industri ha seen the evolut of mortgag broker
as market for mortgag becam more competit bank with their own retail loan
offic also start emploi these thirdparti wholesal origin todai mortgag
broker ar the largest distributor of mortgag product for mortgag lender and bank it
is estim that twothird of all origin ar from wholesal tpo mortgag broker
rather than retail loan offic
