2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Legislation and Regulation in the Mortgage Industry


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Legislation and Regulation in the Mortgage Industry 
The increase in the incidence, cost, and victims of mortgage fraud has spurred the 
government and the mortgage industry to respond. Lawmakers have introduced additional 
legislation at the federal and state levels to curb mortgage fraud and other high-risk products 
and practices, such as predatory and subprime lending. Industry professionals and regulators 
are also reacting with ways to combat mortgage fraud. 
 
  
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.304  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
FEDERAL LEGISLATION ADDRESSING MORTGAGE FRAUD 
The following federal statutes are commonly used to prosecute mortgage fraud:  
 
18 U.S.C. § 1341 Mail fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1342 Use of fictitious name or address in fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1343 Wire fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1344 Bank fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1014 False statements on a loan or credit application 
18 U.S.C. § 1028 Fraud and related activities in connection with identity theft 
18 U.S.C. § 1029 Credit card fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1030 Computer fraud 
18 U.S.C. § 1349 Conspiracy 
18 U.S.C. § 1519 Obstruction of justice 
18 U.S.C. § 1956 Money laundering 
18 U.S.C. § 1957 Monetary transactions with illegal proceeds 
18 U.S.C. § 1001 False statements or entries (generally) 
18 U.S.C. § 1005 False entries to federally insured institutions 
18 U.S.C. § 1010 False statements in HUD transactions 
18 U.S.C. § 408 Fraud in connection with Social Security identification documents 
18 U.S.C. § 1961 Criminal RICO 
18 U.S.C. § 215 Receipt of commissions or gifts for procuring loans 
18 U.S.C. § 371 Conspiracy to commit offense or to defraud the United States 
18 U.S.C. § 656 Theft, embezzlement, or  misapplication by a bank officer or 
employee 
18 U.S.C. § 2314 Transportation of stolen goods or securities 
18 U.S.C. § 1341 Mail fraud 
 
In addition, on May 20, 2009, President Obama signed the Fraud Enforcement and 
Recovery Act of 2009 (FERA) into law. This comprehensive legislation expands the reach of 
federal law and increases funding for federal agencies to investigate and prosecute mortgage, 
corporate, and other financial frauds.  
 
Concerning its application to mortgage fraud, FERA makes a number of important changes 
to federal law. Most importantly, FERA expands the definition of financial institution in the 
criminal code (18 U.S.C. § 20 ), thereby extending federal fraud laws to mortgage-lending 
businesses not directly regulated or insured by the federal government. By amending the 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.305 
definition of financial institution, FERA expands the Department of Justice’s authority to 
prosecute mortgage fraud cases as bank fraud and to seek enhanced penalties under the mail 
and wire fraud statutes. As a result, convictions for mortgage fraud can now carry a 30-year 
maximum prison sentence, a maximum $1 million fine, or both.  
 
FERA also amends the false statement in mortgage applications statute (18 U.S.C. § 1014) to 
make it a crime to make a materially false statement or to willfully overvalue a property to 
influence any action by a mortgage-lending business. 
 
PREDATORY LENDING LEGISLATION  
Predatory lending is a term generally used to characterize a range of abusive and aggressive 
lending practices, including deception and fraud, without any benefit to the borrower. 
Although a few federal laws implicate predatory mortgage-lending practices, the only act 
Congress enacted specifically to address predatory lending was section 32 of the Truth in 
Lending Act, entitled the Home Ownership Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA) (5 U.S.C. § 1639).  
 
Note: The rules of HOEPA protect refinancing and home equity installment loans; they do 
not protect loans to buy or build a home, reverse mortgages, or home equity credit lines.  
 
HOEPA attempts to regulate certain high-cost, potentially predatory mortgage loans, and its 
protections are triggered by home loans that 1) have an annual percentage rate (APR) that is 
eight percent higher than an index tied to Treasury securities or 2) have fees that exceed 
eight percent of the loan total or $583, whichever is greater. However, predatory lenders 
easily evade HOEPA’s protections by imposing charges and fees just below the threshold. 
Thus, very few predatory loans are subject to HOEPA’s regulations. 
 
On July 18, 2008, the Federal Reserve Board approved a rule under HOEPA to protect 
consumers from unfair or deceptive home mortgage lending and advertising practices. The 
rule will take effect on October 1, 2009, and will specifically: 
• Prohibit creditors from extending credit without considering the borrowers’ ability to 
repay; 
• Require creditors to verify income and assets they rely upon in making a loan; 
• Restrict the circumstances under which prepayment penalties are permitted; and  
• Require creditors to establish escrow accounts for taxes and insurance.  
 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.306  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
SUBPRIME LENDING LEGISLATION  
Subprime lending  is the practice of extending credit to borrowers who have certain credit 
characteristics — such as a lower credit score or poor payment history—that disqualify them 
from loans at the prime rate. Currently, there is no federal legislation governing subprime 
lending. But Congress has recently introduced a variety of legislative proposals designed to 
address the problems faced by subprime borrowers. For instance, the rules under HOEPA 
issued by the Federal Reserve Board are designed to increase borrower protections from 
abusive lending practices. The regulations would, among other things, limit various acts and 
practices in mortgage loans with annual percentage of rates exceeding a lower trigger. 
 
STATE LEGISLATION 
As with federal law, many states have enacted legislation related to mortgage fraud and 
predatory lending practices. 
 
MORTGAGE FRAUD STATUTES  
In May 2005, Georgia became the first state to make mortgage fraud a crime. Since then, 
Alabama, Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, 
Louisiana, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Nevada, New York, North Carolina, 
Utah, and Washington have also passed mortgage fraud laws.3 
 
PREDATORY LENDING LAWS  
In the past five years, more than half the states in the United States have taken steps to limit 
predatory lending practices, and seven have placed a ban on prepayment penalties. Localities 
in some states have also passed ordinances dealing with predatory lending practices. 
 
Victims of predatory lending practices should contact their state Attorney General’s office. 
The U.S. Office of the Attorney General consolidates individual states’ actions against 
predatory lending practices. Two additional predatory lending resources are: 
• The National Association of Attorneys General (www.naag.org) 
• The Center for Responsible Lending ( www.responsiblelending.org)  
 
MORTGAGE INDUSTRY REGULATION  
The mortgage industry used to be highly regulated. However, current non-depository 
mortgage lenders are not federally regulated or insured; instead, they are regulated at the 
                                                 
3 National Conference of State Legislatures, “Mortgage Fraud.” http://www.ncsl.org. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.307 
state level. As a result, some mortgage lenders are federally regulated while others are 
regulated by the state in which they are chartered.  
 
FEDERAL REGULATION  
Banks, or depository institutions, that maintain a mortgage-lending function or subsidiary fall 
under regulation from one of the following federal regulators: 
• The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which charters, regulates, and 
supervises more than 2,500 national banks and their subsidiaries, as well as the federal 
branches and agencies of foreign banks 
• The Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), a bureau of the U.S. Department of the 
Treasury, which regulates all federally chartered and some state-charted thrift 
institutions, including federally chartered savings and loan associations and savings banks 
and their subsidiaries 
• The National Credit Union Association (NCUA), which regulates federally chartered 
credit unions and all credit unions chartered in Delaware, South Dakota, Wyoming, and 
the District of Columbia 
• The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, which regulates its state-
 chartered member banks, their subsidiaries, and holding companies, as well as the 
activities of foreign banks that operate within the United States 
 
NATIONAL LICENSING SYSTEM FOR MORTGAGE LOAN OFFICERS  
In 2005, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) and the American Association of 
Residential Mortgage Regulators (AARMR), along with state mortgage regulators, began 
creating a tool that would turn the table on criminals who exploit the complex mortgage 
origination system. State regulators agreed to a single set of uniform applications, including 
assigning a unique identifying number that tracks the entity or individual from state to state 
and over time. The resulting system—the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System 
(NMLS) — offers the industry a single location for ascertaining license status and finding any 
enforcement actions. The system began operating on January 2, 2008; by the end of 2010, 49 
of the U.S. states, as well as Puerto Rico, will have implemented use of the NMLS for 
mortgage licensing. 
 
STATE REGULATION  
New mortgage lenders that are non-depository are regulated by the state of their charter. 
State-chartered mortgage lenders are exempt from federal regulation, and regulation varies 
from state to state. In 1993, only 18 states directly regulated their mortgage lending industry; 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.308  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
however, today, all 50 states have statutes directly regulating the mortgage-lending industry 
in some capacity. 
 
Until recently, there were no national standards for the licensing and oversight of mortgage 
brokers. But on July 30, 2008, President Bush signed into law the Secure and Fair 
Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act), which is part of the Housing 
and Economic Recovery Act of 2008. Designed to provide uniform licensing standards 
nationwide, the SAFE Act requires all states to have in place a system of licensure meeting 
minimum standards for mortgage loan originators (i.e., anyone who takes a residential 
mortgage loan application or who offers or negotiates terms of a residential mortgage loan 
application for compensation or gain) by July 31, 2009.  
 
At a minimum, the state’s licensing system must meet all of the following requirements: 
• Screen individuals for felonies in the last seven years 
• Screen individuals for previous license revocations 
• Require proof of financial responsibility using a credit report 
• Require pre-license testing and education 
• Require continuing education 
• Provide for license renewals on an annual basis 
• Include a bond, net worth, or recovery fund 
 



:


legisl and regul in the mortgag industri
the increas in the incid cost and victim of mortgag fraud ha spur the
govern and the mortgag industri to respond lawmak have introduc addit
legisl at the feder and state level to curb mortgag fraud and other highrisk product
and practic such as predatori and subprim lend industri profession and regul
ar also react with wai to combat mortgag fraud
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2304 2011 fraud examin manual
feder legisl address mortgag fraud
the follow feder statut ar commonli us to prosecut mortgag fraud
18 usc 1341 mail fraud
18 usc 1342 us of fictiti name or address in fraud
18 usc 1343 wire fraud
18 usc 1344 bank fraud
18 usc 1014 fals statement on a loan or credit applic
18 usc 1028 fraud and relat activ in connect with ident theft
18 usc 1029 credit card fraud
18 usc 1030 comput fraud
18 usc 1349 conspiraci
18 usc 1519 obstruct of justic
18 usc 1956 monei launder
18 usc 1957 monetari transact with illeg proce
18 usc 1001 fals statement or entri gener
18 usc 1005 fals entri to feder insur institut
18 usc 1010 fals statement in hud transact
18 usc 408 fraud in connect with social secur identif document
18 usc 1961 crimin rico
18 usc 215 receipt of commiss or gift for procur loan
18 usc 371 conspiraci to commit offens or to defraud the unit state
18 usc 656 theft embezzl or misappl by a bank offic or
employe
18 usc 2314 transport of stolen good or secur
18 usc 1341 mail fraud
in addit on mai 20 2009 presid obama sign the fraud enforc and
recoveri act of 2009 fera into law thi comprehens legisl expand the reach of
feder law and increas fund for feder agenc to investig and prosecut mortgag
corpor and other financi fraud
concern it applic to mortgag fraud fera make a number of import chang
to feder law most importantli fera expand the definit of financi institut in the
crimin code 18 usc 20 therebi extend feder fraud law to mortgagelend
busi not directli regul or insur by the feder govern by amend the
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2305
definit of financi institut fera expand the depart of justic author to
prosecut mortgag fraud case as bank fraud and to seek enhanc penalti under the mail
and wire fraud statut as a result convict for mortgag fraud can now carri a 30year
maximum prison sentenc a maximum 1 million fine or both
fera also amend the fals statement in mortgag applic statut 18 usc 1014 to
make it a crime to make a materi fals statement or to willfulli overvalu a properti to
influenc ani action by a mortgagelend busi
predatori lend legisl
predatori lend is a term gener us to character a rang of abus and aggress
lend practic includ decept and fraud without ani benefit to the borrow
although a few feder law implic predatori mortgagelend practic the onli act
congress enact specif to address predatori lend wa section 32 of the truth in
lend act entitl the home ownership equiti protect act of 1994 hoepa 5 usc 1639
note the rule of hoepa protect refinanc and home equiti instal loan thei do
not protect loan to bui or build a home revers mortgag or home equiti credit line
hoepa attempt to regul certain highcost potenti predatori mortgag loan and it
protect ar trigger by home loan that 1 have an annual percentag rate apr that is
eight percent higher than an index ti to treasuri secur or 2 have fee that exce
eight percent of the loan total or 583 whichev is greater howev predatori lender
easili evad hoepa protect by impos charg and fee just below the threshold
thu veri few predatori loan ar subject to hoepa regul
on juli 18 2008 the feder reserv board approv a rule under hoepa to protect
consum from unfair or decept home mortgag lend and advertis practic the
rule will take effect on octob 1 2009 and will specif
prohibit creditor from extend credit without consid the borrow abil to
repai
requir creditor to verifi incom and asset thei reli upon in make a loan
restrict the circumst under which prepay penalti ar permit and
requir creditor to establish escrow account for tax and insur
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2306 2011 fraud examin manual
subprim lend legisl
subprim lend is the practic of extend credit to borrow who have certain credit
characterist such as a lower credit score or poor payment historythat disqualifi them
from loan at the prime rate current there is no feder legisl govern subprim
lend but congress ha recent introduc a varieti of legisl propos design to
address the problem face by subprim borrow for instanc the rule under hoepa
issu by the feder reserv board ar design to increas borrow protect from
abus lend practic the regul would among other thing limit variou act and
practic in mortgag loan with annual percentag of rate exceed a lower trigger
state legisl
as with feder law mani state have enact legisl relat to mortgag fraud and
predatori lend practic
mortgag fraud statut
in mai 2005 georgia becam the first state to make mortgag fraud a crime sinc then
alabama arizona california colorado connecticut florida georgia indiana kentucki
louisiana maryland minnesota mississippi missouri nevada new york north carolina
utah and washington have also pass mortgag fraud laws3
predatori lend law
in the past five year more than half the state in the unit state have taken step to limit
predatori lend practic and seven have place a ban on prepay penalti local
in some state have also pass ordin deal with predatori lend practic
victim of predatori lend practic should contact their state attornei gener offic
the us offic of the attornei gener consolid individu state action against
predatori lend practic two addit predatori lend resourc ar
the nation associ of attornei gener wwwnaagorg
the center for respons lend wwwresponsiblelendingorg
mortgag industri regul
the mortgag industri us to be highli regul howev current nondepositori
mortgag lender ar not feder regul or insur instead thei ar regul at the
3 nation confer of state legislatur mortgag fraud httpwwwncslorg
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2307
state level as a result some mortgag lender ar feder regul while other ar
regul by the state in which thei ar charter
feder regul
bank or depositori institut that maintain a mortgagelend function or subsidiari fall
under regul from on of the follow feder regul
the offic of the comptrol of the currenc occ which charter regul and
supervis more than 2500 nation bank and their subsidiari as well as the feder
branch and agenc of foreign bank
the offic of thrift supervis ot a bureau of the us depart of the
treasuri which regul all feder charter and some statechart thrift
institut includ feder charter save and loan associ and save bank
and their subsidiari
the nation credit union associ ncua which regul feder charter
credit union and all credit union charter in delawar south dakota wyom and
the district of columbia
the board of governor of the feder reserv system which regul it state
charter member bank their subsidiari and hold compani as well as the
activ of foreign bank that oper within the unit state
nation licens system for mortgag loan offic
in 2005 the confer of state bank supervisor csb and the american associ of
residenti mortgag regul aarmr along with state mortgag regul began
creat a tool that would turn the tabl on crimin who exploit the complex mortgag
origin system state regul agre to a singl set of uniform applic includ
assign a uniqu identifi number that track the entiti or individu from state to state
and over time the result systemth nationwid mortgag licens system
nml offer the industri a singl locat for ascertain licens statu and find ani
enforc action the system began oper on januari 2 2008 by the end of 2010 49
of the us state as well as puerto rico will have implement us of the nml for
mortgag licens
state regul
new mortgag lender that ar nondepositori ar regul by the state of their charter
statechart mortgag lender ar exempt from feder regul and regul vari
from state to state in 1993 onli 18 state directli regul their mortgag lend industri
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2308 2011 fraud examin manual
howev todai all 50 state have statut directli regul the mortgagelend industri
in some capac
until recent there were no nation standard for the licens and oversight of mortgag
broker but on juli 30 2008 presid bush sign into law the secur and fair
enforc for mortgag licens act of 2008 safe act which is part of the hous
and econom recoveri act of 2008 design to provid uniform licens standard
nationwid the safe act requir all state to have in place a system of licensur meet
minimum standard for mortgag loan origin ie anyon who take a residenti
mortgag loan applic or who offer or negoti term of a residenti mortgag loan
applic for compens or gain by juli 31 2009
at a minimum the state licens system must meet all of the follow requir
screen individu for feloni in the last seven year
screen individu for previou licens revoc
requir proof of financi respons us a credit report
requir prelicens test and educ
requir continu educ
provid for licens renew on an annual basi
includ a bond net worth or recoveri fund
