2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal Legislation Related to Fraud (Cont.)/Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with Computers/CIVIL REMEDIES AVAILABLE UNDER THE COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE ACT


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


CIVIL REMEDIES AVAILABLE UNDER THE COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE ACT 
Section 1030(g) provides a civil remedy for any person who suffers “damage or loss” under 
the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. Under section 1030(g), an “individual” may “obtain 
compensatory damages and injunctive relief or other equitable relief,” including all costs, 
consequential damages, and lost revenue. For purposes of establishing loss, the Patriot Act 
made it clear that the term individual includes any individual, firm, corporation, educational 
institution, financial institution, governmental entity, legal entity, or other entity. Damages 
under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act are defined as “any impairment to the integrity or 
availability of data, a program, a system, or information.” 
 
Employers have been “increasingly taking advantage of … [the Computer Fraud and Abuse 
Act’s] civil remedies to sue former employees and their new companies who seek a 
competitive edge through wrongful use of information from the former employer’s 
computer system” ( Pacific Aerospace and Elec tronics Inc. v. Taylor, 295 F. Supp. 2d 1188, 1196 
(E.D. Wash. 2003)). To recover under section 1030(g), the employer must show that the 
employee’s access to the company computers was “without authorization” or exceeded 
authorized access.  
 
The leading case for using this Act against employees who steal company data is Int’l Airport 
Centers LLC v. Citrin, 440 F.3d 418 (7th Circ. 2006). Based on agency principles, the 7th 
Circuit held that when the defendant breaches his duty of loyalty (i.e., accesses his 
employer’s computer to steal data), he terminates his agency relationship and loses all rights 
and authority to access the computer.  
 
At the time of this writing, however, there are several reported district courts that refuse to 
apply the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act to employee data thieves. These courts hold that 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.314  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the Act does not apply in these situations because employees have permission to access the 
company computers.  
 
Despite the split among federal courts, a method to avert relying only on agency principles in 
filing a section 1030(g) action is to establish unauthorized access through employee 
agreements and company policies.   
 



:


civil remedi avail under the comput fraud and abus act
section 1030g provid a civil remedi for ani person who suffer damag or loss under
the comput fraud and abus act under section 1030g an individu mai obtain
compensatori damag and injunct relief or other equit relief includ all cost
consequenti damag and lost revenu for purpos of establish loss the patriot act
made it clear that the term individu includ ani individu firm corpor educ
institut financi institut government entiti legal entiti or other entiti damag
under the comput fraud and abus act ar defin as ani impair to the integr or
avail of data a program a system or inform
employ have been increasingli take advantag of the comput fraud and abus
act civil remedi to sue former employe and their new compani who seek a
competit edg through wrong us of inform from the former employ
comput system pacif aerospac and elec tronic inc v taylor 295 f supp 2d 1188 1196
ed wash 2003 to recov under section 1030g the employ must show that the
employe access to the compani comput wa without author or exceed
author access
the lead case for us thi act against employe who steal compani data is intl airport
center llc v citrin 440 f3d 418 7th circ 2006 base on agenc principl the 7th
circuit held that when the defend breach hi duti of loyalti ie access hi
employ comput to steal data he termin hi agenc relationship and lose all right
and author to access the comput
at the time of thi write howev there ar sever report district court that refus to
appli the comput fraud and abus act to employe data thiev these court hold that
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2314 2011 fraud examin manual
the act doe not appli in these situat becaus employe have permiss to access the
compani comput
despit the split among feder court a method to avert reli onli on agenc principl in
file a section 1030g action is to establish unauthor access through employe
agreement and compani polici
