2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Qui Tam Suits and the Civil False Claims Act


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Qui Tam Suits and the Civil False Claims Act 
A qui tam suit is one in which a private individual sues on behalf of the government to 
recover damages for criminal or fraudulent actions committed against the government. It is a 
civil not a criminal suit. Most qui tam actions are brought under the False Claims Act, 31 
U.S.C. § 3729 et seq. This statute provides, in part, that anyone who commits the following 
acts is liable to the government for three times the amount of damages it sustains, plus a civil 
penalty of $5,000 to $10,000 per false claim: 
• Knowingly presents or causes to be presented a false or fraudulent claim for payment or 
approval (§ 3729(a)(1)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made or used, a false record or statement to get 
a false or fraudulent claim paid or approved (§ 3729(a)(2)) 
• Conspires to defraud the government by getting a false or fraudulent claim allowed or 
paid (§ 3729(a)(3)) 
• Making or delivering a document certifying receipt of property to be used by the 
government without completely knowing that the information on the receipt is true (§ 
3729(a)(5)) 
• Knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made  or used, a false record or statement to 
conceal, avoid, or decrease an obligation to pay or transmit money or property to the 
government (§ 3729(a)(7)) 
 
  
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.339 
Most qui tam actions seek to recover damages and statutory penalties for false claims made 
to the government by government contractors such as defense contractors and health care 
providers. 
 
Since 1986, when Congress substantially strengthened the civil False Claims Act, the United 
States has secured more than $24 billion in settlements and judgments ($2.4 billion in the 
2009 fiscal year alone). 
 
Filing an Action 
If an individual has knowledge that a false claim was submitted to the government, the 
individual should first retain an attorney. The attorney will then draft a complaint and a 
disclosure statement. The whistleblower can file the complaint and the disclosure statement 
under seal in U.S. District Court and copies are served upon the Department of Justice. 
After the filing of the complaint, the Justice Department has 60 days to investigate the 
allegations and determine whether it will join the lawsuit. If the department decides not to 
participate in the lawsuit, the individual has the right to continue to pursue the claim on 
behalf of the United States. If the department does not participate, the whistleblower will 
receive a higher portion of any recovery received. 
 
If the Justice Department elects to join the lawsuit, it has the primary responsibility for 
prosecuting the case and can limit the whistleblower’s participation in the action. If the 
government successfully prosecutes the suit, the private party may recover from 15–25 
percent of the recovery, plus reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs. If the government does 
not take over the prosecution, and the qui tam plaintiff successfully wins the case on his 
own, the court may award the plaintiff 25–30 percent of the recovery, plus reasonable 
attorneys’ fees and costs.  The judge normally determines the percentage. 
 
Who Can Bring a Qui Tam Action 
The False Claims Act provides that any “person” can file a qui tam action as long as they 
have direct and independent knowledge of the fraud and such knowledge was not obtained 
from a “public disclosure.” The definition of person includes not only individuals, but also 
businesses and state or local government entities. The most common plaintiffs in qui tam 
actions are employees of government contractors, health care employees, and employees of 
local, state, or federal government. 
 
The U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed this definition in an opinion handed down May 22, 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.340  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
2000. In the case of Vermont Agency of Natural Resources v. U.S. ex rel. Stevens, 120 S.Ct. 1858, 
the court resolved a conflict among some of the courts of appeal by stating firmly that 
private citizens do have the right to sue under the False Claims Act. However, the Court also 
held that states and state agencies are not subject to liability under the False Claims Act. 
Therefore, if a state or state agency submits false claims to the federal government, they 
cannot be sued by a private individual under the provisions of the False Claims Act. The 
Court did not address the issue of whether the U.S. government could file suit against a state 
under the FCA. 
 
The requirement that a person’s knowledge of the fraud was not obtained from a public 
disclosure does, however, have one exception. Even if based on public disclosure, a qui tam 
suit may proceed if the plaintiff is “an original  source of the information,” which requires the 
plaintiff to have “direct and independent knowledge of the information on which the 
allegations are based” and have “voluntarily provided the information to the government 
before filing [a suit] which is  based on the information.”  
 
At the present time, a controversy still exists over whether federal employees can file qui tam 
actions under the False Claims Act when knowledge of the fraud was obtained through their 
official duties. At least two federal circuit courts that have addressed the issue have 
concluded that employees who are required and paid by the government to disclose fraud 
cannot bring qui tam actions since their knowledge of fraud was not obtained independently. 
In contrast, two federal circuits have held that federal employees may bring a qui tam suit, 
even if the action is based on information obtained during the course of their employment. 
Thus, federal employees may be prohibited from filing qui tam actions, particularly if 
detecting fraud is part of their job duties. 
 
Protections for Whistleblowers 
Many whistleblowers are employees of the government contractor on which they are 
blowing the whistle. Obviously, employees might be reluctant to report their employer to the 
government for fear of retaliation. To address this concern, Congress provided substantial 
protections to whistleblowers. Title 31 U.S.C. section 3730(h) prohibits an employer from 
taking any adverse action (including discharge, demotion, or harassment) against an 
employee “because of lawful acts done by the employee on behalf of the employee or others 
in furtherance of an action under this section, including the investigation or initiation of, 
testimony for, or assistance in an action filed or to be filed under this section.” 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.341 
If an employer takes adverse action against the employee, the employee can seek relief 
against the employer including reinstatement at the same seniority status, an award of two 
times the employee’s back pay plus interest, and any other special damages required to make 
the employee whole. The employee also can receive reimbursement for all the costs of the 
litigation, including attorneys’ fees. 
 
Although these provisions provide necessary and justifiable protection for employees, in 
some cases they have the unintended effect of preventing an employer from firing or taking 
any other action against a whistleblower, even if there is adequate cause. Employers often are 
unwilling to implement any negative employment decision (no matter how justifiable) against 
a whistleblower for fear that the employee will add a claim of retaliation to the suit. 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act (FERA), which was signed into law on May 20, 
2009, enhanced the whistleblower protections under the False Claims Act by making these 
retaliation claims available to government contractors and agents. 
 
 



:


qui tam suit and the civil fals claim act
a qui tam suit is on in which a privat individu sue on behalf of the govern to
recov damag for crimin or fraudul action commit against the govern it is a
civil not a crimin suit most qui tam action ar brought under the fals claim act 31
usc 3729 et seq thi statut provid in part that anyon who commit the follow
act is liabl to the govern for three time the amount of damag it sustain plu a civil
penalti of 5000 to 10000 per fals claim
knowingli present or caus to be present a fals or fraudul claim for payment or
approv 3729a1
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to get
a fals or fraudul claim paid or approv 3729a2
conspir to defraud the govern by get a fals or fraudul claim allow or
paid 3729a3
make or deliv a document certifi receipt of properti to be us by the
govern without complet know that the inform on the receipt is true
3729a5
knowingli make us or caus to be made or us a fals record or statement to
conceal avoid or decreas an oblig to pai or transmit monei or properti to the
govern 3729a7
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2339
most qui tam action seek to recov damag and statutori penalti for fals claim made
to the govern by govern contractor such as defens contractor and health care
provid
sinc 1986 when congress substanti strengthen the civil fals claim act the unit
state ha secur more than 24 billion in settlement and judgment 24 billion in the
2009 fiscal year alon
file an action
if an individu ha knowledg that a fals claim wa submit to the govern the
individu should first retain an attornei the attornei will then draft a complaint and a
disclosur statement the whistleblow can file the complaint and the disclosur statement
under seal in us district court and copi ar serv upon the depart of justic
after the file of the complaint the justic depart ha 60 dai to investig the
alleg and determin whether it will join the lawsuit if the depart decid not to
particip in the lawsuit the individu ha the right to continu to pursu the claim on
behalf of the unit state if the depart doe not particip the whistleblow will
receiv a higher portion of ani recoveri receiv
if the justic depart elect to join the lawsuit it ha the primari respons for
prosecut the case and can limit the whistleblow particip in the action if the
govern successfulli prosecut the suit the privat parti mai recov from 1525
percent of the recoveri plu reason attornei fee and cost if the govern doe
not take over the prosecut and the qui tam plaintiff successfulli win the case on hi
own the court mai award the plaintiff 2530 percent of the recoveri plu reason
attornei fee and cost the judg normal determin the percentag
who can bring a qui tam action
the fals claim act provid that ani person can file a qui tam action as long as thei
have direct and independ knowledg of the fraud and such knowledg wa not obtain
from a public disclosur the definit of person includ not onli individu but also
busi and state or local govern entiti the most common plaintiff in qui tam
action ar employe of govern contractor health care employe and employe of
local state or feder govern
the us suprem court reaffirm thi definit in an opinion hand down mai 22
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2340 2011 fraud examin manual
2000 in the case of vermont agenc of natur resourc v us ex rel steven 120 sct 1858
the court resolv a conflict among some of the court of appeal by state firmli that
privat citizen do have the right to sue under the fals claim act howev the court also
held that state and state agenc ar not subject to liabil under the fals claim act
therefor if a state or state agenc submit fals claim to the feder govern thei
cannot be su by a privat individu under the provis of the fals claim act the
court did not address the issu of whether the us govern could file suit against a state
under the fca
the requir that a person knowledg of the fraud wa not obtain from a public
disclosur doe howev have on except even if base on public disclosur a qui tam
suit mai proce if the plaintiff is an origin sourc of the inform which requir the
plaintiff to have direct and independ knowledg of the inform on which the
alleg ar base and have voluntarili provid the inform to the govern
befor file a suit which is base on the inform
at the present time a controversi still exist over whether feder employe can file qui tam
action under the fals claim act when knowledg of the fraud wa obtain through their
offici duti at least two feder circuit court that have address the issu have
conclud that employe who ar requir and paid by the govern to disclos fraud
cannot bring qui tam action sinc their knowledg of fraud wa not obtain independ
in contrast two feder circuit have held that feder employe mai bring a qui tam suit
even if the action is base on inform obtain dure the cours of their employ
thu feder employe mai be prohibit from file qui tam action particularli if
detect fraud is part of their job duti
protect for whistleblow
mani whistleblow ar employe of the govern contractor on which thei ar
blow the whistl obvious employe might be reluct to report their employ to the
govern for fear of retali to address thi concern congress provid substanti
protect to whistleblow titl 31 usc section 3730h prohibit an employ from
take ani advers action includ discharg demot or harass against an
employe becaus of law act done by the employe on behalf of the employe or other
in further of an action under thi section includ the investig or initi of
testimoni for or assist in an action file or to be file under thi section
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2341
if an employ take advers action against the employe the employe can seek relief
against the employ includ reinstat at the same senior statu an award of two
time the employe back pai plu interest and ani other special damag requir to make
the employe whole the employe also can receiv reimburs for all the cost of the
litig includ attornei fee
although these provis provid necessari and justifi protect for employe in
some case thei have the unintend effect of prevent an employ from fire or take
ani other action against a whistleblow even if there is adequ caus employ often ar
unwil to implement ani neg employ decis no matter how justifi against
a whistleblow for fear that the employe will add a claim of retali to the suit
the fraud enforc and recoveri act fera which wa sign into law on mai 20
2009 enhanc the whistleblow protect under the fals claim act by make these
retali claim avail to govern contractor and agent
