2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE LAW RELATED TO FRAUD (PART 2)/Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes


:


Law


:


Law Related to Fraud


:


Federal “Whistleblower” Statutes 
There are numerous federal laws protecting whistleblowers or employees from retaliation or 
illegal treatment. This section organizes those whistleblower protection laws, which are more 
applicable to CFEs, under specific industries and various areas of law. Even though every 
state has some form of anti-retaliation legislation protecting whistleblowers, this discussion 
will primarily focus on federal law. Therefore, before taking action under any 
whistleblower/anti-retaliation law, a fraud examiner is always well advised to consult an 
attorney for the law of a specific jurisdiction. 
 
In focusing on federal whistleblower/anti-retaliation laws that are more applicable to CFEs, 
this discussion excludes protection laws concerning asbestos, aviation, environmental and 
nuclear laws, federal grants, maritime law, migrant workers, mining, pipeline safety, railroads, 
and transportation and shipping. In addition, this section organizes the applicable laws under 
the following headings:  
• The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
• The Whistleblower Protection Act 
• Banking and Financial Institutions 
• Civil Rights Act of 1871 
• Federal Government Contracting  
• Employees and Members of the Armed Forces 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.342  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
Although the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, passed in 2002, is primarily an accounting reform statute, 
most people do not realize that it made some extremely significant changes to the 
whistleblower laws.  
 
Civil Liability for Reports of Securities Fraud (18 U.S.C. § 1514A) 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 806 creates 18 U.S.C. § 1514A, a statute that creates civil liability for 
companies that retaliate against whistleblowers. It should be noted that this provision does 
not provide universal whistleblower protection; it only protects employees of publicly traded  
companies. Section 1514A makes it unlawful to fire, demote, suspend, threaten, harass, or in 
any other manner discriminate against an employee for providing information or aiding in an 
investigation of securities fraud. However, the statute requires that the employee must report 
the suspected misconduct to a federal regulatory or law enforcement agency, a member of 
Congress or a committee of Congress, or a supervisor. Employees are also protected against 
retaliation for filing, testifying in, participating in, or otherwise assisting in a proceeding filed 
or about to be filed relating to an alleged violation of securities laws or SEC rules. 
 
The whistleblower protections apply even if the company is ultimately found not to have 
committed securities fraud. As long as the employee reasonably believes he is reporting 
conduct that constitutes a violation of various federal securities laws, then he is protected. 
The protections not only cover retaliatory acts by the company, but also by any officer, 
employee, contractor, subcontractor, or agent of the company.  
 
To assert a section 806 retaliation claim, an employee must file a complaint with either the 
secretary of labor or the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) area 
director within 90 days of the alleged retaliatory action, which generally occurs when the 
complainant receives notice of the adverse action. The Act further provides that if a final 
decision has not been issued within 180 days of the complaint filing and there is no showing 
that the delay is due to the claimant’s bad faith, the complaining party may bring a private 
claim in an appropriate federal district court.  
 
Whether a complainant’s 806 claim is heard through the administrative channel or by a 
district court, the elements of proof are the same. The complainant must prove by a 
preponderance of the evidence that (1) the employee engaged in a protected activity or 
conduct; (2) the employer knew that the employee engaged in protected activity; (3) the 
employee suffered an unfavorable personal action; and (4) the protected activity was a 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.343 
contributing factor in the unfavorable personal action. However, even if the complainant 
proves each of these elements, the employer may avoid liability by demonstrating by clear 
and convincing evidence that it would have taken the same unfavorable personnel action 
even in the absence of such protected activity. 
 
If a public company is found to have violated section 1514A, the Act provides for an award 
of compensatory damages sufficient to “make the employee whole.” Penalties include 
reinstatement; back pay with interest; and compensation for special damages including 
litigation costs, expert witness fees, and attorneys’ fees.  
 
Criminal Sanctions for Reports to Law Enforcement (18 U.S.C. § 1513) 
Sarbanes-Oxley section 1107 also amended section 1513 of Title 18, U.S. Code, to make it a 
crime to knowingly, with the intent to retaliate, take any harmful action against a person for 
providing truthful information relating to the commission or possible commission of any  
federal offense, not just securities fraud. This protection is only triggered, however, when 
information is provided to a law enforcement officer.  
 
Violations of section 1513 can be punished by fines of up to $250,000 and up to 10 years in 
prison for individuals. Corporations that violate the act can be fined up to $500,000.  
 
The Whistleblower Protection Act (5 U.S.C. §§ 1211–1215, 1218–1219, 1221–1222, 7703) 
Two pieces of U.S. legislation, the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 and the Whistleblower 
Protection Act of 1989, define the character of whistleblower protection for federal 
employees. The Civil Service Reform Act protected federal employees who disclosed 
information about the government’s misconduct or waste. In 1989, the Whistleblower 
Protection Act (WPA) strengthened the protections provided in the Civil Reform Act to 
protect federal employees from workplace retaliation when disclosing illegal or improper 
government activities. Specifically, the act prevents a federal agency from taking any adverse 
“personnel action” against a civil servant w ho has reported wrongdoing by the agency.  
 
To receive protection under the WPA, employees must first file a complaint with the U.S. 
Office of Special Counselor (OSC), an independent federal investigative and prosecutorial 
agency that investigates whistleblower complaints. There is no statute of limitations for 
initially filing a complaint with the OSC. In addition, the WPA provides federal employees 
an independent right of action; however, this right is only available if the OSC has closed the 
matter at issue or has not notified the employee within 120 days that it will pursue corrective 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.344  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
action. This right of action, which is filed with the Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB), 
must be filed within 60 days of an adverse OSC decision. Appeals under the WPA fall under 
the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit’s exclusive jurisdiction. Remedies that may 
be awarded to employees under the WPA include reinstatement, back pay, and attorneys’ 
fees. 
 
But it is important to note that there are several circumstances that do not afford employees 
protection under the WPA. For example, the WPA does not protect employees who make 
disclosures during the course of performing their job duties. In addition, employees cannot 
claim protection under the WPA if they make disclosures of wrongdoing directly to the 
wrongdoer, or if they make disclosures of publicly known information. 
 
Banking and Financial Institutions   
In 1989, Congress passed three laws that contained anti-retaliation provisions to protect 
both federal and private sector employees within the banking system. The three primary laws 
covering the banking sector are contained within Title 31 of the U.S. Code, the Federal 
Credit Union Act, and the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act.  
 
Monetary Transactions (31 U.S.C. § 5328) 
Title 31 of the U.S. Code outlines the role of money and finance in the U.S. Code. Section 
5328 contains an anti-retaliation provision, prohibiting financial and nondepository financial 
institutions from discharging or otherwise discriminating against any employees who provide 
information to the secretary of the treasury, the attorney general, or any federal supervisory 
agency about possible violations of Title 31 or its regulations, or of specific anti-money 
laundering laws and transactions by unlicensed money transmitting businesses. To bring a 
claim under section 5328, an individual should file a civil action in federal court within two 
years of the retaliation. If an employee brings a successful claim, courts may grant relief, 
including reinstatement, compensatory damages, and “other appropriate actions to remedy 
any past discrimination.”  
 
Federal Credit Union Act (12 U.S.C. 1790b) 
The Federal Credit Union Act (FCUA) established the federal credit unions system and 
provides for the supervision of federal credit unions. The FCUA contains anti-retaliation 
and anti-discrimination provisions that protect credit union and National Credit Union 
Administration employees who provide information to a government body about possible 
legal violations by credit unions or by the directors, officers, or employees of credit unions. 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.345 
To bring an anti-retaliation claim under the FCUA, an employee should file a civil action in 
federal court within two years of the retaliation. However, when initiating such action, the 
employee must also file a copy of the complaint with the National Credit Union 
Administration Board. If successful, employees are entitled to reinstatement, compensatory 
damages, and “other appropriate actions to remedy any past discrimination.”  
 
Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 U.S.C. § 1831j) 
Following the savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, Congress passed the Financial Institutions 
Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act (FIRREA) to enhance the safety of savings 
institutions. Among other things, FIRREA provides anti-retaliation protection for 
employees of depository institutions and federal banks. FIRREA protects such employees 
from discharge or discriminatory actions with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or 
privileges of employment if the employee reports certain conduct (including possible 
violation of any law or regulation, gross mismanagement, gross waste of funds, abuse of 
authority, or a substantial or specific danger to public health) to a regulatory agency, bank, or 
the attorney general. To file an anti-retaliation claim under FIRREA, an employee should file 
a civil action in federal court within two years of the retaliation. 
 
If successful in bringing an anti-retaliation claim, employees are entitled to reinstatement, 
compensatory damages, and “other appropriate actions to remedy any past discrimination.” 
Courts have also held that in appropriate cases, punitive damages are permitted. 
 
There are also a number of statutes that provide protections to employees who expose 
violations of environmental laws. The provisions of these acts are substantially similar to the 
anti-retaliation provisions under FIRREA. They include the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the 
Water Pollution Control Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, the Safe Water Drinking 
Act, and the Clean Air Act.  
 
Civil Rights Act of 1871 
Civil rights are rights that the U.S. government has guaranteed and protected. Although the 
Civil Rights Acts refer to several federal statutes that allow individuals whose civil rights 
have been violated to sue their violator(s), this section will examine the anti-retaliation 
protections under section 1983 of Title 42, U.S. Code.  
 
Where state action is involved, a whistleblower may be able to bring a claim under section 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.346  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
1983, which allows individuals to bring a claim against state actors, acting under color of 
state or local law, alleging a depravation of civil rights guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution or 
federal law. Section 1983 actions may be brought in either federal or state court. States also 
have jurisdiction to hear section 1983 cases. However, if the plaintiff does bring suit in state 
court, the defendant has the right to remove the case to federal court. In a related matter, the 
statute of limitations for claims brought under section 1983 is selected from the law of the 
forum state.  
 
Damages under section 1983 are generally determined according to damages awarded in 
common law tort actions; therefore, the damages that courts may award under section 1983 
include actual or compensatory damages, nominal damages, and punitive damages.  
 
Generally, section 1983 claims brought by public employees concerning whistleblower 
protections allege retaliation in violation of the First Amendment, which provides 
whistleblower protection for public employees that comment on matters of public concern 
that trump an employer’s interest in an efficient workplace. However, in Garcetti v. Ceballos, 
547 U.S. 410 (2006), the Supreme Court limited the extent of First Amendment 
whistleblower protections for government employees, ruling that there is no protection for 
government employees that make disclosures of wrongdoing while in the course of their 
normal job duties. 
 
Federal Government Contracting 
Employees of Defense Contractors (10 U.S.C. § 2409) 
Section 2409 of Title 10, U. S. Code, provides a measure of protection to employees of 
Defense contractors who report violations of laws or regulations relating to defense 
contracts. Under section 2409, an employee of a contractor may not be discharged, demoted, 
or discriminated against for reporting violations of law related to a contract awarded by the 
head of certain federal agencies (i.e., Department of Defense or Department of the Army). A 
person may submit a complaint to the Inspector General (IG) of the contracting agency. If 
an employee does not receive relief through the IG/agency head route, which is generally 
required within 180 days, the employee may bring a claim in federal court. Section 2409 does 
not contain any statute of limitations, and under a successful section 2409 claim, employees 
are entitled to reinstatement, compensatory damages, including back pay, and all costs and 
expenses, including attorneys’ fees, reasonably incurred by the employee in bringing the 
complaint. 
 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.347 
False Claims Act (31 U.S.C. §§ 3729–3732) 
To counteract fraudulent billings turned in to the federal government, the False Claims Act 
(FCA) allows private individuals, on behalf of the federal government, to bring claims 
against federal contractors for committing fraud against the government. The FCA contains 
an anti-retaliation provision under Title 31 U.S.C. section 3730(h), which prohibits an 
employer from taking any adverse action (including discharge, demotion, or harassment) 
against an employee “because of lawful acts done by the employee on behalf of the 
employee or others in furtherance of an action under this section, including the investigation 
or initiation of, testimony for, or assistance in an action filed or to be filed under this 
section.” Federal courts have jurisdiction for section 3730(h) claims, and since section 
3730(h) does not contain any statute of limitations, courts generally borrow the most closely 
analogous state limitations period, which begins tolling when the cause of action accrued. 
 
If an employer takes adverse action against the employee, the employee can seek relief 
against the employer, including reinstatement at the same seniority status, an award of two 
times the employee’s back pay plus interest, and any other special damages required to make 
the employee whole. The employee also can receive reimbursement for all the costs of the 
litigation, including attorneys’ fees. 
 
The Fraud Enforcement and Recovery Act (FERA), a recently enacted law designed to 
combat fraud, makes significant changes to the False Claims Act. Among other significant 
changes, FERA expanded the anti-retaliation protections under the False Claims Act by 
making these retaliation claims available to government contractors and agents. 
 
Contractor Employees of Civilian Agencies (41 U.S.C. § 265) 
Section 265(a) of Title 41, U.S. Code, provides whistleblower protections for employees of 
civilian contractors with federal agencies by prohibiting government contractors from 
discharging or otherwise retaliating against an employee for reporting employer contract 
violations “to a Member of Congress or an authorized official of an executive agency or the 
Department of Justice.” Section 265(b) provides that such complaints are to be filed with the 
Inspector General of the executive agency or, if the agency does not have an Inspector 
General, to the official designated by the head of the executive agency. However, the statute 
does not include any right to private action for individuals who believe they have been 
aggrieved and, in fact, indicates that no private right exists under the section.  
 
Under this law, an employee who brings a successful claim is entitled to reinstatement and 
The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2)  Law 
2.348  2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
compensatory damages, including back pay. Additionally, section 265 “permits any aggrieved 
party to appeal the agency head’s order to the appropriate United States Court of Appeals 
within 60 days.” 
 
Major Fraud Act (18 U.S.C. § 1031) 
Congress enacted the Major Fraud Act to provide federal prosecutors with an additional 
criminal statute that targeted major procurement fraud committed against the United States. 
The Act contains a whistleblower protection clause in section 1031(h), providing that any 
individual who is discharged, demoted, harassed, or otherwise mistreated by their employer 
as a result of the individual’s cooperation in the prosecution of offenses under the Act may 
obtain reinstatement, two times the amount of back pay due, and other damages, including 
litigation costs and attorneys’ fees. There is no federal statute of limitations expressly 
applicable to a federal cause of action under section 1031(h), and in such instances, courts 
generally apply the most closely analogous statute of limitations under state law. Section 
1031(g)(1) of the Major Fraud Act authorizes the attorney general to pay up to $250,000 in 
certain circumstances for information regarding possible prosecutions under this section.  
 
Employees and Members of the Armed Forces 
Non-Appropriated Fund Employees (10 U.S.C. § 1587) 
Section 1587 of Title 10, U.S. Code, prohibits persons subject to this regulation from taking 
retaliatory action against a civilian employee, paid from non-appropriated funds, of the 
Armed Forces for disclosing information of a violation or “mismanagement, a gross waste of 
funds, an abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public health or safety.”  
 
Employees who believe they were subject to retaliatory action should file their section 1587 
complaint with the inspector general of the Department of Defense (IG DoD), which will 
then determine whether there is sufficient evidence to warrant an investigation. If 
investigation is warranted, the IG DoD conducts the investigation of reprisal allegations. 
Upon completing the investigation, the IG DoD reports its findings, conclusions, and 
recommendations to the Director of Administration and Management, who is responsible 
for adjudicating reprisal complaints and directing appropriate corrective action.  
 
Military Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989 (10 U.S.C. § 1034) 
The Military Whistleblower Protection Act, which provides whistleblower protection for 
members of the armed forces, prohibits any individual from retaliating against a service 
member for making or preparing communications concerning illegal conduct to certain 
Law  The Law Related to Fraud (Part 2) 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.349 
statutorily defined recipients. To receive protection under section 1034, service members 
should submit a complaint to the Department of Defense Inspector General or to the 
Department of the Army Inspector General within 60 days of learning of the adverse action. 
A service member who brings a successful claim is entitled to administrative remedy only; 
there is no private right of action under section 1034.  
 
State Statutes 
Every state has some form of legislation protecting whistleblowers. Many are very specific as 
to the manner with which a report must be filed, as well as the particular agencies that must 
receive the report. A particular state also may require that the first report made by an 
employee be directed to the employer under the notion that the employer be given an 
opportunity to correct the circumstances that give rise to a potential violation. 
  
Law  Individual Rights During Examinations 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.401 



:


feder whistleblow statut
there ar numer feder law protect whistleblow or employe from retali or
illeg treatment thi section organ those whistleblow protect law which ar more
applic to cfe under specif industri and variou area of law even though everi
state ha some form of antiretali legisl protect whistleblow thi discuss
will primarili focu on feder law therefor befor take action under ani
whistleblowerantiretali law a fraud examin is alwai well advis to consult an
attornei for the law of a specif jurisdict
in focus on feder whistleblowerantiretali law that ar more applic to cfe
thi discuss exclud protect law concern asbesto aviat environment and
nuclear law feder grant maritim law migrant worker mine pipelin safeti railroad
and transport and ship in addit thi section organ the applic law under
the follow head
the sarbanesoxlei act
the whistleblow protect act
bank and financi institut
civil right act of 1871
feder govern contract
employe and member of the arm forc
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2342 2011 fraud examin manual
the sarbanesoxlei act
although the sarbanesoxlei act pass in 2002 is primarili an account reform statut
most peopl do not realiz that it made some extrem signific chang to the
whistleblow law
civil liabil for report of secur fraud 18 usc 1514a
sarbanesoxlei section 806 creat 18 usc 1514a a statut that creat civil liabil for
compani that retali against whistleblow it should be note that thi provis doe
not provid univers whistleblow protect it onli protect employe of publicli trade
compani section 1514a make it unlaw to fire demot suspend threaten harass or in
ani other manner discrimin against an employe for provid inform or aid in an
investig of secur fraud howev the statut requir that the employe must report
the suspect misconduct to a feder regulatori or law enforc agenc a member of
congress or a committe of congress or a supervisor employe ar also protect against
retali for file testifi in particip in or otherwis assist in a proceed file
or about to be file relat to an alleg violat of secur law or sec rule
the whistleblow protect appli even if the compani is ultim found not to have
commit secur fraud as long as the employe reason believ he is report
conduct that constitut a violat of variou feder secur law then he is protect
the protect not onli cover retaliatori act by the compani but also by ani offic
employe contractor subcontractor or agent of the compani
to assert a section 806 retali claim an employe must file a complaint with either the
secretari of labor or the occup safeti and health administr osha area
director within 90 dai of the alleg retaliatori action which gener occur when the
complain receiv notic of the advers action the act further provid that if a final
decis ha not been issu within 180 dai of the complaint file and there is no show
that the delai is due to the claimant bad faith the complain parti mai bring a privat
claim in an appropri feder district court
whether a complain 806 claim is heard through the administr channel or by a
district court the element of proof ar the same the complain must prove by a
preponder of the evid that 1 the employe engag in a protect activ or
conduct 2 the employ knew that the employe engag in protect activ 3 the
employe suffer an unfavor person action and 4 the protect activ wa a
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2343
contribut factor in the unfavor person action howev even if the complain
prove each of these element the employ mai avoid liabil by demonstr by clear
and convinc evid that it would have taken the same unfavor personnel action
even in the absenc of such protect activ
if a public compani is found to have violat section 1514a the act provid for an award
of compensatori damag suffici to make the employe whole penalti includ
reinstat back pai with interest and compens for special damag includ
litig cost expert wit fee and attornei fee
crimin sanction for report to law enforc 18 usc 1513
sarbanesoxlei section 1107 also amend section 1513 of titl 18 us code to make it a
crime to knowingli with the intent to retali take ani harm action against a person for
provid truth inform relat to the commiss or possibl commiss of ani
feder offens not just secur fraud thi protect is onli trigger howev when
inform is provid to a law enforc offic
violat of section 1513 can be punish by fine of up to 250000 and up to 10 year in
prison for individu corpor that violat the act can be fine up to 500000
the whistleblow protect act 5 usc 12111215 12181219 12211222 7703
two piec of us legisl the civil servic reform act of 1978 and the whistleblow
protect act of 1989 defin the charact of whistleblow protect for feder
employe the civil servic reform act protect feder employe who disclos
inform about the govern misconduct or wast in 1989 the whistleblow
protect act wpa strengthen the protect provid in the civil reform act to
protect feder employe from workplac retali when disclos illeg or improp
govern activ specif the act prevent a feder agenc from take ani advers
personnel action against a civil servant w ho ha report wrongdo by the agenc
to receiv protect under the wpa employe must first file a complaint with the us
offic of special counselor osc an independ feder investig and prosecutori
agenc that investig whistleblow complaint there is no statut of limit for
initi file a complaint with the osc in addit the wpa provid feder employe
an independ right of action howev thi right is onli avail if the osc ha close the
matter at issu or ha not notifi the employe within 120 dai that it will pursu correct
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2344 2011 fraud examin manual
action thi right of action which is file with the merit system protect board mspb
must be file within 60 dai of an advers osc decis appeal under the wpa fall under
the us court of appeal for the feder circuit exclus jurisdict remedi that mai
be award to employe under the wpa includ reinstat back pai and attornei
fee
but it is import to note that there ar sever circumst that do not afford employe
protect under the wpa for exampl the wpa doe not protect employe who make
disclosur dure the cours of perform their job duti in addit employe cannot
claim protect under the wpa if thei make disclosur of wrongdo directli to the
wrongdoer or if thei make disclosur of publicli known inform
bank and financi institut
in 1989 congress pass three law that contain antiretali provis to protect
both feder and privat sector employe within the bank system the three primari law
cover the bank sector ar contain within titl 31 of the us code the feder
credit union act and the financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act
monetari transact 31 usc 5328
titl 31 of the us code outlin the role of monei and financ in the us code section
5328 contain an antiretali provis prohibit financi and nondepositori financi
institut from discharg or otherwis discrimin against ani employe who provid
inform to the secretari of the treasuri the attornei gener or ani feder supervisori
agenc about possibl violat of titl 31 or it regul or of specif antimonei
launder law and transact by unlicens monei transmit busi to bring a
claim under section 5328 an individu should file a civil action in feder court within two
year of the retali if an employe bring a success claim court mai grant relief
includ reinstat compensatori damag and other appropri action to remedi
ani past discrimin
feder credit union act 12 usc 1790b
the feder credit union act fcua establish the feder credit union system and
provid for the supervis of feder credit union the fcua contain antiretali
and antidiscrimin provis that protect credit union and nation credit union
administr employe who provid inform to a govern bodi about possibl
legal violat by credit union or by the director offic or employe of credit union
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2345
to bring an antiretali claim under the fcua an employe should file a civil action in
feder court within two year of the retali howev when initi such action the
employe must also file a copi of the complaint with the nation credit union
administr board if success employe ar entitl to reinstat compensatori
damag and other appropri action to remedi ani past discrimin
financi institut reform recoveri and enforc act of 1989 12 usc 1831j
follow the save and loan crisi of the 1980 congress pass the financi institut
reform recoveri and enforc act firrea to enhanc the safeti of save
institut among other thing firrea provid antiretali protect for
employe of depositori institut and feder bank firrea protect such employe
from discharg or discriminatori action with respect to compens term condit or
privileg of employ if the employe report certain conduct includ possibl
violat of ani law or regul gross mismanag gross wast of fund abus of
author or a substanti or specif danger to public health to a regulatori agenc bank or
the attornei gener to file an antiretali claim under firrea an employe should file
a civil action in feder court within two year of the retali
if success in bring an antiretali claim employe ar entitl to reinstat
compensatori damag and other appropri action to remedi ani past discrimin
court have also held that in appropri case punit damag ar permit
there ar also a number of statut that provid protect to employe who expos
violat of environment law the provis of these act ar substanti similar to the
antiretali provis under firrea thei includ the solid wast dispos act the
water pollut control act the toxic substanc control act the safe water drink
act and the clean air act
civil right act of 1871
civil right ar right that the us govern ha guarante and protect although the
civil right act refer to sever feder statut that allow individu whose civil right
have been violat to sue their violat thi section will examin the antiretali
protect under section 1983 of titl 42 us code
where state action is involv a whistleblow mai be abl to bring a claim under section
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2346 2011 fraud examin manual
1983 which allow individu to bring a claim against state actor act under color of
state or local law alleg a deprav of civil right guarante by the us constitut or
feder law section 1983 action mai be brought in either feder or state court state also
have jurisdict to hear section 1983 case howev if the plaintiff doe bring suit in state
court the defend ha the right to remov the case to feder court in a relat matter the
statut of limit for claim brought under section 1983 is select from the law of the
forum state
damag under section 1983 ar gener determin accord to damag award in
common law tort action therefor the damag that court mai award under section 1983
includ actual or compensatori damag nomin damag and punit damag
gener section 1983 claim brought by public employe concern whistleblow
protect alleg retali in violat of the first amend which provid
whistleblow protect for public employe that comment on matter of public concern
that trump an employ interest in an effici workplac howev in garcetti v ceballo
547 us 410 2006 the suprem court limit the extent of first amend
whistleblow protect for govern employe rule that there is no protect for
govern employe that make disclosur of wrongdo while in the cours of their
normal job duti
feder govern contract
employe of defens contractor 10 usc 2409
section 2409 of titl 10 u s code provid a measur of protect to employe of
defens contractor who report violat of law or regul relat to defens
contract under section 2409 an employe of a contractor mai not be discharg demot
or discrimin against for report violat of law relat to a contract award by the
head of certain feder agenc ie depart of defens or depart of the armi a
person mai submit a complaint to the inspector gener ig of the contract agenc if
an employe doe not receiv relief through the igag head rout which is gener
requir within 180 dai the employe mai bring a claim in feder court section 2409 doe
not contain ani statut of limit and under a success section 2409 claim employe
ar entitl to reinstat compensatori damag includ back pai and all cost and
expens includ attornei fee reason incur by the employe in bring the
complaint
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2347
fals claim act 31 usc 37293732
to counteract fraudul bill turn in to the feder govern the fals claim act
fca allow privat individu on behalf of the feder govern to bring claim
against feder contractor for commit fraud against the govern the fca contain
an antiretali provis under titl 31 usc section 3730h which prohibit an
employ from take ani advers action includ discharg demot or harass
against an employe becaus of law act done by the employe on behalf of the
employe or other in further of an action under thi section includ the investig
or initi of testimoni for or assist in an action file or to be file under thi
section feder court have jurisdict for section 3730h claim and sinc section
3730h doe not contain ani statut of limit court gener borrow the most close
analog state limit period which begin toll when the caus of action accru
if an employ take advers action against the employe the employe can seek relief
against the employ includ reinstat at the same senior statu an award of two
time the employe back pai plu interest and ani other special damag requir to make
the employe whole the employe also can receiv reimburs for all the cost of the
litig includ attornei fee
the fraud enforc and recoveri act fera a recent enact law design to
combat fraud make signific chang to the fals claim act among other signific
chang fera expand the antiretali protect under the fals claim act by
make these retali claim avail to govern contractor and agent
contractor employe of civilian agenc 41 usc 265
section 265a of titl 41 us code provid whistleblow protect for employe of
civilian contractor with feder agenc by prohibit govern contractor from
discharg or otherwis retali against an employe for report employ contract
violat to a member of congress or an author offici of an execut agenc or the
depart of justic section 265b provid that such complaint ar to be file with the
inspector gener of the execut agenc or if the agenc doe not have an inspector
gener to the offici design by the head of the execut agenc howev the statut
doe not includ ani right to privat action for individu who believ thei have been
aggriev and in fact indic that no privat right exist under the section
under thi law an employe who bring a success claim is entitl to reinstat and
the law relat to fraud part 2 law
2348 2011 fraud examin manual
compensatori damag includ back pai addition section 265 permit ani aggriev
parti to appeal the agenc head order to the appropri unit state court of appeal
within 60 dai
major fraud act 18 usc 1031
congress enact the major fraud act to provid feder prosecutor with an addit
crimin statut that target major procur fraud commit against the unit state
the act contain a whistleblow protect claus in section 1031h provid that ani
individu who is discharg demot harass or otherwis mistreat by their employ
as a result of the individu cooper in the prosecut of offens under the act mai
obtain reinstat two time the amount of back pai due and other damag includ
litig cost and attornei fee there is no feder statut of limit expressli
applic to a feder caus of action under section 1031h and in such instanc court
gener appli the most close analog statut of limit under state law section
1031g1 of the major fraud act author the attornei gener to pai up to 250000 in
certain circumst for inform regard possibl prosecut under thi section
employe and member of the arm forc
nonappropri fund employe 10 usc 1587
section 1587 of titl 10 us code prohibit person subject to thi regul from take
retaliatori action against a civilian employe paid from nonappropri fund of the
arm forc for disclos inform of a violat or mismanag a gross wast of
fund an abus of author or a substanti and specif danger to public health or safeti
employe who believ thei were subject to retaliatori action should file their section 1587
complaint with the inspector gener of the depart of defens ig dod which will
then determin whether there is suffici evid to warrant an investig if
investig is warrant the ig dod conduct the investig of repris alleg
upon complet the investig the ig dod report it find conclus and
recommend to the director of administr and manag who is respons
for adjud repris complaint and direct appropri correct action
militari whistleblow protect act of 1989 10 usc 1034
the militari whistleblow protect act which provid whistleblow protect for
member of the arm forc prohibit ani individu from retali against a servic
member for make or prepar commun concern illeg conduct to certain
law the law relat to fraud part 2
2011 fraud examin manual 2349
statutorili defin recipi to receiv protect under section 1034 servic member
should submit a complaint to the depart of defens inspector gener or to the
depart of the armi inspector gener within 60 dai of learn of the advers action
a servic member who bring a success claim is entitl to administr remedi onli
there is no privat right of action under section 1034
state statut
everi state ha some form of legisl protect whistleblow mani ar veri specif as
to the manner with which a report must be file as well as the particular agenc that must
receiv the report a particular state also mai requir that the first report made by an
employe be direct to the employ under the notion that the employ be given an
opportun to correct the circumst that give rise to a potenti violat
law individu right dure examin
2011 fraud examin manual 2401
