2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Edwin H. Sutherland


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


Edwin H. Sutherland 
Relatively little research has been done on the subject of occupational fraud and abuse. 
Much of the current literature is based upon the early works of Edwin H. Sutherland. As 
previously discussed in the “Theories of Crime Causation” chapter, Sutherland believed 
that the learning of criminal behavior occurs with other persons in a process of 
communication. Therefore, he reasoned, criminality cannot occur without the assistance of 
other people. Sutherland further theorized that the learning of criminal activity usually 
occurred within intimate personal groups. This explains, in his view, how a dysfunctional 
parent is more likely to produce dysfunctional offspring. Sutherland believed that the 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.602   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
learning process involves two specific areas: the techniques to commit the crime, and the 
attitudes, drives, rationalizations, and motives of the criminal mind. One can see how 
Sutherland’s differential association theory fits with occupational offenders. Organizations 
that have dishonest employees will eventually infect a portion of honest ones. It also goes 
the other way: honest employees will eventually  have an influence on some of those who 
are dishonest.  
 



:


edwin h sutherland
rel littl research ha been done on the subject of occup fraud and abus
much of the current literatur is base upon the earli work of edwin h sutherland as
previous discuss in the theori of crime causat chapter sutherland believ
that the learn of crimin behavior occur with other person in a process of
commun therefor he reason crimin cannot occur without the assist of
other peopl sutherland further theoriz that the learn of crimin activ usual
occur within intim person group thi explain in hi view how a dysfunct
parent is more like to produc dysfunct offspr sutherland believ that the
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4602 2011 fraud examin manual
learn process involv two specif area the techniqu to commit the crime and the
attitud drive ration and motiv of the crimin mind on can see how
sutherland differenti associ theori fit with occup offend organ
that have dishonest employe will eventu infect a portion of honest on it also goe
the other wai honest employe will eventu have an influenc on some of those who
ar dishonest
