2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Rationalizations/LONG-TERM VIOLATORS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


LONG-TERM VIOLATORS 
Cressey defined long-term violators as individuals who converted their employer’s funds, or 
funds belonging to their employer’s clients, by taking relatively small amounts over a period 
of time.13 Similar to independent businessmen, the long-term violators generally preferred 
the “borrowing” rationalization. Other rationalizations of long-term violators were 
described, too, but they almost always were used in connection with the “borrowing” theme: 
(1) they were embezzling to keep their families from shame, disgrace, or poverty; (2) theirs 
was a case of “necessity”; their employers were cheating them financially; and (3) their 
employers were dishonest toward others and deserved to be fleeced. Some even pointed out 
                                                 
10 Cressey, p. 93. 
11 Cressey, p. 101–102. 
12 Cressey, p. 102. 
13 Cressey, p. 102. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.608   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
that it was more difficult to return the funds than to steal them in the first place, and claimed 
that they did not pay back their “borrowings”  because they feared that would lead to 
detection of their thefts. A few in the study actually kept track of their thefts, but most only 
did so at first. Later, as the embezzlements escalated, it is assumed that the offender would 
rather not know the extent of his “borrowings.”  
 
All of the long-term violators in the study expressed a feeling that they would like to 
eventually “clean the slate” and repay their de bt. This feeling usually arose even before the 
perpetrators perceived that they might be caught. Cressey pointed out that at this point, 
whatever fear the perpetrators felt in relation to their crimes was related to losing their social 
status by the exposure of their non-shareable problem, not the exposure of the theft itself or 
the possibility of punishment or imprisonment. This is because their rationalizations still 
prevented them from perceiving their misconduct as criminal. “The trust violator cannot 
fear the treatment usually accorded to criminals until he comes to look upon himself as  
a criminal.” 14 
 
Eventually, most of the long-term violators finally realized they were “in too deep.” It is at 
this point that the embezzler faces a crisis. While maintaining the borrowing rationalization 
(or other rationalizations, for that matter), the trust violator is able to maintain his self-image 
as a law-abiding citizen; but when the level of theft escalates to a certain point, the 
perpetrator is confronted with the idea that he is behaving in a criminal manner. This is 
contrary to his personal values and the values of the social groups to which he belongs. This 
conflict creates a great deal of anxiety for the perpetrator. A number of offenders described 
themselves as extremely nervous and upset, tense, and unhappy.15 
 
Without the rationalization that they were borrowing, long-term offenders in the study 
found it difficult to reconcile converting money, while at the same time seeing themselves as 
honest and trustworthy. In this situation, they have two options: (1) they can readopt the 
attitudes of the (law-abiding) social group with which they identified before the thefts began, 
or (2) they can adopt the attitudes of the new category of persons (criminals) with whom 
they now identify.16 From his study, Cressey was able to cite examples of each type of 
behavior. Those who sought to readopt the attitudes of their law-abiding social groups “may 
report their behavior to the police or to their employer, quit taking funds or resolve to quit 
                                                 
14 Cressey, pp. 120–121. 
15 Cressey, p. 121. 
16 Cressey, p. 122.  
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.609  
taking funds, speculate or gamble wildly in order to regain the amounts taken, or “‘leave the 
field’ by absconding or committing suicide.” 17 On the other hand, those who adopt the 
attitudes of the group of criminals to which they now belong “may become reckless in their 
defalcations, taking larger amounts than formerly with less attempts to avoid detection and 
with no notion of repayment.” 18 
 



:


longterm violat
cressei defin longterm violat as individu who convert their employ fund or
fund belong to their employ client by take rel small amount over a period
of time13 similar to independ businessmen the longterm violat gener prefer
the borrow ration other ration of longterm violat were
describ too but thei almost alwai were us in connect with the borrow theme
1 thei were embezzl to keep their famili from shame disgrac or poverti 2 their
wa a case of necess their employ were cheat them financi and 3 their
employ were dishonest toward other and deserv to be fleec some even point out
10 cressei p 93
11 cressei p 101102
12 cressei p 102
13 cressei p 102
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4608 2011 fraud examin manual
that it wa more difficult to return the fund than to steal them in the first place and claim
that thei did not pai back their borrow becaus thei fear that would lead to
detect of their theft a few in the studi actual kept track of their theft but most onli
did so at first later as the embezzl escal it is assum that the offend would
rather not know the extent of hi borrow
all of the longterm violat in the studi express a feel that thei would like to
eventu clean the slate and repai their de bt thi feel usual aros even befor the
perpetr perceiv that thei might be caught cressei point out that at thi point
whatev fear the perpetr felt in relat to their crime wa relat to lose their social
statu by the exposur of their nonshar problem not the exposur of the theft itself or
the possibl of punish or imprison thi is becaus their ration still
prevent them from perceiv their misconduct as crimin the trust violat cannot
fear the treatment usual accord to crimin until he come to look upon himself as
a crimin 14
eventu most of the longterm violat final realiz thei were in too deep it is at
thi point that the embezzl face a crisi while maintain the borrow ration
or other ration for that matter the trust violat is abl to maintain hi selfimag
as a lawabid citizen but when the level of theft escal to a certain point the
perpetr is confront with the idea that he is behav in a crimin manner thi is
contrari to hi person valu and the valu of the social group to which he belong thi
conflict creat a great deal of anxieti for the perpetr a number of offend describ
themselv as extrem nervou and upset tens and unhappy15
without the ration that thei were borrow longterm offend in the studi
found it difficult to reconcil convert monei while at the same time see themselv as
honest and trustworthi in thi situat thei have two option 1 thei can readopt the
attitud of the lawabid social group with which thei identifi befor the theft began
or 2 thei can adopt the attitud of the new categori of person crimin with whom
thei now identify16 from hi studi cressei wa abl to cite exampl of each type of
behavior those who sought to readopt the attitud of their lawabid social group mai
report their behavior to the polic or to their employ quit take fund or resolv to quit
14 cressei pp 120121
15 cressei p 121
16 cressei p 122
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4609
take fund specul or gambl wildli in order to regain the amount taken or leav the
field by abscond or commit suicid 17 on the other hand those who adopt the
attitud of the group of crimin to which thei now belong mai becom reckless in their
defalc take larger amount than formerli with less attempt to avoid detect and
with no notion of repay 18
