2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Rationalizations/ABSCONDERS


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


ABSCONDERS 
The third group of offenders Cressey discussed was absconders — people who take the money 
and run. Cressey found that the non-shareable problems for absconders usually resulted 
from physical isolation. He observed that these people, “usually are unmarried or separated 
from their spouses, live in hotels or rooming houses, have few primary group associations of 
any sort, and own little property. Only one of the absconders interviewed had held a higher 
status position of trust, such as an accountant, business executive, or bookkeeper.” 19 He also 
found that the absconders tended to have lower occupational and socio-economic status 
than the members of the other two categories.  
 
Because absconders tended to lack strong social ties, Cressey found that almost any financial 
problem could be defined as non-shareable for these persons, and also that rationalizations 
were easily adopted because the persons only had to sever a minimum of social ties when 
they absconded.20 The absconders rationalized their conduct by noting that their attempts to 
live honest lives had been futile (hence their low status). They also adopted an attitude of not 
caring what happened to them, and a belief that they could not help themselves because they 
were predisposed to criminal behavior. The latter two rationalizations, which were adopted 
by every absconder in Cressey’s study, allowed them to remove almost all personal 
accountability from their conduct.21 
 
In the 1950s, when this data was gathered by Cressey, embezzlers were considered persons 
of higher socioeconomic status who took funds over a limited period of time because of 
some personal problem such as drinking or gambling, while “thieves” were considered 
persons of lower status who took whatever funds were at hand. Cressey noted, “Since most 
absconders identify with the lower status group, they look upon themselves as belonging to a 
                                                 
17 Cressey, p. 121. 
18 Cressey, p. 122.  
19 Cressey, p. 128. 
20 Cressey, p. 129.  
21 Cressey, pp. 128–129. 
Occupational Fraud  Fraud Prevention and Deterrence 
4.610   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual     
special class of thieves rather than trust violators. Just as long-term violators and 
independent businessmen do not at first consider the possibility of absconding with the 
funds, absconders do not consider the possibility of taking relatively small amounts of 
money over a period of time.” 22 
 



:


abscond
the third group of offend cressei discuss wa abscond peopl who take the monei
and run cressei found that the nonshar problem for abscond usual result
from physic isol he observ that these peopl usual ar unmarri or separ
from their spous live in hotel or room hous have few primari group associ of
ani sort and own littl properti onli on of the abscond interview had held a higher
statu posit of trust such as an account busi execut or bookkeep 19 he also
found that the abscond tend to have lower occup and socioeconom statu
than the member of the other two categori
becaus abscond tend to lack strong social ti cressei found that almost ani financi
problem could be defin as nonshar for these person and also that ration
were easili adopt becaus the person onli had to sever a minimum of social ti when
thei absconded20 the abscond ration their conduct by note that their attempt to
live honest live had been futil henc their low statu thei also adopt an attitud of not
care what happen to them and a belief that thei could not help themselv becaus thei
were predispos to crimin behavior the latter two ration which were adopt
by everi abscond in cressei studi allow them to remov almost all person
account from their conduct21
in the 1950 when thi data wa gather by cressei embezzl were consid person
of higher socioeconom statu who took fund over a limit period of time becaus of
some person problem such as drink or gambl while thiev were consid
person of lower statu who took whatev fund were at hand cressei note sinc most
abscond identifi with the lower statu group thei look upon themselv as belong to a
17 cressei p 121
18 cressei p 122
19 cressei p 128
20 cressei p 129
21 cressei pp 128129
occup fraud fraud prevent and deterr
4610 2011 fraud examin manual
special class of thiev rather than trust violat just as longterm violat and
independ businessmen do not at first consid the possibl of abscond with the
fund abscond do not consid the possibl of take rel small amount of
monei over a period of time 22
