2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Fraud Prevention and Deterrence/OCCUPATIONAL FRAUD/Research in Occupational Fraud and Abuse/Hypotheses of Employee Theft/JOB SATISFACTION AND DEVIANCE


:


Fraud Prevention and Deterrence


:


Occupational Fraud


:


JOB SATISFACTION AND DEVIANCE 
The research of Hollinger and Clark strongly suggests that employees who are dissatisfied 
with their jobs?across all age groups, but especially younger workers?are the most likely to 
seek redress through counterproductive or illegal behavior in order to right the perceived 
“inequity.” Other writers, notably anthropol ogist Gerald Mars and researcher David 
Altheide, have commented on this connection. Mars observed that among both hotel dining 
room employees and dock workers it was believed that pilferage was not theft, but was “seen 
as a morally justified addition to wages; indeed, as an entitlement due from exploiting 
employers.” 37 Altheide also documented that theft is often perceived by employees as a 
“way of getting back at the boss or supervisor.” 38 Jason Ditton documented a pattern in U.S. 
industries called “wages in kind,” in which employees “situated in structurally disadvantaged 
parts [of the organization] receive large segments of their wages invisibly.” 39 
 
                                                 
37 Hollinger and Clark, p. 77. 
38 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
39 Hollinger and Clark, p. 86. 
Fraud Prevention and Deterrence  Occupational Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    4.617  



:


job satisfact and devianc
the research of holling and clark strongli suggest that employe who ar dissatisfi
with their jobsacross all ag group but especi younger workersar the most like to
seek redress through counterproduct or illeg behavior in order to right the perceiv
inequ other writer notabl anthropol ogist gerald mar and research david
altheid have comment on thi connect mar observ that among both hotel dine
room employe and dock worker it wa believ that pilferag wa not theft but wa seen
as a moral justifi addit to wage inde as an entitl due from exploit
employ 37 altheid also document that theft is often perceiv by employe as a
wai of get back at the boss or supervisor 38 jason ditton document a pattern in us
industri call wage in kind in which employe situat in structur disadvantag
part of the organ receiv larg segment of their wage invis 39
37 holling and clark p 77
38 holling and clark p 86
39 holling and clark p 86
fraud prevent and deterr occup fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 4617
