2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


REPORTING STANDARDS 
 
Documenting results is a particularly important function in fraud examinations. In many 
instances, the written report is the only evidence that the work was performed. Cases can be 
won or lost on the strength of the written report. It conveys to the litigator all the evidence 
and provides credence to the fraud examination and to the examiner’s work. It forces the 
examiner to consider his actions during an investigation by requiring that they will be 
documented. It omits irrelevant information, thereby allowing pertinent facts to stand out. A 
first-rate written report is based on a first-rate examination. 
 
 
Preparation 
The fraud examiner must adequately prepare prior to any interview or information-gathering 
process. Proper preparation entails analyzing what is to be expected as an end product. It 
should also involve having a good idea of what is to be learned from each witness. 
 
Active listening is an essential function of effective report writing. The fraud examiner must 
have good listening skills so that the information is properly assimilated, evaluated, and 
communicated to others. Listening skills are lear ned. Listening involves perceiving what the 
respondent is actually communicating. To do so properly, you must set aside any 
preconceived notions and listen objectively, not only to what is being said, but to how it is 
said and why. The fraud examiner should withhold judgment until the entire message has 
been heard. 
 
Active listening often involves participating with the respondent during the information-gathering 
process. Participation conveys interest in the subject and promotes rapport. 
Participation might require reacting openly to information by verbal and nonverbal 
responses. 
 
 
Accuracy of Reports 
Written reports must be accurate because an inaccurate report will affect the credibility of 
the report and the report’s author. Each contact an examiner makes during the course of a 
fraud examination should be recorded on a timely basis in a memorandum of interview (i.e., a 
written record used to document all interviews conducted during the investigation). 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.902   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Although there is no need to recapitulate testimony word for word, for accuracy’s sake the 
fraud examiner should include all facts of possible relevance. 
 
You should reconfirm dates and supporting information with the respondent. It is important 
to reconfirm the facts before  the report is written, not after. Attachments to the report, if any, 
should be completely described. Inaccuracies and careless errors are inexcusable and can 
render a report useless. 
 
 
Clarity 
Investigative reports on fraud examinations should convey pertinent information in the 
clearest possible language. If necessary, quote the respondent directly (provided the 
quotation does not distort the context). Only convey objective facts  (i.e., unbiased evidence that 
is not influenced by personal feelings, interpretations, or prejudice); do not editorialize or 
give judgments. Use complex or technical terms in their proper contexts, and, where 
necessary, explain their meaning. Do not use jargon since the report might be read by people 
who are not familiar with esoteric or technical terminology. 
 
 
Impartiality and Relevance 
Report all facts without bias, and everything relevant should be included regardless of which 
side it favors or what it proves or disproves. At the outset of a fraud examination, the 
examiner should carefully determine what information will be needed to prove the case and 
attempt to include only this information. A report should include only those matters that are 
relevant to the examination. However, almost every investigation yields much information of 
which the relevance is not immediately known. In such cases, it is best to opt for 
completeness. 
 
 
Timeliness 
Timeliness of reports is extremely important because it tends to enhance the accuracy of 
witness testimony. Another aim of timeliness is to preserve the examiner’s memory of the 
interview(s). All interviews should be transcribed as soon as possible after the questioning. 
Upon completing the examination, the examiner should prepare a final or interim report 
(whichever is appropriate) as soon as possible. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.903 
Common Reporting Mistakes 
 
Conclusions and Opinions 
In a report-writing context, conclusions and opinions are similar, but not identical. 
Conclusions  are based on observations of the evidence, whereas opinions  call for an 
interpretation of the facts.  
 
The fraud examiner must be very circumspect about drawing conclusions. In most 
situations, the conclusions from the examination should be self-evident and should not need 
to be pointed out in the report. If the conclusions are not obvious, the report might need to 
be clarified. 
 
The fraud examiner must also avoid stating opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any 
person or party. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics specifically 
prohibits statements of opinions regarding guilt or innocence, as this is the job of the judge 
or jury (see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Opinions regarding technical matters are permitted  if the fraud examiner is qualified as an 
expert in the matter being considered. For example, a permissible expert opinion might be in 
regard to the relative adequacy of an entity’s internal controls. Another opinion might 
discuss whether financial transactions conform to generally accepted accounting principles. 
 
Evidence 
Legal standards provide guidelines for handlin g evidence and maintaining its integrity. The 
fraud examiner can avoid problems of evidence maintenance by simply documenting—in 
memorandum form—the receipt or release of all evidence. 
 
Copy Documents 
Most evidence in fraud cases will be in document form. When operating under a lawful court 
order that compels a custodian to furnish original documents, the examiner should copy 
those documents (preferably in the presence of the custodian). Then the examiner should 
furnish the custodian with a receipt describing the documents copied or taken. A sample 
receipt can be found in the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section. 
 
Safeguarding and Maintaining Documents 
After obtaining documents, the examiner should secure them for evidence. Be sure that only 
those people with an absolute need for the documents can gain access to them. For practical 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.904   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
purposes, it is usually best to copy all documents (original documents are usually not 
included in reports). Mark all original documents in a unique manner, preferably by using 
initials and dates. To avoid defacing originals, use a small but distinctive tick mark or other 
form of identifier. 
 
When documents are voluntarily furnished, leave the originals in place and work with the 
copies. If originals are later lost, stolen, or misplaced, the copies can normally be introduced 
in court under the “best evidence”  rule (see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Don’t take shortcuts with evidence, and certainly  do not lose or misplace crucial documents. 
It is inexcusable for a fraud examiner to mishandle evidence; doing so will almost certainly 
compromise the case. 
 
 
Effective Note-Taking 
Note-taking is a demanding and necessary fraud examination skill; good reports are based on 
good notes. Once the notes have helped the examiner prepare a memorandum of interview, 
they have fulfilled their essential purpose. However, some jurisdictions require that notes 
pertaining to criminal matters be retained for evidence. 
 
The most common types of note taking include manual, stenographic, and electronic. 
Manual note-taking is the most usual method. Its main advantage is that no extra people 
need to be present during the interview. However, manual note-taking can be obtrusive and 
distracting during questioning. 
 
A stenographer might be present during the interview to take notes (rather than a verbatim 
transcript). This allows the interviewer to concentrate on the questioning. A potential 
disadvantage of this method is that the respondent might be inhibited by the presence of 
another individual. 
 
Electronic note-taking commonly entails tape recording an interview, then summarizing the 
recording to reflect the most pertinent information. Its main advantages are increased 
accuracy and information-gathering efficiency. It can be especially helpful in complicated 
interview situations, or in situations where terminology is defined or explained.  
 
Electronic note-taking has the disadvantage of requiring a duplication of effort. In some 
instances, an electronic recording device can be inhibiting. In a limited number of situations 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.905 
it might be illegal without the respondent’s consent. See the Law section of the Fraud 
Examiners Manual for more information. 
 
 
Organization of Information 
Because of the amount of information and the number of documents that might be collected 
during a fraud examination, the examiner should plan early and plan well. If circumstances 
permit, an information database should be established in the early phases of the case. Report 
information can be presented either in chronological order or by transaction. The options 
are discussed below.  
 
Chronological 
This method presents facts in the order in which they were uncovered. For example, if an 
anonymous tip predicated the fraud examination, the information received would be 
presented first in the report. Thereafter, the reader would follow the development of each 
step as the case progressed. 
 
Information from each witness should be presented in a chronological manner. If 
interviewing an associate of the target, for example, relay the information in a fashion that 
begins at the point the associate first met the target, then proceed through the course of 
pertinent events that lead to the present. 
 
By Transaction 
If a multitude of documents support several instances of fraud, this information should be 
presented by separating individual transactions. For example, in a case of internal fraud 
involving six different instances of embezzlement, the documents and the related interviews 
might best be understood if presented as a group. Thereafter, detail the remaining 
transactions chronologically. 
 
 
Analyzing the Reader 
Keep in mind that the fraud examination report will be read by the general public and the 
opposition. Under no circumstances should the examiner prepare a communicat ion with the idea that the 
information will not be disclo sed to adverse third parties. Write the report with this caveat in mind. A 
fraud examination should stand on its own. It should adequately answer the classic questions 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of who, what, why, where, when, and how. If the report is prepared properly, the reader 
should not have to refer to any other documents to understand the issues.  
 
Types of Readers 
Fraud examination reports will most likely be read by the following individuals. 
 
Company Insiders 
Managers and executives will probably review reports of cases involving internal fraud and 
misdeeds. Because these documents will likely be reviewed by people outside the company as 
well, they should not address internal control deficiencies, management issues, or other 
sensitive company considerations. Instead, these matters should be dealt with in a separate 
letter or other form of communication. 
 
Attorneys 
Reports will be read by attorneys from within the organization and without. In reports 
prepared at the request of counsel, mark each page “privileged and confidential.” This 
procedure will document any privilege claim (discussed below). Understand, however, that 
marking the report in such a manner will not necessarily ensure that the privilege will be 
sustained. 
 
Attorneys for the defendant(s) will likely gain access to a report during the discovery phase 
of civil litigation. These lawyers will scrutinize the report for errors, omissions, and/or 
misstatements. You should be certain that the report is accurate down to the most seemingly 
unimportant detail. Defense attorneys will cite the smallest error as evidence that the entire 
document is inaccurate. In criminal cases, prosecuting attorneys and law enforcement 
personnel will also review a report. These individuals will look primarily at evidence and 
witness statements that will best sustain a criminal prosecution. 
 
Defendants and Witnesses 
In either civil or criminal litigation, the defendants will eventually see most, if not all, of a 
report. If the case reaches court, the witnesses an examiner identified and interviewed will be 
provided with copies of their own statements, if not the entire report. 
 
Press 
In some instances, the press might gain access to a report. Report data might be obtained 
from information disclosed during litigation or, in some instances, from confidential sources. 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.907 
The press is particularly adept at uncovering mistakes and incorrect conclusions drawn by 
the fraud examiner. 
 
Juries 
When the case reaches trial, the jury will usually receive the entire report for review and 
analysis. Juries normally do not have a back ground in business and accounting matters, 
therefore, the report should be as simple and easy to understand as possible. Of all the important 
individuals who will review the report, the members of the jury will by far be the most 
important. 
 
Presenting the Case to Prosecutors 
If fraud is discovered, the examiner will also have to discuss with the relevant individuals and 
determine whether the case should be presented to criminal prosecutors.  
 
Of course, no matter what the results of a company’s fraud examination, the company does 
not prosecute — or decide to prosecute — an offending individual. Instead, prosecution — in 
the sense of charging and trying a person on criminal charges — is exclusively the right of the 
state, and attorneys for state or federal government have the discretion to decide whether to 
bring criminal charges against a person and with what crimes he will be charged.  
 
But even though these decisions belong to the government, there are several reasons an 
entity may wish to prosecute an offending employee. For example, prosecution punishes the 
employee and, hopefully, will deter other employees from engaging in similar offenses. In 
addition, criminal charges brought against an employee may help a company defray the 
losses suffered as a result of fraud. Similarly, prosecution may aid the victim company in 
pursuing civil remedies against an offending employee. 
 
Even if an entity establishes a solid case against an employee or contractor, the prosecutor 
might be reluctant to bring criminal charges in a fraud case because of the time and expense 
involved, lack of expertise, the high standard of proof required for conviction, and so on. 
 
Nevertheless, fraud examiners can do a number of things to help their chances of 
prosecution. For instance, before presenting a case to the police or prosecutor, it will benefit 
the fraud examiner to develop a relationship with either or both, or at least to know enough 
about both agencies to know whom to call so that any submission of a case is not lost in the 
administrative netherworld of bureaucracies. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.908   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
And generally, attorneys will take cases that enhance their reputations and statistics. 
Government lawyers have high conviction rate in the cases they prosecute, and this is due in 
part to their reluctance to take cases they might lose. Therefore, a prosecutor will be more 
likely to pursue the case if the evidence is strong or if the case involves significant losses, 
deals with notorious or important defendants (e.g., prior criminal records), and does not 
appear to be unduly complex. 
 
Furthermore, prosecutors, like all professionals, are very busy, handling enormous caseloads 
in clogged dockets around the country, and many prosecutors have a limited background in 
financial matters. Regardless, here are some basic rules for dealing with prosecutors.  
 
First, examiners should never show up at a prosecutor’s office with a pile of cancelled checks 
and innuendo about what they think happened in a case. In general, a prosecutor is legally 
and ethically bound to proceed only on what he can prove beyond a reasonable doubt in 
court through competent evidence. (Note that the laws of evidence are different from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction—you should have a fundamental familiarity with these laws prior 
to presentation of any case to the prosecutor.) 
 
Second, examiners should not approach the prosecutor unless their investigation is 
complete. Have all of the relevant documents been gathered? Has the examiner made all of 
his observations? Has the examiner interviewed all necessary witnesses? 
 
Third, to get the full attention of the prosecuting attorney, the examiner must have his case 
ready to present in an organized and clear package. A fraud examiner may have done a great 
job in developing evidence, but that information must be communicated effectively to the 
government, which must be convinced that the case is worth the time and effort necessary 
to pursue legal action against the wrongdoer. 
 
Moreover, examiners can enhance their chances of prosecution if: 
• They have obtained a legal and binding admission of guilt. 
• They obtain a commitment from the outset for the lawyer to “consider prosecution” 
based on the evidence obtained. 
• They avail themselves to the lawyer for aid in the prosecution. 
• They follow-up regularly with the lawyer to ensure their case does not fall through the 
cracks. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.909 
And if possible, present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who has: 
• A successful track record in white-collar cases 
• A reputation as a hard worker 
 
 
Outlining 
Outlines of reports and memoranda of interview can be helpful in long or complex fraud 
examinations. Report outlines can take many forms, depending on the type(s) of information 
one must relay. Although the following outlining technique is mechanical, it is easy to master 
and well suited to unraveling the complexities of large and difficult subjects. 
 
Step One 
Group naturally related items and write them down on note cards, and then determine 
whether they are exactly what is needed to meet the demands of the objective, the reader, 
and the scope of coverage. When they are grouped, arrange them in the proper order and 
label them with Roman numerals. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
 I. First-level head 
A. Second-level head 
1. Third-level head 
a. Fourth-level head 
(1) Fifth-level head 
 
Step Two 
Mark each of the note cards with the appropriate Roman numeral and capital letter. Sort the 
note cards by major and minor headings. Transfer the notes to paper, converting them to 
complete sentences. 
 
Step Three 
Polish the rough outline. Check to ensure that the subordination of minor headings to major 
headings is logical and sequential. Check for unity. Stay within the established scope of 
coverage. Resist the temptation to report irrelevant facts. Check the outline for 
completeness; scan it to see whether more information is needed. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.910   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Style 
Write each report in a style that is clear, concise, and to the point. Poorly constructed or 
grammatically incorrect sentences can ruin an otherwise flawless fraud examination. The 
purpose for writing a report is to convey information to a reader; therefore, it is the 
examiner’s responsibility to communicate effectively  and efficiently. The two cardinal sins of 
report writing are vagueness and wordiness. Common breaches of good basic writing include: 
• Improperly placed or ambiguous modifiers (changes sentence context) 
• Use of technical jargon, slang, and/or colloquialisms (places the burden to understand 
on the reader) 
• Use of unnecessary, high-flown verbiage (in an attempt to impress the reader) 
 
Voice 
In grammar, voice  indicates the relation of the subject to the action of the verb. When the 
verb is in the active voice, the subject acts; when it is in the passive voice, the subject is  
acted upon. 
 
EXAMPLE 
John Doe wrote  the report. (active) 
OR 
The report was written  by John Doe. (passive) 
 
Both of the sentences say the same thing, but each has a different emphasis. In the first 
sentence, emphasis is on the subject, John Doe, whereas in the second sentence, the focus is 
on the object, the report. Notice how much stronger and more forceful the active sentence is. 
Always use the active voice unless there is good reason to use the passive. Because they are 
wordy and indirect, passive sentences are harder for the reader to understand. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Instances of fraud are most likely to be reported  by coworkers. (passive) 
OR 
Coworkers report  most instances of fraud. (active) 
 
Person 
Person  indicates whether the written text refers to the writer (first person), to the reader or 
the person for whom the text was written (second person), or to an object or third party 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.911 
about whom the text was written (third person). Person is established through the use of 
personal pronouns. 
 
EXAMPLE 
First person:  “I  did not find a record of the deposit.” 
Second person:  “You did not find a record of the deposit.” 
Third person:  “He did not find a record of the deposit.” 
 
Point of View 
Point of view indicates the writer’s relation to the in formation presented, as reflected in the use 
of person. The writer usually expresses point of view in first-, second-, or third-person 
personal pronouns. The use of the first person indicates that the writer is a participant or 
observer (“This happened to me;” “I saw that ”). The second and third person indicate that 
the writer is writing about other people (“This happened to you, to her, to them”). When 
writing a report, one should never use the writer  to replace I or me in a mistaken attempt to 
sound formal or dignified.  
 
CHANGE:  The writer  believes that this examination will be completed by the end  
of June. 
 
  TO :  I  believe that this examination will be completed by the end of June. 
 
Constructing Clear Sentences 
Sentences that make up a report should be simple and clear. Whenever possible, use 
uncomplicated sentences to state complex ideas. If readers must cope with a complicated 
sentence in addition to a complex idea, they are likely to become confused. Common 
sentence structure mistakes to avoid are discussed below.  
 
Rambling Sentences 
Sentences that contain more information than the reader can comfortably absorb are known 
as rambling sentence s. The remedy for a rambling sentence is to divide it into two or more 
sentences. Put the main message of the rambling sentence into the first of the revised 
sentences. 
 
CHANGE:  The payment to which a subcontractor is entitled should be made 
promptly in order that in the event of a subsequent contractual dispute, 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.912   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the general contractors might not be held in default of contract by virtue 
of nonpayment. 
 
 TO : Pay subcontractors promptly. Then, if a contractual dispute should occur, 
the general contractor cannot be held in default for nonpayment. 
 
Run-On Sentences 
A run-on sentence  is two or more sentences without proper punctuation to separate them. Run-
 on sentences can be corrected by creating two sentences or by joining the two clauses with a 
semicolon (if they are closely related). 
 
 CHANGE: The new manager instituted several new procedures some were 
impractical. (run-on sentence) 
 
 TO : The new manager instituted several new procedures. Some were 
impractical. (period) 
OR 
 TO : The new manager instituted several new procedures; some were 
impractical. (semicolon) 
 
Omitted Verbs 
Do not omit a required verb. 
 
 CHANGE: I never and probably never will locate the missing file. 
 
 TO : I never located  and probably never will locate the missing file. 
 
Omitted Subjects 
Do not omit a subject. 
 
 CHANGE: He regarded price fixing as wrong, but until abolished by law, he engaged 
in it, as did everyone else. 
 
 TO : He regarded price fixing as wrong, but until it was  abolished by law, he 
engaged in it, as did everyone else. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.913 
Unnecessary Compound Sentences 
Avoid compound sentences containing clauses that have little or no logical relationship. 
 
 CHANGE: The ledger contains several exam ples of altered data entries, and it is 
usually stored in the company’s safe. 
 
 TO : The ledger contains several examples of altered data entries. It is usually 
stored in the company’s safe. 
 
Misplaced Modifiers 
A modifier (a word, a phrase, or a clause) is misplaced when it modifies, or appears to 
modify, the wrong word or phrase. 
 
CHANGE: I almost located all the missing files. 
 
TO :  I located almost all the missing files. 
 
Possible confusion in sentences of this type can be avoided by placing the modifier 
immediately before the word it is intended to modify. 
 
 CHANGE: All businessmen are not  talented in mathematics. (The implication is that 
no  businessman is talented in mathematics.) 
 
 TO : Not  all businessmen are talented in mathematics. 
 
Paragraph Structure 
State a paragraph’s main point in its first sentence. Subsequent sentences should support and 
clarify that main point. For the purposes of report writing, paragraphs should be short. 
Readers can be daunted by long, complicated paragraphs that contain multiple issues. (Note 
also that short paragraphs result in more white space on the page, making the document 
more readable.) 
 
 
Report Structure 
Reporting formats vary widely. Some organizations, especially governmental investigative 
bodies, use report forms so that case information is provided in a consistent manner. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.914   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Suggested Standard Format 
Fraud examination reports are not “one size fits  all” items. Obviously, no format can cover 
every specific case, company, or situation. However, a standard format is a good place to 
start. The ACFE recommends the following be included in most reports. A sample report is 
included in the Appendix to this section. 
 
Background 
The background section should generally be about two paragraphs. It should state very 
succinctly why the fraud examination was conducted (e.g., an anonymous tip was received, 
an anomaly was discovered during an audit, money or property was missing). 
 
You may also state who called for the examination and who assembled the examination 
team. 
 
Executive Summary 
For a simple fraud examination, the executive summary should be no more than four or five 
paragraphs. For a more complex case, the summary may reach a page or two in length. 
 
In this section, you should also summarize what actions you performed during the fraud 
examination, such as reviewing documents, interviewing witnesses, or conducting analyses or 
tests. It provides the reader with an overview of what you did during the examination 
process. 
 
At the end of this section, you should summarize the outcome of the examination. For 
example, “$50,000 in checks was deposited into an account owned by Bob Wilson. When 
confronted with this information, Wilson stated that he had only borrowed the money and 
meant to pay it back.” 
 
Scope 
This section should consist of only one paragraph explaining what the scope of the fraud 
examination was. For example, “Determine whether inventory was misappropriated from 
the warehouse,” or “Determine why money is missing from the bank account.”  
 
Approach 
This section gives a brief description of the following items: 
• Fraud examination team members 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.915 
• Procedures (generally, what documents were reviewed or what tests were conducted) 
• Individuals interviewed 
 
It provides a handy reference to who was involved in the fraud examination, what the team 
reviewed, what tests or analyses were conducted, and what individuals the team interviewed. 
 
Findings 
This section contains the details of the fraud examination. It will generally consist of several 
pages. In this section you should describe what tasks you performed and what you found. 
Provide enough detail so that the reader understands what occurred, but not so much detail 
that the reader begins to lose interest or becomes bogged down in the details. The reader 
wants to know how many invoices were forged, who was involved, how they did it, and what 
proof you have. 
 
If the findings section is long, you may wish to use subheadings for particular topics or 
individuals to make it easier for the reader to stay organized. 
 
The information can be presented either chronologically or by topic — whatever makes it 
easier for the reader to follow. 
 
Summary 
This section should be one or two paragraphs and should succinctly summarize the results 
of the fraud examination. It should be similar to the outcome stated at the end of the 
Executive Summary section. 
 
Impact 
Here you should describe how the fraud affected the victim organization. In this section you 
can provide an estimate of the dollar losses or any other time of tangible or intangible 
damage already suffered or that may occur in the future. 
 
Recommendations 
This section is optional. There may be instances in which you wish to discuss remedial 
measures or specific recommendations in a separate document. If you do wish to include 
this section, you should state what follow-up action is necessary or recommended, including 
remedial measures such as a review of internal controls, introduction of a hotline, or 
increased security.  
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.916   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting Documents 
The basic reporting documents are: 
• Memoranda 
• Exhibits, documents, or enclosures 
• Indexes 
• Cover page 
• Transmittal letter 
 
The long-form report will consist of copies of these documents. The Linda Reed Collins 
case study report, included in the Appendix to this section, illustrates this approach.  
 
The heart of the documentation is the memorandum of interview, and one memorandum 
should be prepared for each official contact. Once all the memoranda of interviews are 
completed, they are typically assembled in chronological order and indexed.  
 
Memoranda 
Use memoranda to document all interviews and other pertinent information discovered 
during the examination. Each memorandum should contain the following information where 
appropriate: 
• Heading 
• File number or control number 
• Name of person reporting 
• Case name or subject 
• Subject of memorandum 
• Date 
• Details of facts 
• Interview was voluntary 
• Indicate that one provided one’s identity 
• The witness was informed of the nature of the inquiry 
• Date of inquiry 
• How the interview was conducted (in person, by telephone, etc.) 
• If the interview was electronically recorded 
• Facts learned during inquiry 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.917 
Cover Page or Letter 
A cover page  summarizes the examination’s salient points. The cover page should be direct and 
succinct. If a report is submitted to an outside agency (such as law enforcement or outside 
counsel), a cover letter should accompany it. The cover letter should recapitulate 
information in the report and summarize the principal weaknesses. It is not necessary to list 
all witnesses, only those most valuable. 
 
Exhibits 
As a general rule, copies of exhibits should be included in the report and not attached 
separately. However, bulky files (including working papers and similar exhibits) might be 
attached separately and referred to in the body of the report. The chain of custody should be 
maintained over original documents. 
 
Forms 
A complete fraud examination report must document every step of the information-
 gathering process. Because the orderly and legal presentation of evidence requires the 
examiner to organize a great deal of information, the examiner should use the forms 
available to facilitate this task (see Appendix). As a general rule, these forms are kept in the 
file and not included in the report unless necessary. These forms include the following items. 
 
Consent to Search 
A consent to search  form documents the fact that a person has been informed of his 
constitutional rights, stating that: 
• The premises cannot be searched without a search warrant. 
• The person can refuse to consent to such a search. 
 
The signatures on the bottom of the form (subjects and witnesses) indicate that the person is 
voluntarily giving the examiner written permission to search the premises and to remove 
whatever papers, documents, or other property he might desire. 
 
Receipt for Property 
A receipt for property  form is a multipurpose document used to list items of evidence that have 
been received, returned, or released. This form includes the following information: 
• Date of transfer 
• Property owner’s name 
• Owner’s address 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.918   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Description of item(s) 
• Signature lines (“Received by” and “Received from”) 
 
Telephone Recording Consent 
A telephone recording consent  form stipulates where, when, and with whom telephone 
conversations can be recorded. This form states that the subject has granted permission 
without threats or promises of any kind, and it must be signed by the subject and witnesses. 
Be cautioned that the form alone does not make the conduct illegal or legal. See the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual for information on the interception of 
communications. 
 
Advice of Rights 
An Advice of Rights  form effectively “Mirandizes” an individual; that is, it informs a  
person that: 
• He may remain silent in the face of questioning. 
• Whatever the person says can be used against him in a court of law. 
• If he requests, an attorney will be appointed for him before questioning.  
• He may stop answering questions at any time, whether an attorney is present. 
 
If Mirandizing is applicable, this form should be signed and witnessed. 
 
Consent to Record 
A consent to record  form documents the fact that an individual has given the examiner 
permission to record specific conversations. This form must be signed and witnessed.  
It details: 
• The name of the individual 
• His address 
• The location of the conversation(s) 
• Who might record the conversation(s) 
• The name of the subject(s) with whom the individual might converse 
• The date(s) of the conversation(s) 
 
Customer Consent and Authorization for Access to Financial Records 
This form authorizes a financial institution to disclose the customer’s own records to the 
examiner or other specifically listed individuals. It must be signed by the account holder. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.919 
Evidence Control Log 
In the case of significant items of evidence, it might be advisable to prepare an evidence control 
log, a form that documents: 
• The evidence control center location 
• The bank safe-deposit box location 
• Other evidence location 
• The signature(s) of person(s) placing in or removing evidence from repository 
• The reasons why evidence was moved 
• The file case number 
• The time(s) and date(s) authorized individuals entered and departed evidence repository 
 
 
Signed Statements 
The verbal confession should be reduced to a short and concise written statement. The 
interviewer should prepare the statement and present it to the confessor for his signature. 
The statement should be prepared before the confessor leaves the interview. There should 
be no attempt to make the statement long, and it should rarely exceed two or three 
handwritten pages. The following points should be covered in every signed statement. 
 
Voluntariness of Confessions 
The general law of confessions requires that they be completely voluntary. This should be set 
forth specifically in the first paragraph with the date of the interview. 
 
Intent 
There is no such thing as an accidental fraud or crime. Both require as part of the elements 
of proof the fact that the confessor knew the conduct was wrong and intended to commit 
the act. This can best be accomplished by using precise language in the statement that clearly 
describes the act (e.g., “I wrongfully took assets from the company that weren’t mine” versus “I 
borrowed money from the company without telling anyone ”). 
 
As a general rule, strong emotive words, such as “lie” and “steal,” should be avoided, as the 
confessor might balk at signing the statement. Still, the wording must be precise. Following 
are suggested wordings: 
  
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.920   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of  Use  
 
Lie 
 
I knew the statement/action was untrue.  
 
Steal 
 
I wrongfully took the property of _____ for my 
own benefit. 
 
Embezzle 
 
I wrongfully took ____’s property, which had 
been entrusted to me, and used it for my own 
benefit.  
 
Fraud 
 
I knowingly told ____ an untrue statement 
and he/she/they relied on it. 
 
Approximate Dates of Offense 
Unless the exact dates of the offense are known, the word approximately  must precede any 
dates of the offense. If the confessor is unsure about the dates, language to that effect 
should be included. 
 
Approximate Amounts of Losses 
Include the approximate losses, making sure they are labeled as such. It is satisfactory to 
state a range (“probably not less than $____ or more than $____”). 
 
Approximate Number of Instances 
Ranges are also satisfactory for the number of instances. The number is important because it 
helps establish intent by showing a repeated pattern of activity. 
 
Willingness to Cooperate 
It makes it easier for the confessor when he perceives that the statement includes language 
portraying him in a more favorable light. The confessor can convert that natural tendency by 
emphasizing cooperation and willingness to make amends. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“I am willing to cooperate in hel ping undo what I have done. I promise that I will try to repay 
whatever damages I caused by my actions.” 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.921 
Excuse Clause 
The confessor’s moral excuse should be mentioned. The interviewer should ensure the 
excuse clause wording does not diminish legal responsibility. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG: 
“I didn’t mean to do this.” (This implies a lack of intent.) 
 
RIGHT: 
“I wouldn’t have done this if it had not been for pressing financial problems. I didn’t mean to 
hurt anyone.” 
 
Confessor Read the Statement 
The confessor must acknowledge that he read the statement and he should initial all the 
pages of the statement. It might be advisable to insert intentional errors in the statement so 
that the confessor will notice them. The errors are crossed out, the correct information is 
inserted, and the confessor is asked to initial the changes. Whether this step is advisable 
depends on the likelihood that the confessor will attempt to retract the statement or claim it 
was not read. 
 
Truthfulness of Statement 
The written statement should state specifically that it is true. This adds weight to it. 
However, the language should also allow for mistakes. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“This statement is true and complete to the best of my current recollection.” 
 
Key Points in Signed Statements 
There is no legal requirement that a statement must be in the handwriting or wording of the 
declarant. Because the examiner usually knows how to draft a valid statement, to let a 
confessor draft the statement is generally not a good idea. A statement’s wording should be 
precise. 
 
Declarants should read and sign the statement without undue delay. Do not ask the 
confessor to sign the statement; instead, say “Please sign here.” Although there is no legal 
requirement, it is a good idea to have two people witness the signing of a statement. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.922   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There should not be more than one written statement for each offense. If facts are inadvertently 
omitted, they can later be added to the original statement as an addendum. For legal 
purposes, prepare separate statements for unrelated offenses. This rule applies because the 
target might be tried more than once—once for each offense. Preserve all notes taken during 
an interview, especially those concerning a confession. Having access to pertinent notes can 
aid in a cross-examination regarding the validity of a signed statement. Stenographic notes, if 
any, also should be preserved. Once a conf ession is obtained, substantiate it through 
additional investigation, if necessary. 
 
 
Visual Aids 
Occasionally, the fraud examiner might include visual aids prepared either as part of the 
report or to be used as exhibits at trial. Visual aids should be kept simple. Several different 
types of visual aids are discussed below. 
 
Link-Network Diagrams 
Link networks show the relationships between people, organizations, and events. Different 
symbols are used to represent different entities: a square can symbolize an organization; a 
circle, a person; a triangle, an event; and so fo rth. It doesn’t matter which symbols you use as 
long as you use them consistently. Confirmed connections between entities can be 
represented by a solid line or enclosure within another symbol. Speculative or presumed 
relationships can be indicated by broken lines. To achieve its intended purpose, a graphic 
should always be clear. Don’t cross lines if possible.  
 
EXAMPLE 
Smith is vice-president of the ABC Corporat ion and president of the DEF Corporation, a 
subsidiary of ABC. Jones is general partner in  the First and Second Partnerships. Brown and 
Green are limited partners in the First Partne rship. Brown and Black are limited partners in 
the Second Partnership. Black is also a general partner in the Third Partnership. Smith also 
might have an interest in  the First Partnership. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.923 
LINK NETWORK DIAGRAM  
 
ABC Corporation
DEF Corporation
President
VP
Smith
First
Partnership  
Second 
Partnership
Third
Partnership  
Jones 
Gen. Partner 
Black 
Gen. Partner
Brown 
Ltd. Partner  
Green
Ltd. Partner 
Black 
Ltd. Partner  
Brown
Ltd. Partner  
 
Matrices 
A matrix is a grid that shows the relationship (or points of contacts) between a number of 
entities. Known contacts can be differentiated from presumed contacts by means of a bullet 
(l) or a circle (m). 
 
A matrix can be used to identify the direction and frequency of telephone traffic between 
suspect parties. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.924   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 
 
 
This information can also be represented in chart form. 
 
  
450-1011 550-2022 650-3033 750-4044 850-5055 
T otal 
Out go in g 
Calls  
450-1011 X 1 3   4 
550-2022  X 2   2 
650-3033 8 7 X 8 9 32 
750-4044 1  1 X  2 
850-5055   8  X 8 
Tot al 
Incomin g 
Calls  
 
9 8 14 8 9 
 
 
 
Time-Flow Diagrams 
The following chart shows the relationship of significant events, in the order in which  
they occurred. 
 
450-1011 550-20221 
850-5055750-4044
 650-30331 
8 
3 7 2 
1 
9 
8 
8 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.925 
Summaries of Witnesses’ Statements 
Reduce voluminous testimony and witness statements to summary form in order to identify 
inconsistent statements and to permit quick review. To identify pertinent passages, indicate 
briefly the topic being covered at a given point, and provide a synopsis of the statement (see 
example below). 
 
Summary of Evidence 
Linda Reed Collins 
 
Page Topic Testimony 
   
    5 Collins hired 6/1/XX Personnel file 
     
    5 
Collins promoted to 
Purchaser 11/8/XX 
Personnel file 
      
    8 
Collins and Nagel friends De La Garza interview 
  15 Checks to Orion Robinson interview 
  30 Indebtedness of Collins Public records 
 
Keep the synopsis as succinct as possible. Too much detail will impair the summary’s utility. 
The examiner or someone familiar with the facts and issues in the case should prepare the 
summary, not an assistant who does not know what might or might not be relevant. The 
summary can also be useful as a basis for a chronology. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.926   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
An example of a report of a fraud examination is included in the Appendix to “Report 
Writing.” The fraud examiner typically will also  prepare other written documents including, 
but not limited to, engagement contracts and opinion letters.  
 
 
Engagement Contracts 
Certified Fraud Examiners are sometimes hired for specific engagements. The examiner 
should always prepare an engagement letter so that he and the client have a clear 
understanding of the objectives of the assignment. If the terms of the engagement are 
defined in a contract, any later dispute becomes easier to resolve. 
 
According to the Code of Professional Ethics, a Certified Fraud Examiner: 
• Will only accept assignments for which there is a reasonable expectation that the work 
will be completed with professional competence. 
• Will obtain evidence or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any 
opinion rendered. 
• Will disclose all material matters discovered during the course of an examination that, if 
omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
The engagement letter should be written with these standards in mind. The first question 
one must answer in preparing a contract is: Who is one’s client? Has one been engaged by 
the plaintiff, the defendant, or their counsel?  Often the engagement letter will be addressed 
to attorneys. This can be either corporate or outside counsel.  
 
There are two primary forms of engagement letters: the long form and the short form. The 
long form spells out the details of what examination techniques you intend to follow, while 
the short form does not. See the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section for examples 
of each type of engagement contracts. 
 
Elements of the Engagement Contract 
Engagement letters have four basic parts: ope ning, body (long or short), terms, and close. 
In the opening paragraph state the purpose of the engagement. Be specific as to whether the 
letter is an engagement or a proposal letter. The body of the letter will follow either the long 
form or the short form. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.927 
The Long Form 
The long form is similar to an engagement letter prepared for specific-scope examinations 
performed by auditors. The examiner describes the procedures in detail and limits the scope 
of an examination to the procedures defined. It is not recommended for use in engagements 
requiring the investigation of fraud allegations and a concluding opinion on the existence  
of fraud. 
 
At the onset, the examiner might not know what procedures will be necessary to resolve the 
allegation. Consequently, it is difficult to describe, with any precision, the anticipated 
procedures before the examination begins. 
 
The Short Form 
The short-form engagement letter outlines the general scope of the engagement. For 
example, it might describe that the services will include an investigation of a fraud allegation 
received over the hotline, by an anonymous tip, or by an audit anomaly. 
 
The short form might also confirm if the examiner has access to any personnel or 
documentation deemed necessary to carry out the assignment. This type of engagement 
letter is best used for work that will ultimately require an opinion on a fraud allegation. 
Because the examiner will not know the nature of the alleged fraud at the onset, it is best to 
not limit the examination’s scope. 
 
Terms 
The terms paragraph includes the fee, either flat rate or hourly, and the method of payment. 
This is an excellent time to ask for a retainer and to describe the billing procedures. Also 
address the issue of out-of-pocket expenses. If travel is required, discuss the anticipated cost 
of travel and the number of trips. 
 
Close 
In the closing section, thank the addressee for the opportunity to work with him. Provide a 
phone number where you can be reached and any special instructions, such as cell phone 
and fax numbers. Ask the addressee to sign one copy, and return it in the envelope. Don’t 
forget to supply a signature plate for the returned letter and a self-addressed stamped 
envelope. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.928   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Opinions 
The Certified Fraud Examiner is often asked for an opinion about the existence of fraud. He 
might be engaged to perform fraud deterrence services or to resolve a fraud allegation.  
 
In the former instance, the opinion will address the strengths and weaknesses of the  
client’s current fraud deterrence system and include recommendations to strengthen that 
system. If specific instances of possible fraudulent conduct are uncovered, those should also 
be addressed. 
 
In the latter situation, the examiner must be attentive to the Certified Fraud Examiner’s 
Code of Professional Ethics, in that: 
 
“no opinion shall be expressed regarding the gu ilt or innocence of any person or party.” 
 
There are three possible outcomes of a fraud examination: evidence was obtained that 
supports the allegation of fraud; evidence was gathered that does not support such an 
allegation; and inconclusive evidence was ga thered. In the first outcome, the opinion will 
vary depending on whether the perpetrator confessed to the alleged crime. In the second 
outcome, the examiner can state that the evidence does not support the fraud charge. The 
examiner is not able to declare that there was no fraud. In the final outcome, the examiner 
can state that the evidence is inconclusive; it neither supports nor refutes the allegation. 
Examples of opinions appear in the Appendix. 
 
 
Fraud Examination Checklist 
It is often helpful to prepare to-do lists or checklists of the documents to be examined and 
the potential witnesses to be interviewed. For reference, a sample checklist is located in the 
Appendix. It is not intended to cover all aspects of the examination, but rather to provide 
the examination team with assistance in planning the investigation. 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.1001 
APPENDIX A 
 



:


report standard
document result is a particularli import function in fraud examin in mani
instanc the written report is the onli evid that the work wa perform case can be
won or lost on the strength of the written report it convei to the litig all the evid
and provid credenc to the fraud examin and to the examin work it forc the
examin to consid hi action dure an investig by requir that thei will be
document it omit irrelev inform therebi allow pertin fact to stand out a
firstrat written report is base on a firstrat examin
prepar
the fraud examin must adequ prepar prior to ani interview or informationgath
process proper prepar entail analyz what is to be expect as an end product it
should also involv have a good idea of what is to be learn from each wit
activ listen is an essenti function of effect report write the fraud examin must
have good listen skill so that the inform is properli assimil evalu and
commun to other listen skill ar lear ned listen involv perceiv what the
respond is actual commun to do so properli you must set asid ani
preconceiv notion and listen object not onli to what is be said but to how it is
said and why the fraud examin should withhold judgment until the entir messag ha
been heard
activ listen often involv particip with the respond dure the informationgath
process particip convei interest in the subject and promot rapport
particip might requir react openli to inform by verbal and nonverb
respons
accuraci of report
written report must be accur becaus an inaccur report will affect the credibl of
the report and the report author each contact an examin make dure the cours of a
fraud examin should be record on a time basi in a memorandum of interview ie a
written record us to document all interview conduct dure the investig
report standard investig
3902 2011 fraud examin manual
although there is no need to recapitul testimoni word for word for accuraci sake the
fraud examin should includ all fact of possibl relev
you should reconfirm date and support inform with the respond it is import
to reconfirm the fact befor the report is written not after attach to the report if ani
should be complet describ inaccuraci and careless error ar inexcus and can
render a report useless
clariti
investig report on fraud examin should convei pertin inform in the
clearest possibl languag if necessari quot the respond directli provid the
quotat doe not distort the context onli convei object fact ie unbias evid that
is not influenc by person feel interpret or prejudic do not editori or
give judgment us complex or technic term in their proper context and where
necessari explain their mean do not us jargon sinc the report might be read by peopl
who ar not familiar with esoter or technic terminolog
imparti and relev
report all fact without bia and everyth relev should be includ regardless of which
side it favor or what it prove or disprov at the outset of a fraud examin the
examin should carefulli determin what inform will be need to prove the case and
attempt to includ onli thi inform a report should includ onli those matter that ar
relev to the examin howev almost everi investig yield much inform of
which the relev is not immedi known in such case it is best to opt for
complet
timeli
timeli of report is extrem import becaus it tend to enhanc the accuraci of
wit testimoni anoth aim of timeli is to preserv the examin memori of the
interview all interview should be transcrib as soon as possibl after the question
upon complet the examin the examin should prepar a final or interim report
whichev is appropri as soon as possibl
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3903
common report mistak
conclus and opinion
in a reportwrit context conclus and opinion ar similar but not ident
conclus ar base on observ of the evid wherea opinion call for an
interpret of the fact
the fraud examin must be veri circumspect about draw conclus in most
situat the conclus from the examin should be selfevid and should not need
to be point out in the report if the conclus ar not obviou the report might need to
be clarifi
the fraud examin must also avoid state opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic specif
prohibit statement of opinion regard guilt or innoc as thi is the job of the judg
or juri see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
opinion regard technic matter ar permit if the fraud examin is qualifi as an
expert in the matter be consid for exampl a permiss expert opinion might be in
regard to the rel adequaci of an entiti intern control anoth opinion might
discuss whether financi transact conform to gener accept account principl
evid
legal standard provid guidelin for handlin g evid and maintain it integr the
fraud examin can avoid problem of evid mainten by simpli documentingin
memorandum formth receipt or releas of all evid
copi document
most evid in fraud case will be in document form when oper under a law court
order that compel a custodian to furnish origin document the examin should copi
those document prefer in the presenc of the custodian then the examin should
furnish the custodian with a receipt describ the document copi or taken a sampl
receipt can be found in the sampl report in the appendix to thi section
safeguard and maintain document
after obtain document the examin should secur them for evid be sure that onli
those peopl with an absolut need for the document can gain access to them for practic
report standard investig
3904 2011 fraud examin manual
purpos it is usual best to copi all document origin document ar usual not
includ in report mark all origin document in a uniqu manner prefer by us
initi and date to avoid defac origin us a small but distinct tick mark or other
form of identifi
when document ar voluntarili furnish leav the origin in place and work with the
copi if origin ar later lost stolen or misplac the copi can normal be introduc
in court under the best evid rule see the law section of the fraud examin manual
dont take shortcut with evid and certainli do not lose or misplac crucial document
it is inexcus for a fraud examin to mishandl evid do so will almost certainli
compromis the case
effect notetak
notetak is a demand and necessari fraud examin skill good report ar base on
good note onc the note have help the examin prepar a memorandum of interview
thei have fulfil their essenti purpos howev some jurisdict requir that note
pertain to crimin matter be retain for evid
the most common type of note take includ manual stenograph and electron
manual notetak is the most usual method it main advantag is that no extra peopl
need to be present dure the interview howev manual notetak can be obtrus and
distract dure question
a stenograph might be present dure the interview to take note rather than a verbatim
transcript thi allow the interview to concentr on the question a potenti
disadvantag of thi method is that the respond might be inhibit by the presenc of
anoth individu
electron notetak commonli entail tape record an interview then summar the
record to reflect the most pertin inform it main advantag ar increas
accuraci and informationgath effici it can be especi help in complic
interview situat or in situat where terminolog is defin or explain
electron notetak ha the disadvantag of requir a duplic of effort in some
instanc an electron record devic can be inhibit in a limit number of situat
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3905
it might be illeg without the respond consent see the law section of the fraud
examin manual for more inform
organ of inform
becaus of the amount of inform and the number of document that might be collect
dure a fraud examin the examin should plan earli and plan well if circumst
permit an inform databas should be establish in the earli phase of the case report
inform can be present either in chronolog order or by transact the option
ar discuss below
chronolog
thi method present fact in the order in which thei were uncov for exampl if an
anonym tip predic the fraud examin the inform receiv would be
present first in the report thereaft the reader would follow the develop of each
step as the case progress
inform from each wit should be present in a chronolog manner if
interview an associ of the target for exampl relai the inform in a fashion that
begin at the point the associ first met the target then proce through the cours of
pertin event that lead to the present
by transact
if a multitud of document support sever instanc of fraud thi inform should be
present by separ individu transact for exampl in a case of intern fraud
involv six differ instanc of embezzl the document and the relat interview
might best be understood if present as a group thereaft detail the remain
transact chronolog
analyz the reader
keep in mind that the fraud examin report will be read by the gener public and the
opposit under no circumst should the examin prepar a communicat ion with the idea that the
inform will not be disclo sed to advers third parti write the report with thi caveat in mind a
fraud examin should stand on it own it should adequ answer the classic question
report standard investig
3906 2011 fraud examin manual
of who what why where when and how if the report is prepar properli the reader
should not have to refer to ani other document to understand the issu
type of reader
fraud examin report will most like be read by the follow individu
compani insid
manag and execut will probabl review report of case involv intern fraud and
misde becaus these document will like be review by peopl outsid the compani as
well thei should not address intern control defici manag issu or other
sensit compani consider instead these matter should be dealt with in a separ
letter or other form of commun
attornei
report will be read by attornei from within the organ and without in report
prepar at the request of counsel mark each page privileg and confidenti thi
procedur will document ani privileg claim discuss below understand howev that
mark the report in such a manner will not necessarili ensur that the privileg will be
sustain
attornei for the defend will like gain access to a report dure the discoveri phase
of civil litig these lawyer will scrutin the report for error omiss andor
misstat you should be certain that the report is accur down to the most seemingli
unimport detail defens attornei will cite the smallest error as evid that the entir
document is inaccur in crimin case prosecut attornei and law enforc
personnel will also review a report these individu will look primarili at evid and
wit statement that will best sustain a crimin prosecut
defend and wit
in either civil or crimin litig the defend will eventu see most if not all of a
report if the case reach court the wit an examin identifi and interview will be
provid with copi of their own statement if not the entir report
press
in some instanc the press might gain access to a report report data might be obtain
from inform disclos dure litig or in some instanc from confidenti sourc
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3907
the press is particularli adept at uncov mistak and incorrect conclus drawn by
the fraud examin
juri
when the case reach trial the juri will usual receiv the entir report for review and
analysi juri normal do not have a back ground in busi and account matter
therefor the report should be as simpl and easi to understand as possibl of all the import
individu who will review the report the member of the juri will by far be the most
import
present the case to prosecutor
if fraud is discov the examin will also have to discuss with the relev individu and
determin whether the case should be present to crimin prosecutor
of cours no matter what the result of a compani fraud examin the compani doe
not prosecut or decid to prosecut an offend individu instead prosecut in
the sens of charg and try a person on crimin charg is exclus the right of the
state and attornei for state or feder govern have the discret to decid whether to
bring crimin charg against a person and with what crime he will be charg
but even though these decis belong to the govern there ar sever reason an
entiti mai wish to prosecut an offend employe for exampl prosecut punish the
employe and hopefulli will deter other employe from engag in similar offens in
addit crimin charg brought against an employe mai help a compani defrai the
loss suffer as a result of fraud similarli prosecut mai aid the victim compani in
pursu civil remedi against an offend employe
even if an entiti establish a solid case against an employe or contractor the prosecutor
might be reluct to bring crimin charg in a fraud case becaus of the time and expens
involv lack of expertis the high standard of proof requir for convict and so on
nevertheless fraud examin can do a number of thing to help their chanc of
prosecut for instanc befor present a case to the polic or prosecutor it will benefit
the fraud examin to develop a relationship with either or both or at least to know enough
about both agenc to know whom to call so that ani submiss of a case is not lost in the
administr netherworld of bureaucraci
report standard investig
3908 2011 fraud examin manual
and gener attornei will take case that enhanc their reput and statist
govern lawyer have high convict rate in the case thei prosecut and thi is due in
part to their reluct to take case thei might lose therefor a prosecutor will be more
like to pursu the case if the evid is strong or if the case involv signific loss
deal with notori or import defend eg prior crimin record and doe not
appear to be unduli complex
furthermor prosecutor like all profession ar veri busi handl enorm caseload
in clog docket around the countri and mani prosecutor have a limit background in
financi matter regardless here ar some basic rule for deal with prosecutor
first examin should never show up at a prosecutor offic with a pile of cancel check
and innuendo about what thei think happen in a case in gener a prosecutor is legal
and ethic bound to proce onli on what he can prove beyond a reason doubt in
court through compet evid note that the law of evid ar differ from
jurisdict to jurisdictiony should have a fundament familiar with these law prior
to present of ani case to the prosecutor
second examin should not approach the prosecutor unless their investig is
complet have all of the relev document been gather ha the examin made all of
hi observ ha the examin interview all necessari wit
third to get the full attent of the prosecut attornei the examin must have hi case
readi to present in an organ and clear packag a fraud examin mai have done a great
job in develop evid but that inform must be commun effect to the
govern which must be convinc that the case is worth the time and effort necessari
to pursu legal action against the wrongdoer
moreov examin can enhanc their chanc of prosecut if
thei have obtain a legal and bind admiss of guilt
thei obtain a commit from the outset for the lawyer to consid prosecut
base on the evid obtain
thei avail themselv to the lawyer for aid in the prosecut
thei followup regularli with the lawyer to ensur their case doe not fall through the
crack
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3909
and if possibl present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who ha
a success track record in whitecollar case
a reput as a hard worker
outlin
outlin of report and memoranda of interview can be help in long or complex fraud
examin report outlin can take mani form depend on the type of inform
on must relai although the follow outlin techniqu is mechan it is easi to master
and well suit to unravel the complex of larg and difficult subject
step on
group natur relat item and write them down on note card and then determin
whether thei ar exactli what is need to meet the demand of the object the reader
and the scope of coverag when thei ar group arrang them in the proper order and
label them with roman numer
exampl
i firstlevel head
a secondlevel head
1 thirdlevel head
a fourthlevel head
1 fifthlevel head
step two
mark each of the note card with the appropri roman numer and capit letter sort the
note card by major and minor head transfer the note to paper convert them to
complet sentenc
step three
polish the rough outlin check to ensur that the subordin of minor head to major
head is logic and sequenti check for uniti stai within the establish scope of
coverag resist the temptat to report irrelev fact check the outlin for
complet scan it to see whether more inform is need
report standard investig
3910 2011 fraud examin manual
style
write each report in a style that is clear concis and to the point poorli construct or
grammat incorrect sentenc can ruin an otherwis flawless fraud examin the
purpos for write a report is to convei inform to a reader therefor it is the
examin respons to commun effect and effici the two cardin sin of
report write ar vagu and wordi common breach of good basic write includ
improperli place or ambigu modifi chang sentenc context
us of technic jargon slang andor colloqui place the burden to understand
on the reader
us of unnecessari highflown verbiag in an attempt to impress the reader
voic
in grammar voic indic the relat of the subject to the action of the verb when the
verb is in the activ voic the subject act when it is in the passiv voic the subject is
act upon
exampl
john doe wrote the report activ
or
the report wa written by john doe passiv
both of the sentenc sai the same thing but each ha a differ emphasi in the first
sentenc emphasi is on the subject john doe wherea in the second sentenc the focu is
on the object the report notic how much stronger and more forc the activ sentenc is
alwai us the activ voic unless there is good reason to us the passiv becaus thei ar
wordi and indirect passiv sentenc ar harder for the reader to understand
exampl
instanc of fraud ar most like to be report by cowork passiv
or
cowork report most instanc of fraud activ
person
person indic whether the written text refer to the writer first person to the reader or
the person for whom the text wa written second person or to an object or third parti
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3911
about whom the text wa written third person person is establish through the us of
person pronoun
exampl
first person i did not find a record of the deposit
second person you did not find a record of the deposit
third person he did not find a record of the deposit
point of view
point of view indic the writer relat to the in format present as reflect in the us
of person the writer usual express point of view in first second or thirdperson
person pronoun the us of the first person indic that the writer is a particip or
observ thi happen to me i saw that the second and third person indic that
the writer is write about other peopl thi happen to you to her to them when
write a report on should never us the writer to replac i or me in a mistaken attempt to
sound formal or dignifi
chang the writer believ that thi examin will be complet by the end
of june
to i believ that thi examin will be complet by the end of june
construct clear sentenc
sentenc that make up a report should be simpl and clear whenev possibl us
uncompl sentenc to state complex idea if reader must cope with a complic
sentenc in addit to a complex idea thei ar like to becom confus common
sentenc structur mistak to avoid ar discuss below
rambl sentenc
sentenc that contain more inform than the reader can comfort absorb ar known
as rambl sentenc s the remedi for a rambl sentenc is to divid it into two or more
sentenc put the main messag of the rambl sentenc into the first of the revis
sentenc
chang the payment to which a subcontractor is entitl should be made
promptli in order that in the event of a subsequ contractu disput
report standard investig
3912 2011 fraud examin manual
the gener contractor might not be held in default of contract by virtu
of nonpay
to pai subcontractor promptli then if a contractu disput should occur
the gener contractor cannot be held in default for nonpay
runon sentenc
a runon sentenc is two or more sentenc without proper punctuat to separ them run
on sentenc can be correct by creat two sentenc or by join the two claus with a
semicolon if thei ar close relat
chang the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract runon sentenc
to the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract period
or
to the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract semicolon
omit verb
do not omit a requir verb
chang i never and probabl never will locat the miss file
to i never locat and probabl never will locat the miss file
omit subject
do not omit a subject
chang he regard price fix as wrong but until abolish by law he engag
in it as did everyon els
to he regard price fix as wrong but until it wa abolish by law he
engag in it as did everyon els
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3913
unnecessari compound sentenc
avoid compound sentenc contain claus that have littl or no logic relationship
chang the ledger contain sever exam ple of alter data entri and it is
usual store in the compani safe
to the ledger contain sever exampl of alter data entri it is usual
store in the compani safe
misplac modifi
a modifi a word a phrase or a claus is misplac when it modifi or appear to
modifi the wrong word or phrase
chang i almost locat all the miss file
to i locat almost all the miss file
possibl confus in sentenc of thi type can be avoid by place the modifi
immedi befor the word it is intend to modifi
chang all businessmen ar not talent in mathemat the implic is that
no businessman is talent in mathemat
to not all businessmen ar talent in mathemat
paragraph structur
state a paragraph main point in it first sentenc subsequ sentenc should support and
clarifi that main point for the purpos of report write paragraph should be short
reader can be daunt by long complic paragraph that contain multipl issu note
also that short paragraph result in more white space on the page make the document
more readabl
report structur
report format vari wide some organ especi government investig
bodi us report form so that case inform is provid in a consist manner
report standard investig
3914 2011 fraud examin manual
suggest standard format
fraud examin report ar not on size fit all item obvious no format can cover
everi specif case compani or situat howev a standard format is a good place to
start the acf recommend the follow be includ in most report a sampl report is
includ in the appendix to thi section
background
the background section should gener be about two paragraph it should state veri
succinctli why the fraud examin wa conduct eg an anonym tip wa receiv
an anomali wa discov dure an audit monei or properti wa miss
you mai also state who call for the examin and who assembl the examin
team
execut summari
for a simpl fraud examin the execut summari should be no more than four or five
paragraph for a more complex case the summari mai reach a page or two in length
in thi section you should also summar what action you perform dure the fraud
examin such as review document interview wit or conduct analys or
test it provid the reader with an overview of what you did dure the examin
process
at the end of thi section you should summar the outcom of the examin for
exampl 50000 in check wa deposit into an account own by bob wilson when
confront with thi inform wilson state that he had onli borrow the monei and
meant to pai it back
scope
thi section should consist of onli on paragraph explain what the scope of the fraud
examin wa for exampl determin whether inventori wa misappropri from
the warehous or determin why monei is miss from the bank account
approach
thi section give a brief descript of the follow item
fraud examin team member
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3915
procedur gener what document were review or what test were conduct
individu interview
it provid a handi refer to who wa involv in the fraud examin what the team
review what test or analys were conduct and what individu the team interview
find
thi section contain the detail of the fraud examin it will gener consist of sever
page in thi section you should describ what task you perform and what you found
provid enough detail so that the reader understand what occur but not so much detail
that the reader begin to lose interest or becom bog down in the detail the reader
want to know how mani invoic were forg who wa involv how thei did it and what
proof you have
if the find section is long you mai wish to us subhead for particular topic or
individu to make it easier for the reader to stai organ
the inform can be present either chronolog or by topic whatev make it
easier for the reader to follow
summari
thi section should be on or two paragraph and should succinctli summar the result
of the fraud examin it should be similar to the outcom state at the end of the
execut summari section
impact
here you should describ how the fraud affect the victim organ in thi section you
can provid an estim of the dollar loss or ani other time of tangibl or intang
damag alreadi suffer or that mai occur in the futur
recommend
thi section is option there mai be instanc in which you wish to discuss remedi
measur or specif recommend in a separ document if you do wish to includ
thi section you should state what followup action is necessari or recommend includ
remedi measur such as a review of intern control introduct of a hotlin or
increas secur
report standard investig
3916 2011 fraud examin manual
report document
the basic report document ar
memoranda
exhibit document or enclosur
index
cover page
transmitt letter
the longform report will consist of copi of these document the linda reed collin
case studi report includ in the appendix to thi section illustr thi approach
the heart of the document is the memorandum of interview and on memorandum
should be prepar for each offici contact onc all the memoranda of interview ar
complet thei ar typic assembl in chronolog order and index
memoranda
us memoranda to document all interview and other pertin inform discov
dure the examin each memorandum should contain the follow inform where
appropri
head
file number or control number
name of person report
case name or subject
subject of memorandum
date
detail of fact
interview wa voluntari
indic that on provid on ident
the wit wa inform of the natur of the inquiri
date of inquiri
how the interview wa conduct in person by telephon etc
if the interview wa electron record
fact learn dure inquiri
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3917
cover page or letter
a cover page summar the examin salient point the cover page should be direct and
succinct if a report is submit to an outsid agenc such as law enforc or outsid
counsel a cover letter should accompani it the cover letter should recapitul
inform in the report and summar the princip weak it is not necessari to list
all wit onli those most valuabl
exhibit
as a gener rule copi of exhibit should be includ in the report and not attach
separ howev bulki file includ work paper and similar exhibit might be
attach separ and refer to in the bodi of the report the chain of custodi should be
maintain over origin document
form
a complet fraud examin report must document everi step of the inform
gather process becaus the orderli and legal present of evid requir the
examin to organ a great deal of inform the examin should us the form
avail to facilit thi task see appendix as a gener rule these form ar kept in the
file and not includ in the report unless necessari these form includ the follow item
consent to search
a consent to search form document the fact that a person ha been inform of hi
constitut right state that
the premis cannot be search without a search warrant
the person can refus to consent to such a search
the signatur on the bottom of the form subject and wit indic that the person is
voluntarili give the examin written permiss to search the premis and to remov
whatev paper document or other properti he might desir
receipt for properti
a receipt for properti form is a multipurpos document us to list item of evid that have
been receiv return or releas thi form includ the follow inform
date of transfer
properti owner name
owner address
report standard investig
3918 2011 fraud examin manual
descript of item
signatur line receiv by and receiv from
telephon record consent
a telephon record consent form stipul where when and with whom telephon
convers can be record thi form state that the subject ha grant permiss
without threat or promis of ani kind and it must be sign by the subject and wit
be caution that the form alon doe not make the conduct illeg or legal see the law
section of the fraud examin manual for inform on the intercept of
commun
advic of right
an advic of right form effect mirand an individu that is it inform a
person that
he mai remain silent in the face of question
whatev the person sai can be us against him in a court of law
if he request an attornei will be appoint for him befor question
he mai stop answer question at ani time whether an attornei is present
if mirand is applic thi form should be sign and wit
consent to record
a consent to record form document the fact that an individu ha given the examin
permiss to record specif convers thi form must be sign and wit
it detail
the name of the individu
hi address
the locat of the convers
who might record the convers
the name of the subject with whom the individu might convers
the date of the convers
custom consent and author for access to financi record
thi form author a financi institut to disclos the custom own record to the
examin or other specif list individu it must be sign by the account holder
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3919
evid control log
in the case of signific item of evid it might be advis to prepar an evid control
log a form that document
the evid control center locat
the bank safedeposit box locat
other evid locat
the signatur of person place in or remov evid from repositori
the reason why evid wa move
the file case number
the time and date author individu enter and depart evid repositori
sign statement
the verbal confess should be reduc to a short and concis written statement the
interview should prepar the statement and present it to the confessor for hi signatur
the statement should be prepar befor the confessor leav the interview there should
be no attempt to make the statement long and it should rare exce two or three
handwritten page the follow point should be cover in everi sign statement
voluntari of confess
the gener law of confess requir that thei be complet voluntari thi should be set
forth specif in the first paragraph with the date of the interview
intent
there is no such thing as an accident fraud or crime both requir as part of the element
of proof the fact that the confessor knew the conduct wa wrong and intend to commit
the act thi can best be accomplish by us precis languag in the statement that clearli
describ the act eg i wrongfulli took asset from the compani that werent mine versu i
borrow monei from the compani without tell anyon
as a gener rule strong emot word such as lie and steal should be avoid as the
confessor might balk at sign the statement still the word must be precis follow
ar suggest word
report standard investig
3920 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
instead of us
lie
i knew the statementact wa untru
steal
i wrongfulli took the properti of for my
own benefit
embezzl
i wrongfulli took s properti which had
been entrust to me and us it for my own
benefit
fraud
i knowingli told an untru statement
and heshethei reli on it
approxim date of offens
unless the exact date of the offens ar known the word approxim must preced ani
date of the offens if the confessor is unsur about the date languag to that effect
should be includ
approxim amount of loss
includ the approxim loss make sure thei ar label as such it is satisfactori to
state a rang probabl not less than or more than
approxim number of instanc
rang ar also satisfactori for the number of instanc the number is import becaus it
help establish intent by show a repeat pattern of activ
willing to cooper
it make it easier for the confessor when he perceiv that the statement includ languag
portrai him in a more favor light the confessor can convert that natur tendenc by
emphas cooper and willing to make amend
exampl
i am will to cooper in hel ping undo what i have done i promis that i will try to repai
whatev damag i caus by my action
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3921
excus claus
the confessor moral excus should be mention the interview should ensur the
excus claus word doe not diminish legal respons
exampl
wrong
i didnt mean to do thi thi impli a lack of intent
right
i wouldnt have done thi if it had not been for press financi problem i didnt mean to
hurt anyon
confessor read the statement
the confessor must acknowledg that he read the statement and he should initi all the
page of the statement it might be advis to insert intent error in the statement so
that the confessor will notic them the error ar cross out the correct inform is
insert and the confessor is ask to initi the chang whether thi step is advis
depend on the likelihood that the confessor will attempt to retract the statement or claim it
wa not read
truth of statement
the written statement should state specif that it is true thi add weight to it
howev the languag should also allow for mistak
exampl
thi statement is true and complet to the best of my current recollect
kei point in sign statement
there is no legal requir that a statement must be in the handwrit or word of the
declar becaus the examin usual know how to draft a valid statement to let a
confessor draft the statement is gener not a good idea a statement word should be
precis
declar should read and sign the statement without undu delai do not ask the
confessor to sign the statement instead sai pleas sign here although there is no legal
requir it is a good idea to have two peopl wit the sign of a statement
report standard investig
3922 2011 fraud examin manual
there should not be more than on written statement for each offens if fact ar inadvert
omit thei can later be ad to the origin statement as an addendum for legal
purpos prepar separ statement for unrel offens thi rule appli becaus the
target might be tri more than onceonc for each offens preserv all note taken dure
an interview especi those concern a confess have access to pertin note can
aid in a crossexamin regard the valid of a sign statement stenograph note if
ani also should be preserv onc a conf ession is obtain substanti it through
addit investig if necessari
visual aid
occasion the fraud examin might includ visual aid prepar either as part of the
report or to be us as exhibit at trial visual aid should be kept simpl sever differ
type of visual aid ar discuss below
linknetwork diagram
link network show the relationship between peopl organ and event differ
symbol ar us to repres differ entiti a squar can symbol an organ a
circl a person a triangl an event and so fo rth it doesnt matter which symbol you us as
long as you us them consist confirm connect between entiti can be
repres by a solid line or enclosur within anoth symbol specul or presum
relationship can be indic by broken line to achiev it intend purpos a graphic
should alwai be clear dont cross line if possibl
exampl
smith is vicepresid of the abc corporat ion and presid of the def corpor a
subsidiari of abc jone is gener partner in the first and second partnership brown and
green ar limit partner in the first partn rship brown and black ar limit partner in
the second partnership black is also a gener partner in the third partnership smith also
might have an interest in the first partnership
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3923
link network diagram
abc corpor
def corpor
presid
vp
smith
first
partnership
second
partnership
third
partnership
jone
gen partner
black
gen partner
brown
ltd partner
green
ltd partner
black
ltd partner
brown
ltd partner
matric
a matrix is a grid that show the relationship or point of contact between a number of
entiti known contact can be differenti from presum contact by mean of a bullet
l or a circl m
a matrix can be us to identifi the direct and frequenc of telephon traffic between
suspect parti
report standard investig
3924 2011 fraud examin manual
thi inform can also be repres in chart form
4501011 5502022 6503033 7504044 8505055
t otal
out go in g
call
4501011 x 1 3 4
5502022 x 2 2
6503033 8 7 x 8 9 32
7504044 1 1 x 2
8505055 8 x 8
tot al
incomin g
call
9 8 14 8 9
timeflow diagram
the follow chart show the relationship of signific event in the order in which
thei occur
4501011 55020221
85050557504044
65030331
8
3 7 2
1
9
8
8
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3925
summari of wit statement
reduc volumin testimoni and wit statement to summari form in order to identifi
inconsist statement and to permit quick review to identifi pertin passag indic
briefli the topic be cover at a given point and provid a synopsi of the statement see
exampl below
summari of evid
linda reed collin
page topic testimoni
5 collin hire 61xx personnel file
5
collin promot to
purchas 118xx
personnel file
8
collin and nagel friend de la garza interview
15 check to orion robinson interview
30 indebted of collin public record
keep the synopsi as succinct as possibl too much detail will impair the summari util
the examin or someon familiar with the fact and issu in the case should prepar the
summari not an assist who doe not know what might or might not be relev the
summari can also be us as a basi for a chronolog
report standard investig
3926 2011 fraud examin manual
an exampl of a report of a fraud examin is includ in the appendix to report
write the fraud examin typic will also prepar other written document includ
but not limit to engag contract and opinion letter
engag contract
certifi fraud examin ar sometim hire for specif engag the examin
should alwai prepar an engag letter so that he and the client have a clear
understand of the object of the assign if the term of the engag ar
defin in a contract ani later disput becom easier to resolv
accord to the code of profession ethic a certifi fraud examin
will onli accept assign for which there is a reason expect that the work
will be complet with profession compet
will obtain evid or other document to establish a reason basi for ani
opinion render
will disclos all materi matter discov dure the cours of an examin that if
omit could caus a distort of the fact
the engag letter should be written with these standard in mind the first question
on must answer in prepar a contract is who is on client ha on been engag by
the plaintiff the defend or their counsel often the engag letter will be address
to attornei thi can be either corpor or outsid counsel
there ar two primari form of engag letter the long form and the short form the
long form spell out the detail of what examin techniqu you intend to follow while
the short form doe not see the sampl report in the appendix to thi section for exampl
of each type of engag contract
element of the engag contract
engag letter have four basic part op ning bodi long or short term and close
in the open paragraph state the purpos of the engag be specif as to whether the
letter is an engag or a propos letter the bodi of the letter will follow either the long
form or the short form
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3927
the long form
the long form is similar to an engag letter prepar for specificscop examin
perform by auditor the examin describ the procedur in detail and limit the scope
of an examin to the procedur defin it is not recommend for us in engag
requir the investig of fraud alleg and a conclud opinion on the exist
of fraud
at the onset the examin might not know what procedur will be necessari to resolv the
alleg consequ it is difficult to describ with ani precis the anticip
procedur befor the examin begin
the short form
the shortform engag letter outlin the gener scope of the engag for
exampl it might describ that the servic will includ an investig of a fraud alleg
receiv over the hotlin by an anonym tip or by an audit anomali
the short form might also confirm if the examin ha access to ani personnel or
document deem necessari to carri out the assign thi type of engag
letter is best us for work that will ultim requir an opinion on a fraud alleg
becaus the examin will not know the natur of the alleg fraud at the onset it is best to
not limit the examin scope
term
the term paragraph includ the fee either flat rate or hourli and the method of payment
thi is an excel time to ask for a retain and to describ the bill procedur also
address the issu of outofpocket expens if travel is requir discuss the anticip cost
of travel and the number of trip
close
in the close section thank the addresse for the opportun to work with him provid a
phone number where you can be reach and ani special instruct such as cell phone
and fax number ask the addresse to sign on copi and return it in the envelop dont
forget to suppli a signatur plate for the return letter and a selfaddress stamp
envelop
report standard investig
3928 2011 fraud examin manual
opinion
the certifi fraud examin is often ask for an opinion about the exist of fraud he
might be engag to perform fraud deterr servic or to resolv a fraud alleg
in the former instanc the opinion will address the strength and weak of the
client current fraud deterr system and includ recommend to strengthen that
system if specif instanc of possibl fraudul conduct ar uncov those should also
be address
in the latter situat the examin must be attent to the certifi fraud examin
code of profession ethic in that
no opinion shall be express regard the gu ilt or innoc of ani person or parti
there ar three possibl outcom of a fraud examin evid wa obtain that
support the alleg of fraud evid wa gather that doe not support such an
alleg and inconclus evid wa ga there in the first outcom the opinion will
vari depend on whether the perpetr confess to the alleg crime in the second
outcom the examin can state that the evid doe not support the fraud charg the
examin is not abl to declar that there wa no fraud in the final outcom the examin
can state that the evid is inconclus it neither support nor refut the alleg
exampl of opinion appear in the appendix
fraud examin checklist
it is often help to prepar todo list or checklist of the document to be examin and
the potenti wit to be interview for refer a sampl checklist is locat in the
appendix it is not intend to cover all aspect of the examin but rather to provid
the examin team with assist in plan the investig
2011 fraud examin manual 31001
appendix a
