2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Common Reporting Mistakes


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Common Reporting Mistakes 
 
Conclusions and Opinions 
In a report-writing context, conclusions and opinions are similar, but not identical. 
Conclusions  are based on observations of the evidence, whereas opinions  call for an 
interpretation of the facts.  
 
The fraud examiner must be very circumspect about drawing conclusions. In most 
situations, the conclusions from the examination should be self-evident and should not need 
to be pointed out in the report. If the conclusions are not obvious, the report might need to 
be clarified. 
 
The fraud examiner must also avoid stating opinions regarding the guilt or innocence of any 
person or party. The Certified Fraud Examiner’s Code of Professional Ethics specifically 
prohibits statements of opinions regarding guilt or innocence, as this is the job of the judge 
or jury (see the Fraud Prevention and Deterrence section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Opinions regarding technical matters are permitted  if the fraud examiner is qualified as an 
expert in the matter being considered. For example, a permissible expert opinion might be in 
regard to the relative adequacy of an entity’s internal controls. Another opinion might 
discuss whether financial transactions conform to generally accepted accounting principles. 
 
Evidence 
Legal standards provide guidelines for handlin g evidence and maintaining its integrity. The 
fraud examiner can avoid problems of evidence maintenance by simply documenting—in 
memorandum form—the receipt or release of all evidence. 
 
Copy Documents 
Most evidence in fraud cases will be in document form. When operating under a lawful court 
order that compels a custodian to furnish original documents, the examiner should copy 
those documents (preferably in the presence of the custodian). Then the examiner should 
furnish the custodian with a receipt describing the documents copied or taken. A sample 
receipt can be found in the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section. 
 
Safeguarding and Maintaining Documents 
After obtaining documents, the examiner should secure them for evidence. Be sure that only 
those people with an absolute need for the documents can gain access to them. For practical 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.904   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
purposes, it is usually best to copy all documents (original documents are usually not 
included in reports). Mark all original documents in a unique manner, preferably by using 
initials and dates. To avoid defacing originals, use a small but distinctive tick mark or other 
form of identifier. 
 
When documents are voluntarily furnished, leave the originals in place and work with the 
copies. If originals are later lost, stolen, or misplaced, the copies can normally be introduced 
in court under the “best evidence”  rule (see the Law section of the Fraud Examiners Manual ). 
Don’t take shortcuts with evidence, and certainly  do not lose or misplace crucial documents. 
It is inexcusable for a fraud examiner to mishandle evidence; doing so will almost certainly 
compromise the case. 
 
 



:


common report mistak
conclus and opinion
in a reportwrit context conclus and opinion ar similar but not ident
conclus ar base on observ of the evid wherea opinion call for an
interpret of the fact
the fraud examin must be veri circumspect about draw conclus in most
situat the conclus from the examin should be selfevid and should not need
to be point out in the report if the conclus ar not obviou the report might need to
be clarifi
the fraud examin must also avoid state opinion regard the guilt or innoc of ani
person or parti the certifi fraud examin code of profession ethic specif
prohibit statement of opinion regard guilt or innoc as thi is the job of the judg
or juri see the fraud prevent and deterr section of the fraud examin manual
opinion regard technic matter ar permit if the fraud examin is qualifi as an
expert in the matter be consid for exampl a permiss expert opinion might be in
regard to the rel adequaci of an entiti intern control anoth opinion might
discuss whether financi transact conform to gener accept account principl
evid
legal standard provid guidelin for handlin g evid and maintain it integr the
fraud examin can avoid problem of evid mainten by simpli documentingin
memorandum formth receipt or releas of all evid
copi document
most evid in fraud case will be in document form when oper under a law court
order that compel a custodian to furnish origin document the examin should copi
those document prefer in the presenc of the custodian then the examin should
furnish the custodian with a receipt describ the document copi or taken a sampl
receipt can be found in the sampl report in the appendix to thi section
safeguard and maintain document
after obtain document the examin should secur them for evid be sure that onli
those peopl with an absolut need for the document can gain access to them for practic
report standard investig
3904 2011 fraud examin manual
purpos it is usual best to copi all document origin document ar usual not
includ in report mark all origin document in a uniqu manner prefer by us
initi and date to avoid defac origin us a small but distinct tick mark or other
form of identifi
when document ar voluntarili furnish leav the origin in place and work with the
copi if origin ar later lost stolen or misplac the copi can normal be introduc
in court under the best evid rule see the law section of the fraud examin manual
dont take shortcut with evid and certainli do not lose or misplac crucial document
it is inexcus for a fraud examin to mishandl evid do so will almost certainli
compromis the case
