2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Organization of Information


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Organization of Information 
Because of the amount of information and the number of documents that might be collected 
during a fraud examination, the examiner should plan early and plan well. If circumstances 
permit, an information database should be established in the early phases of the case. Report 
information can be presented either in chronological order or by transaction. The options 
are discussed below.  
 
Chronological 
This method presents facts in the order in which they were uncovered. For example, if an 
anonymous tip predicated the fraud examination, the information received would be 
presented first in the report. Thereafter, the reader would follow the development of each 
step as the case progressed. 
 
Information from each witness should be presented in a chronological manner. If 
interviewing an associate of the target, for example, relay the information in a fashion that 
begins at the point the associate first met the target, then proceed through the course of 
pertinent events that lead to the present. 
 
By Transaction 
If a multitude of documents support several instances of fraud, this information should be 
presented by separating individual transactions. For example, in a case of internal fraud 
involving six different instances of embezzlement, the documents and the related interviews 
might best be understood if presented as a group. Thereafter, detail the remaining 
transactions chronologically. 
 
 



:


organ of inform
becaus of the amount of inform and the number of document that might be collect
dure a fraud examin the examin should plan earli and plan well if circumst
permit an inform databas should be establish in the earli phase of the case report
inform can be present either in chronolog order or by transact the option
ar discuss below
chronolog
thi method present fact in the order in which thei were uncov for exampl if an
anonym tip predic the fraud examin the inform receiv would be
present first in the report thereaft the reader would follow the develop of each
step as the case progress
inform from each wit should be present in a chronolog manner if
interview an associ of the target for exampl relai the inform in a fashion that
begin at the point the associ first met the target then proce through the cours of
pertin event that lead to the present
by transact
if a multitud of document support sever instanc of fraud thi inform should be
present by separ individu transact for exampl in a case of intern fraud
involv six differ instanc of embezzl the document and the relat interview
might best be understood if present as a group thereaft detail the remain
transact chronolog
