2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Analyzing the Reader


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Analyzing the Reader 
Keep in mind that the fraud examination report will be read by the general public and the 
opposition. Under no circumstances should the examiner prepare a communicat ion with the idea that the 
information will not be disclo sed to adverse third parties. Write the report with this caveat in mind. A 
fraud examination should stand on its own. It should adequately answer the classic questions 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.906   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
of who, what, why, where, when, and how. If the report is prepared properly, the reader 
should not have to refer to any other documents to understand the issues.  
 
Types of Readers 
Fraud examination reports will most likely be read by the following individuals. 
 
Company Insiders 
Managers and executives will probably review reports of cases involving internal fraud and 
misdeeds. Because these documents will likely be reviewed by people outside the company as 
well, they should not address internal control deficiencies, management issues, or other 
sensitive company considerations. Instead, these matters should be dealt with in a separate 
letter or other form of communication. 
 
Attorneys 
Reports will be read by attorneys from within the organization and without. In reports 
prepared at the request of counsel, mark each page “privileged and confidential.” This 
procedure will document any privilege claim (discussed below). Understand, however, that 
marking the report in such a manner will not necessarily ensure that the privilege will be 
sustained. 
 
Attorneys for the defendant(s) will likely gain access to a report during the discovery phase 
of civil litigation. These lawyers will scrutinize the report for errors, omissions, and/or 
misstatements. You should be certain that the report is accurate down to the most seemingly 
unimportant detail. Defense attorneys will cite the smallest error as evidence that the entire 
document is inaccurate. In criminal cases, prosecuting attorneys and law enforcement 
personnel will also review a report. These individuals will look primarily at evidence and 
witness statements that will best sustain a criminal prosecution. 
 
Defendants and Witnesses 
In either civil or criminal litigation, the defendants will eventually see most, if not all, of a 
report. If the case reaches court, the witnesses an examiner identified and interviewed will be 
provided with copies of their own statements, if not the entire report. 
 
Press 
In some instances, the press might gain access to a report. Report data might be obtained 
from information disclosed during litigation or, in some instances, from confidential sources. 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.907 
The press is particularly adept at uncovering mistakes and incorrect conclusions drawn by 
the fraud examiner. 
 
Juries 
When the case reaches trial, the jury will usually receive the entire report for review and 
analysis. Juries normally do not have a back ground in business and accounting matters, 
therefore, the report should be as simple and easy to understand as possible. Of all the important 
individuals who will review the report, the members of the jury will by far be the most 
important. 
 
Presenting the Case to Prosecutors 
If fraud is discovered, the examiner will also have to discuss with the relevant individuals and 
determine whether the case should be presented to criminal prosecutors.  
 
Of course, no matter what the results of a company’s fraud examination, the company does 
not prosecute — or decide to prosecute — an offending individual. Instead, prosecution — in 
the sense of charging and trying a person on criminal charges — is exclusively the right of the 
state, and attorneys for state or federal government have the discretion to decide whether to 
bring criminal charges against a person and with what crimes he will be charged.  
 
But even though these decisions belong to the government, there are several reasons an 
entity may wish to prosecute an offending employee. For example, prosecution punishes the 
employee and, hopefully, will deter other employees from engaging in similar offenses. In 
addition, criminal charges brought against an employee may help a company defray the 
losses suffered as a result of fraud. Similarly, prosecution may aid the victim company in 
pursuing civil remedies against an offending employee. 
 
Even if an entity establishes a solid case against an employee or contractor, the prosecutor 
might be reluctant to bring criminal charges in a fraud case because of the time and expense 
involved, lack of expertise, the high standard of proof required for conviction, and so on. 
 
Nevertheless, fraud examiners can do a number of things to help their chances of 
prosecution. For instance, before presenting a case to the police or prosecutor, it will benefit 
the fraud examiner to develop a relationship with either or both, or at least to know enough 
about both agencies to know whom to call so that any submission of a case is not lost in the 
administrative netherworld of bureaucracies. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.908   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
And generally, attorneys will take cases that enhance their reputations and statistics. 
Government lawyers have high conviction rate in the cases they prosecute, and this is due in 
part to their reluctance to take cases they might lose. Therefore, a prosecutor will be more 
likely to pursue the case if the evidence is strong or if the case involves significant losses, 
deals with notorious or important defendants (e.g., prior criminal records), and does not 
appear to be unduly complex. 
 
Furthermore, prosecutors, like all professionals, are very busy, handling enormous caseloads 
in clogged dockets around the country, and many prosecutors have a limited background in 
financial matters. Regardless, here are some basic rules for dealing with prosecutors.  
 
First, examiners should never show up at a prosecutor’s office with a pile of cancelled checks 
and innuendo about what they think happened in a case. In general, a prosecutor is legally 
and ethically bound to proceed only on what he can prove beyond a reasonable doubt in 
court through competent evidence. (Note that the laws of evidence are different from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction—you should have a fundamental familiarity with these laws prior 
to presentation of any case to the prosecutor.) 
 
Second, examiners should not approach the prosecutor unless their investigation is 
complete. Have all of the relevant documents been gathered? Has the examiner made all of 
his observations? Has the examiner interviewed all necessary witnesses? 
 
Third, to get the full attention of the prosecuting attorney, the examiner must have his case 
ready to present in an organized and clear package. A fraud examiner may have done a great 
job in developing evidence, but that information must be communicated effectively to the 
government, which must be convinced that the case is worth the time and effort necessary 
to pursue legal action against the wrongdoer. 
 
Moreover, examiners can enhance their chances of prosecution if: 
• They have obtained a legal and binding admission of guilt. 
• They obtain a commitment from the outset for the lawyer to “consider prosecution” 
based on the evidence obtained. 
• They avail themselves to the lawyer for aid in the prosecution. 
• They follow-up regularly with the lawyer to ensure their case does not fall through the 
cracks. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.909 
And if possible, present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who has: 
• A successful track record in white-collar cases 
• A reputation as a hard worker 
 
 



:


analyz the reader
keep in mind that the fraud examin report will be read by the gener public and the
opposit under no circumst should the examin prepar a communicat ion with the idea that the
inform will not be disclo sed to advers third parti write the report with thi caveat in mind a
fraud examin should stand on it own it should adequ answer the classic question
report standard investig
3906 2011 fraud examin manual
of who what why where when and how if the report is prepar properli the reader
should not have to refer to ani other document to understand the issu
type of reader
fraud examin report will most like be read by the follow individu
compani insid
manag and execut will probabl review report of case involv intern fraud and
misde becaus these document will like be review by peopl outsid the compani as
well thei should not address intern control defici manag issu or other
sensit compani consider instead these matter should be dealt with in a separ
letter or other form of commun
attornei
report will be read by attornei from within the organ and without in report
prepar at the request of counsel mark each page privileg and confidenti thi
procedur will document ani privileg claim discuss below understand howev that
mark the report in such a manner will not necessarili ensur that the privileg will be
sustain
attornei for the defend will like gain access to a report dure the discoveri phase
of civil litig these lawyer will scrutin the report for error omiss andor
misstat you should be certain that the report is accur down to the most seemingli
unimport detail defens attornei will cite the smallest error as evid that the entir
document is inaccur in crimin case prosecut attornei and law enforc
personnel will also review a report these individu will look primarili at evid and
wit statement that will best sustain a crimin prosecut
defend and wit
in either civil or crimin litig the defend will eventu see most if not all of a
report if the case reach court the wit an examin identifi and interview will be
provid with copi of their own statement if not the entir report
press
in some instanc the press might gain access to a report report data might be obtain
from inform disclos dure litig or in some instanc from confidenti sourc
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3907
the press is particularli adept at uncov mistak and incorrect conclus drawn by
the fraud examin
juri
when the case reach trial the juri will usual receiv the entir report for review and
analysi juri normal do not have a back ground in busi and account matter
therefor the report should be as simpl and easi to understand as possibl of all the import
individu who will review the report the member of the juri will by far be the most
import
present the case to prosecutor
if fraud is discov the examin will also have to discuss with the relev individu and
determin whether the case should be present to crimin prosecutor
of cours no matter what the result of a compani fraud examin the compani doe
not prosecut or decid to prosecut an offend individu instead prosecut in
the sens of charg and try a person on crimin charg is exclus the right of the
state and attornei for state or feder govern have the discret to decid whether to
bring crimin charg against a person and with what crime he will be charg
but even though these decis belong to the govern there ar sever reason an
entiti mai wish to prosecut an offend employe for exampl prosecut punish the
employe and hopefulli will deter other employe from engag in similar offens in
addit crimin charg brought against an employe mai help a compani defrai the
loss suffer as a result of fraud similarli prosecut mai aid the victim compani in
pursu civil remedi against an offend employe
even if an entiti establish a solid case against an employe or contractor the prosecutor
might be reluct to bring crimin charg in a fraud case becaus of the time and expens
involv lack of expertis the high standard of proof requir for convict and so on
nevertheless fraud examin can do a number of thing to help their chanc of
prosecut for instanc befor present a case to the polic or prosecutor it will benefit
the fraud examin to develop a relationship with either or both or at least to know enough
about both agenc to know whom to call so that ani submiss of a case is not lost in the
administr netherworld of bureaucraci
report standard investig
3908 2011 fraud examin manual
and gener attornei will take case that enhanc their reput and statist
govern lawyer have high convict rate in the case thei prosecut and thi is due in
part to their reluct to take case thei might lose therefor a prosecutor will be more
like to pursu the case if the evid is strong or if the case involv signific loss
deal with notori or import defend eg prior crimin record and doe not
appear to be unduli complex
furthermor prosecutor like all profession ar veri busi handl enorm caseload
in clog docket around the countri and mani prosecutor have a limit background in
financi matter regardless here ar some basic rule for deal with prosecutor
first examin should never show up at a prosecutor offic with a pile of cancel check
and innuendo about what thei think happen in a case in gener a prosecutor is legal
and ethic bound to proce onli on what he can prove beyond a reason doubt in
court through compet evid note that the law of evid ar differ from
jurisdict to jurisdictiony should have a fundament familiar with these law prior
to present of ani case to the prosecutor
second examin should not approach the prosecutor unless their investig is
complet have all of the relev document been gather ha the examin made all of
hi observ ha the examin interview all necessari wit
third to get the full attent of the prosecut attornei the examin must have hi case
readi to present in an organ and clear packag a fraud examin mai have done a great
job in develop evid but that inform must be commun effect to the
govern which must be convinc that the case is worth the time and effort necessari
to pursu legal action against the wrongdoer
moreov examin can enhanc their chanc of prosecut if
thei have obtain a legal and bind admiss of guilt
thei obtain a commit from the outset for the lawyer to consid prosecut
base on the evid obtain
thei avail themselv to the lawyer for aid in the prosecut
thei followup regularli with the lawyer to ensur their case doe not fall through the
crack
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3909
and if possibl present the case to a lawyer or prosecutor who ha
a success track record in whitecollar case
a reput as a hard worker
