2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Outlining


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Outlining 
Outlines of reports and memoranda of interview can be helpful in long or complex fraud 
examinations. Report outlines can take many forms, depending on the type(s) of information 
one must relay. Although the following outlining technique is mechanical, it is easy to master 
and well suited to unraveling the complexities of large and difficult subjects. 
 
Step One 
Group naturally related items and write them down on note cards, and then determine 
whether they are exactly what is needed to meet the demands of the objective, the reader, 
and the scope of coverage. When they are grouped, arrange them in the proper order and 
label them with Roman numerals. 
 
EXAMPLE 
 
 I. First-level head 
A. Second-level head 
1. Third-level head 
a. Fourth-level head 
(1) Fifth-level head 
 
Step Two 
Mark each of the note cards with the appropriate Roman numeral and capital letter. Sort the 
note cards by major and minor headings. Transfer the notes to paper, converting them to 
complete sentences. 
 
Step Three 
Polish the rough outline. Check to ensure that the subordination of minor headings to major 
headings is logical and sequential. Check for unity. Stay within the established scope of 
coverage. Resist the temptation to report irrelevant facts. Check the outline for 
completeness; scan it to see whether more information is needed. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.910   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Style 
Write each report in a style that is clear, concise, and to the point. Poorly constructed or 
grammatically incorrect sentences can ruin an otherwise flawless fraud examination. The 
purpose for writing a report is to convey information to a reader; therefore, it is the 
examiner’s responsibility to communicate effectively  and efficiently. The two cardinal sins of 
report writing are vagueness and wordiness. Common breaches of good basic writing include: 
• Improperly placed or ambiguous modifiers (changes sentence context) 
• Use of technical jargon, slang, and/or colloquialisms (places the burden to understand 
on the reader) 
• Use of unnecessary, high-flown verbiage (in an attempt to impress the reader) 
 
Voice 
In grammar, voice  indicates the relation of the subject to the action of the verb. When the 
verb is in the active voice, the subject acts; when it is in the passive voice, the subject is  
acted upon. 
 
EXAMPLE 
John Doe wrote  the report. (active) 
OR 
The report was written  by John Doe. (passive) 
 
Both of the sentences say the same thing, but each has a different emphasis. In the first 
sentence, emphasis is on the subject, John Doe, whereas in the second sentence, the focus is 
on the object, the report. Notice how much stronger and more forceful the active sentence is. 
Always use the active voice unless there is good reason to use the passive. Because they are 
wordy and indirect, passive sentences are harder for the reader to understand. 
 
EXAMPLE 
Instances of fraud are most likely to be reported  by coworkers. (passive) 
OR 
Coworkers report  most instances of fraud. (active) 
 
Person 
Person  indicates whether the written text refers to the writer (first person), to the reader or 
the person for whom the text was written (second person), or to an object or third party 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.911 
about whom the text was written (third person). Person is established through the use of 
personal pronouns. 
 
EXAMPLE 
First person:  “I  did not find a record of the deposit.” 
Second person:  “You did not find a record of the deposit.” 
Third person:  “He did not find a record of the deposit.” 
 
Point of View 
Point of view indicates the writer’s relation to the in formation presented, as reflected in the use 
of person. The writer usually expresses point of view in first-, second-, or third-person 
personal pronouns. The use of the first person indicates that the writer is a participant or 
observer (“This happened to me;” “I saw that ”). The second and third person indicate that 
the writer is writing about other people (“This happened to you, to her, to them”). When 
writing a report, one should never use the writer  to replace I or me in a mistaken attempt to 
sound formal or dignified.  
 
CHANGE:  The writer  believes that this examination will be completed by the end  
of June. 
 
  TO :  I  believe that this examination will be completed by the end of June. 
 
Constructing Clear Sentences 
Sentences that make up a report should be simple and clear. Whenever possible, use 
uncomplicated sentences to state complex ideas. If readers must cope with a complicated 
sentence in addition to a complex idea, they are likely to become confused. Common 
sentence structure mistakes to avoid are discussed below.  
 
Rambling Sentences 
Sentences that contain more information than the reader can comfortably absorb are known 
as rambling sentence s. The remedy for a rambling sentence is to divide it into two or more 
sentences. Put the main message of the rambling sentence into the first of the revised 
sentences. 
 
CHANGE:  The payment to which a subcontractor is entitled should be made 
promptly in order that in the event of a subsequent contractual dispute, 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.912   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
the general contractors might not be held in default of contract by virtue 
of nonpayment. 
 
 TO : Pay subcontractors promptly. Then, if a contractual dispute should occur, 
the general contractor cannot be held in default for nonpayment. 
 
Run-On Sentences 
A run-on sentence  is two or more sentences without proper punctuation to separate them. Run-
 on sentences can be corrected by creating two sentences or by joining the two clauses with a 
semicolon (if they are closely related). 
 
 CHANGE: The new manager instituted several new procedures some were 
impractical. (run-on sentence) 
 
 TO : The new manager instituted several new procedures. Some were 
impractical. (period) 
OR 
 TO : The new manager instituted several new procedures; some were 
impractical. (semicolon) 
 
Omitted Verbs 
Do not omit a required verb. 
 
 CHANGE: I never and probably never will locate the missing file. 
 
 TO : I never located  and probably never will locate the missing file. 
 
Omitted Subjects 
Do not omit a subject. 
 
 CHANGE: He regarded price fixing as wrong, but until abolished by law, he engaged 
in it, as did everyone else. 
 
 TO : He regarded price fixing as wrong, but until it was  abolished by law, he 
engaged in it, as did everyone else. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.913 
Unnecessary Compound Sentences 
Avoid compound sentences containing clauses that have little or no logical relationship. 
 
 CHANGE: The ledger contains several exam ples of altered data entries, and it is 
usually stored in the company’s safe. 
 
 TO : The ledger contains several examples of altered data entries. It is usually 
stored in the company’s safe. 
 
Misplaced Modifiers 
A modifier (a word, a phrase, or a clause) is misplaced when it modifies, or appears to 
modify, the wrong word or phrase. 
 
CHANGE: I almost located all the missing files. 
 
TO :  I located almost all the missing files. 
 
Possible confusion in sentences of this type can be avoided by placing the modifier 
immediately before the word it is intended to modify. 
 
 CHANGE: All businessmen are not  talented in mathematics. (The implication is that 
no  businessman is talented in mathematics.) 
 
 TO : Not  all businessmen are talented in mathematics. 
 
Paragraph Structure 
State a paragraph’s main point in its first sentence. Subsequent sentences should support and 
clarify that main point. For the purposes of report writing, paragraphs should be short. 
Readers can be daunted by long, complicated paragraphs that contain multiple issues. (Note 
also that short paragraphs result in more white space on the page, making the document 
more readable.) 
 
 



:


outlin
outlin of report and memoranda of interview can be help in long or complex fraud
examin report outlin can take mani form depend on the type of inform
on must relai although the follow outlin techniqu is mechan it is easi to master
and well suit to unravel the complex of larg and difficult subject
step on
group natur relat item and write them down on note card and then determin
whether thei ar exactli what is need to meet the demand of the object the reader
and the scope of coverag when thei ar group arrang them in the proper order and
label them with roman numer
exampl
i firstlevel head
a secondlevel head
1 thirdlevel head
a fourthlevel head
1 fifthlevel head
step two
mark each of the note card with the appropri roman numer and capit letter sort the
note card by major and minor head transfer the note to paper convert them to
complet sentenc
step three
polish the rough outlin check to ensur that the subordin of minor head to major
head is logic and sequenti check for uniti stai within the establish scope of
coverag resist the temptat to report irrelev fact check the outlin for
complet scan it to see whether more inform is need
report standard investig
3910 2011 fraud examin manual
style
write each report in a style that is clear concis and to the point poorli construct or
grammat incorrect sentenc can ruin an otherwis flawless fraud examin the
purpos for write a report is to convei inform to a reader therefor it is the
examin respons to commun effect and effici the two cardin sin of
report write ar vagu and wordi common breach of good basic write includ
improperli place or ambigu modifi chang sentenc context
us of technic jargon slang andor colloqui place the burden to understand
on the reader
us of unnecessari highflown verbiag in an attempt to impress the reader
voic
in grammar voic indic the relat of the subject to the action of the verb when the
verb is in the activ voic the subject act when it is in the passiv voic the subject is
act upon
exampl
john doe wrote the report activ
or
the report wa written by john doe passiv
both of the sentenc sai the same thing but each ha a differ emphasi in the first
sentenc emphasi is on the subject john doe wherea in the second sentenc the focu is
on the object the report notic how much stronger and more forc the activ sentenc is
alwai us the activ voic unless there is good reason to us the passiv becaus thei ar
wordi and indirect passiv sentenc ar harder for the reader to understand
exampl
instanc of fraud ar most like to be report by cowork passiv
or
cowork report most instanc of fraud activ
person
person indic whether the written text refer to the writer first person to the reader or
the person for whom the text wa written second person or to an object or third parti
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3911
about whom the text wa written third person person is establish through the us of
person pronoun
exampl
first person i did not find a record of the deposit
second person you did not find a record of the deposit
third person he did not find a record of the deposit
point of view
point of view indic the writer relat to the in format present as reflect in the us
of person the writer usual express point of view in first second or thirdperson
person pronoun the us of the first person indic that the writer is a particip or
observ thi happen to me i saw that the second and third person indic that
the writer is write about other peopl thi happen to you to her to them when
write a report on should never us the writer to replac i or me in a mistaken attempt to
sound formal or dignifi
chang the writer believ that thi examin will be complet by the end
of june
to i believ that thi examin will be complet by the end of june
construct clear sentenc
sentenc that make up a report should be simpl and clear whenev possibl us
uncompl sentenc to state complex idea if reader must cope with a complic
sentenc in addit to a complex idea thei ar like to becom confus common
sentenc structur mistak to avoid ar discuss below
rambl sentenc
sentenc that contain more inform than the reader can comfort absorb ar known
as rambl sentenc s the remedi for a rambl sentenc is to divid it into two or more
sentenc put the main messag of the rambl sentenc into the first of the revis
sentenc
chang the payment to which a subcontractor is entitl should be made
promptli in order that in the event of a subsequ contractu disput
report standard investig
3912 2011 fraud examin manual
the gener contractor might not be held in default of contract by virtu
of nonpay
to pai subcontractor promptli then if a contractu disput should occur
the gener contractor cannot be held in default for nonpay
runon sentenc
a runon sentenc is two or more sentenc without proper punctuat to separ them run
on sentenc can be correct by creat two sentenc or by join the two claus with a
semicolon if thei ar close relat
chang the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract runon sentenc
to the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract period
or
to the new manag institut sever new procedur some were
impract semicolon
omit verb
do not omit a requir verb
chang i never and probabl never will locat the miss file
to i never locat and probabl never will locat the miss file
omit subject
do not omit a subject
chang he regard price fix as wrong but until abolish by law he engag
in it as did everyon els
to he regard price fix as wrong but until it wa abolish by law he
engag in it as did everyon els
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3913
unnecessari compound sentenc
avoid compound sentenc contain claus that have littl or no logic relationship
chang the ledger contain sever exam ple of alter data entri and it is
usual store in the compani safe
to the ledger contain sever exampl of alter data entri it is usual
store in the compani safe
misplac modifi
a modifi a word a phrase or a claus is misplac when it modifi or appear to
modifi the wrong word or phrase
chang i almost locat all the miss file
to i locat almost all the miss file
possibl confus in sentenc of thi type can be avoid by place the modifi
immedi befor the word it is intend to modifi
chang all businessmen ar not talent in mathemat the implic is that
no businessman is talent in mathemat
to not all businessmen ar talent in mathemat
paragraph structur
state a paragraph main point in it first sentenc subsequ sentenc should support and
clarifi that main point for the purpos of report write paragraph should be short
reader can be daunt by long complic paragraph that contain multipl issu note
also that short paragraph result in more white space on the page make the document
more readabl
