2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Report Structure


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Report Structure 
Reporting formats vary widely. Some organizations, especially governmental investigative 
bodies, use report forms so that case information is provided in a consistent manner. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.914   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Suggested Standard Format 
Fraud examination reports are not “one size fits  all” items. Obviously, no format can cover 
every specific case, company, or situation. However, a standard format is a good place to 
start. The ACFE recommends the following be included in most reports. A sample report is 
included in the Appendix to this section. 
 
Background 
The background section should generally be about two paragraphs. It should state very 
succinctly why the fraud examination was conducted (e.g., an anonymous tip was received, 
an anomaly was discovered during an audit, money or property was missing). 
 
You may also state who called for the examination and who assembled the examination 
team. 
 
Executive Summary 
For a simple fraud examination, the executive summary should be no more than four or five 
paragraphs. For a more complex case, the summary may reach a page or two in length. 
 
In this section, you should also summarize what actions you performed during the fraud 
examination, such as reviewing documents, interviewing witnesses, or conducting analyses or 
tests. It provides the reader with an overview of what you did during the examination 
process. 
 
At the end of this section, you should summarize the outcome of the examination. For 
example, “$50,000 in checks was deposited into an account owned by Bob Wilson. When 
confronted with this information, Wilson stated that he had only borrowed the money and 
meant to pay it back.” 
 
Scope 
This section should consist of only one paragraph explaining what the scope of the fraud 
examination was. For example, “Determine whether inventory was misappropriated from 
the warehouse,” or “Determine why money is missing from the bank account.”  
 
Approach 
This section gives a brief description of the following items: 
• Fraud examination team members 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.915 
• Procedures (generally, what documents were reviewed or what tests were conducted) 
• Individuals interviewed 
 
It provides a handy reference to who was involved in the fraud examination, what the team 
reviewed, what tests or analyses were conducted, and what individuals the team interviewed. 
 
Findings 
This section contains the details of the fraud examination. It will generally consist of several 
pages. In this section you should describe what tasks you performed and what you found. 
Provide enough detail so that the reader understands what occurred, but not so much detail 
that the reader begins to lose interest or becomes bogged down in the details. The reader 
wants to know how many invoices were forged, who was involved, how they did it, and what 
proof you have. 
 
If the findings section is long, you may wish to use subheadings for particular topics or 
individuals to make it easier for the reader to stay organized. 
 
The information can be presented either chronologically or by topic — whatever makes it 
easier for the reader to follow. 
 
Summary 
This section should be one or two paragraphs and should succinctly summarize the results 
of the fraud examination. It should be similar to the outcome stated at the end of the 
Executive Summary section. 
 
Impact 
Here you should describe how the fraud affected the victim organization. In this section you 
can provide an estimate of the dollar losses or any other time of tangible or intangible 
damage already suffered or that may occur in the future. 
 
Recommendations 
This section is optional. There may be instances in which you wish to discuss remedial 
measures or specific recommendations in a separate document. If you do wish to include 
this section, you should state what follow-up action is necessary or recommended, including 
remedial measures such as a review of internal controls, introduction of a hotline, or 
increased security.  
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.916   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Reporting Documents 
The basic reporting documents are: 
• Memoranda 
• Exhibits, documents, or enclosures 
• Indexes 
• Cover page 
• Transmittal letter 
 
The long-form report will consist of copies of these documents. The Linda Reed Collins 
case study report, included in the Appendix to this section, illustrates this approach.  
 
The heart of the documentation is the memorandum of interview, and one memorandum 
should be prepared for each official contact. Once all the memoranda of interviews are 
completed, they are typically assembled in chronological order and indexed.  
 
Memoranda 
Use memoranda to document all interviews and other pertinent information discovered 
during the examination. Each memorandum should contain the following information where 
appropriate: 
• Heading 
• File number or control number 
• Name of person reporting 
• Case name or subject 
• Subject of memorandum 
• Date 
• Details of facts 
• Interview was voluntary 
• Indicate that one provided one’s identity 
• The witness was informed of the nature of the inquiry 
• Date of inquiry 
• How the interview was conducted (in person, by telephone, etc.) 
• If the interview was electronically recorded 
• Facts learned during inquiry 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.917 
Cover Page or Letter 
A cover page  summarizes the examination’s salient points. The cover page should be direct and 
succinct. If a report is submitted to an outside agency (such as law enforcement or outside 
counsel), a cover letter should accompany it. The cover letter should recapitulate 
information in the report and summarize the principal weaknesses. It is not necessary to list 
all witnesses, only those most valuable. 
 
Exhibits 
As a general rule, copies of exhibits should be included in the report and not attached 
separately. However, bulky files (including working papers and similar exhibits) might be 
attached separately and referred to in the body of the report. The chain of custody should be 
maintained over original documents. 
 
Forms 
A complete fraud examination report must document every step of the information-
 gathering process. Because the orderly and legal presentation of evidence requires the 
examiner to organize a great deal of information, the examiner should use the forms 
available to facilitate this task (see Appendix). As a general rule, these forms are kept in the 
file and not included in the report unless necessary. These forms include the following items. 
 
Consent to Search 
A consent to search  form documents the fact that a person has been informed of his 
constitutional rights, stating that: 
• The premises cannot be searched without a search warrant. 
• The person can refuse to consent to such a search. 
 
The signatures on the bottom of the form (subjects and witnesses) indicate that the person is 
voluntarily giving the examiner written permission to search the premises and to remove 
whatever papers, documents, or other property he might desire. 
 
Receipt for Property 
A receipt for property  form is a multipurpose document used to list items of evidence that have 
been received, returned, or released. This form includes the following information: 
• Date of transfer 
• Property owner’s name 
• Owner’s address 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.918   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
• Description of item(s) 
• Signature lines (“Received by” and “Received from”) 
 
Telephone Recording Consent 
A telephone recording consent  form stipulates where, when, and with whom telephone 
conversations can be recorded. This form states that the subject has granted permission 
without threats or promises of any kind, and it must be signed by the subject and witnesses. 
Be cautioned that the form alone does not make the conduct illegal or legal. See the Law 
section of the Fraud Examiners Manual for information on the interception of 
communications. 
 
Advice of Rights 
An Advice of Rights  form effectively “Mirandizes” an individual; that is, it informs a  
person that: 
• He may remain silent in the face of questioning. 
• Whatever the person says can be used against him in a court of law. 
• If he requests, an attorney will be appointed for him before questioning.  
• He may stop answering questions at any time, whether an attorney is present. 
 
If Mirandizing is applicable, this form should be signed and witnessed. 
 
Consent to Record 
A consent to record  form documents the fact that an individual has given the examiner 
permission to record specific conversations. This form must be signed and witnessed.  
It details: 
• The name of the individual 
• His address 
• The location of the conversation(s) 
• Who might record the conversation(s) 
• The name of the subject(s) with whom the individual might converse 
• The date(s) of the conversation(s) 
 
Customer Consent and Authorization for Access to Financial Records 
This form authorizes a financial institution to disclose the customer’s own records to the 
examiner or other specifically listed individuals. It must be signed by the account holder. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.919 
Evidence Control Log 
In the case of significant items of evidence, it might be advisable to prepare an evidence control 
log, a form that documents: 
• The evidence control center location 
• The bank safe-deposit box location 
• Other evidence location 
• The signature(s) of person(s) placing in or removing evidence from repository 
• The reasons why evidence was moved 
• The file case number 
• The time(s) and date(s) authorized individuals entered and departed evidence repository 
 
 



:


report structur
report format vari wide some organ especi government investig
bodi us report form so that case inform is provid in a consist manner
report standard investig
3914 2011 fraud examin manual
suggest standard format
fraud examin report ar not on size fit all item obvious no format can cover
everi specif case compani or situat howev a standard format is a good place to
start the acf recommend the follow be includ in most report a sampl report is
includ in the appendix to thi section
background
the background section should gener be about two paragraph it should state veri
succinctli why the fraud examin wa conduct eg an anonym tip wa receiv
an anomali wa discov dure an audit monei or properti wa miss
you mai also state who call for the examin and who assembl the examin
team
execut summari
for a simpl fraud examin the execut summari should be no more than four or five
paragraph for a more complex case the summari mai reach a page or two in length
in thi section you should also summar what action you perform dure the fraud
examin such as review document interview wit or conduct analys or
test it provid the reader with an overview of what you did dure the examin
process
at the end of thi section you should summar the outcom of the examin for
exampl 50000 in check wa deposit into an account own by bob wilson when
confront with thi inform wilson state that he had onli borrow the monei and
meant to pai it back
scope
thi section should consist of onli on paragraph explain what the scope of the fraud
examin wa for exampl determin whether inventori wa misappropri from
the warehous or determin why monei is miss from the bank account
approach
thi section give a brief descript of the follow item
fraud examin team member
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3915
procedur gener what document were review or what test were conduct
individu interview
it provid a handi refer to who wa involv in the fraud examin what the team
review what test or analys were conduct and what individu the team interview
find
thi section contain the detail of the fraud examin it will gener consist of sever
page in thi section you should describ what task you perform and what you found
provid enough detail so that the reader understand what occur but not so much detail
that the reader begin to lose interest or becom bog down in the detail the reader
want to know how mani invoic were forg who wa involv how thei did it and what
proof you have
if the find section is long you mai wish to us subhead for particular topic or
individu to make it easier for the reader to stai organ
the inform can be present either chronolog or by topic whatev make it
easier for the reader to follow
summari
thi section should be on or two paragraph and should succinctli summar the result
of the fraud examin it should be similar to the outcom state at the end of the
execut summari section
impact
here you should describ how the fraud affect the victim organ in thi section you
can provid an estim of the dollar loss or ani other time of tangibl or intang
damag alreadi suffer or that mai occur in the futur
recommend
thi section is option there mai be instanc in which you wish to discuss remedi
measur or specif recommend in a separ document if you do wish to includ
thi section you should state what followup action is necessari or recommend includ
remedi measur such as a review of intern control introduct of a hotlin or
increas secur
report standard investig
3916 2011 fraud examin manual
report document
the basic report document ar
memoranda
exhibit document or enclosur
index
cover page
transmitt letter
the longform report will consist of copi of these document the linda reed collin
case studi report includ in the appendix to thi section illustr thi approach
the heart of the document is the memorandum of interview and on memorandum
should be prepar for each offici contact onc all the memoranda of interview ar
complet thei ar typic assembl in chronolog order and index
memoranda
us memoranda to document all interview and other pertin inform discov
dure the examin each memorandum should contain the follow inform where
appropri
head
file number or control number
name of person report
case name or subject
subject of memorandum
date
detail of fact
interview wa voluntari
indic that on provid on ident
the wit wa inform of the natur of the inquiri
date of inquiri
how the interview wa conduct in person by telephon etc
if the interview wa electron record
fact learn dure inquiri
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3917
cover page or letter
a cover page summar the examin salient point the cover page should be direct and
succinct if a report is submit to an outsid agenc such as law enforc or outsid
counsel a cover letter should accompani it the cover letter should recapitul
inform in the report and summar the princip weak it is not necessari to list
all wit onli those most valuabl
exhibit
as a gener rule copi of exhibit should be includ in the report and not attach
separ howev bulki file includ work paper and similar exhibit might be
attach separ and refer to in the bodi of the report the chain of custodi should be
maintain over origin document
form
a complet fraud examin report must document everi step of the inform
gather process becaus the orderli and legal present of evid requir the
examin to organ a great deal of inform the examin should us the form
avail to facilit thi task see appendix as a gener rule these form ar kept in the
file and not includ in the report unless necessari these form includ the follow item
consent to search
a consent to search form document the fact that a person ha been inform of hi
constitut right state that
the premis cannot be search without a search warrant
the person can refus to consent to such a search
the signatur on the bottom of the form subject and wit indic that the person is
voluntarili give the examin written permiss to search the premis and to remov
whatev paper document or other properti he might desir
receipt for properti
a receipt for properti form is a multipurpos document us to list item of evid that have
been receiv return or releas thi form includ the follow inform
date of transfer
properti owner name
owner address
report standard investig
3918 2011 fraud examin manual
descript of item
signatur line receiv by and receiv from
telephon record consent
a telephon record consent form stipul where when and with whom telephon
convers can be record thi form state that the subject ha grant permiss
without threat or promis of ani kind and it must be sign by the subject and wit
be caution that the form alon doe not make the conduct illeg or legal see the law
section of the fraud examin manual for inform on the intercept of
commun
advic of right
an advic of right form effect mirand an individu that is it inform a
person that
he mai remain silent in the face of question
whatev the person sai can be us against him in a court of law
if he request an attornei will be appoint for him befor question
he mai stop answer question at ani time whether an attornei is present
if mirand is applic thi form should be sign and wit
consent to record
a consent to record form document the fact that an individu ha given the examin
permiss to record specif convers thi form must be sign and wit
it detail
the name of the individu
hi address
the locat of the convers
who might record the convers
the name of the subject with whom the individu might convers
the date of the convers
custom consent and author for access to financi record
thi form author a financi institut to disclos the custom own record to the
examin or other specif list individu it must be sign by the account holder
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3919
evid control log
in the case of signific item of evid it might be advis to prepar an evid control
log a form that document
the evid control center locat
the bank safedeposit box locat
other evid locat
the signatur of person place in or remov evid from repositori
the reason why evid wa move
the file case number
the time and date author individu enter and depart evid repositori
