2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Signed Statements


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Signed Statements 
The verbal confession should be reduced to a short and concise written statement. The 
interviewer should prepare the statement and present it to the confessor for his signature. 
The statement should be prepared before the confessor leaves the interview. There should 
be no attempt to make the statement long, and it should rarely exceed two or three 
handwritten pages. The following points should be covered in every signed statement. 
 
Voluntariness of Confessions 
The general law of confessions requires that they be completely voluntary. This should be set 
forth specifically in the first paragraph with the date of the interview. 
 
Intent 
There is no such thing as an accidental fraud or crime. Both require as part of the elements 
of proof the fact that the confessor knew the conduct was wrong and intended to commit 
the act. This can best be accomplished by using precise language in the statement that clearly 
describes the act (e.g., “I wrongfully took assets from the company that weren’t mine” versus “I 
borrowed money from the company without telling anyone ”). 
 
As a general rule, strong emotive words, such as “lie” and “steal,” should be avoided, as the 
confessor might balk at signing the statement. Still, the wording must be precise. Following 
are suggested wordings: 
  
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.920   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
 EXAMPLE 
 
Instead of  Use  
 
Lie 
 
I knew the statement/action was untrue.  
 
Steal 
 
I wrongfully took the property of _____ for my 
own benefit. 
 
Embezzle 
 
I wrongfully took ____’s property, which had 
been entrusted to me, and used it for my own 
benefit.  
 
Fraud 
 
I knowingly told ____ an untrue statement 
and he/she/they relied on it. 
 
Approximate Dates of Offense 
Unless the exact dates of the offense are known, the word approximately  must precede any 
dates of the offense. If the confessor is unsure about the dates, language to that effect 
should be included. 
 
Approximate Amounts of Losses 
Include the approximate losses, making sure they are labeled as such. It is satisfactory to 
state a range (“probably not less than $____ or more than $____”). 
 
Approximate Number of Instances 
Ranges are also satisfactory for the number of instances. The number is important because it 
helps establish intent by showing a repeated pattern of activity. 
 
Willingness to Cooperate 
It makes it easier for the confessor when he perceives that the statement includes language 
portraying him in a more favorable light. The confessor can convert that natural tendency by 
emphasizing cooperation and willingness to make amends. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“I am willing to cooperate in hel ping undo what I have done. I promise that I will try to repay 
whatever damages I caused by my actions.” 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.921 
Excuse Clause 
The confessor’s moral excuse should be mentioned. The interviewer should ensure the 
excuse clause wording does not diminish legal responsibility. 
 
EXAMPLE 
WRONG: 
“I didn’t mean to do this.” (This implies a lack of intent.) 
 
RIGHT: 
“I wouldn’t have done this if it had not been for pressing financial problems. I didn’t mean to 
hurt anyone.” 
 
Confessor Read the Statement 
The confessor must acknowledge that he read the statement and he should initial all the 
pages of the statement. It might be advisable to insert intentional errors in the statement so 
that the confessor will notice them. The errors are crossed out, the correct information is 
inserted, and the confessor is asked to initial the changes. Whether this step is advisable 
depends on the likelihood that the confessor will attempt to retract the statement or claim it 
was not read. 
 
Truthfulness of Statement 
The written statement should state specifically that it is true. This adds weight to it. 
However, the language should also allow for mistakes. 
 
EXAMPLE 
“This statement is true and complete to the best of my current recollection.” 
 
Key Points in Signed Statements 
There is no legal requirement that a statement must be in the handwriting or wording of the 
declarant. Because the examiner usually knows how to draft a valid statement, to let a 
confessor draft the statement is generally not a good idea. A statement’s wording should be 
precise. 
 
Declarants should read and sign the statement without undue delay. Do not ask the 
confessor to sign the statement; instead, say “Please sign here.” Although there is no legal 
requirement, it is a good idea to have two people witness the signing of a statement. 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.922   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
There should not be more than one written statement for each offense. If facts are inadvertently 
omitted, they can later be added to the original statement as an addendum. For legal 
purposes, prepare separate statements for unrelated offenses. This rule applies because the 
target might be tried more than once—once for each offense. Preserve all notes taken during 
an interview, especially those concerning a confession. Having access to pertinent notes can 
aid in a cross-examination regarding the validity of a signed statement. Stenographic notes, if 
any, also should be preserved. Once a conf ession is obtained, substantiate it through 
additional investigation, if necessary. 
 
 



:


sign statement
the verbal confess should be reduc to a short and concis written statement the
interview should prepar the statement and present it to the confessor for hi signatur
the statement should be prepar befor the confessor leav the interview there should
be no attempt to make the statement long and it should rare exce two or three
handwritten page the follow point should be cover in everi sign statement
voluntari of confess
the gener law of confess requir that thei be complet voluntari thi should be set
forth specif in the first paragraph with the date of the interview
intent
there is no such thing as an accident fraud or crime both requir as part of the element
of proof the fact that the confessor knew the conduct wa wrong and intend to commit
the act thi can best be accomplish by us precis languag in the statement that clearli
describ the act eg i wrongfulli took asset from the compani that werent mine versu i
borrow monei from the compani without tell anyon
as a gener rule strong emot word such as lie and steal should be avoid as the
confessor might balk at sign the statement still the word must be precis follow
ar suggest word
report standard investig
3920 2011 fraud examin manual
exampl
instead of us
lie
i knew the statementact wa untru
steal
i wrongfulli took the properti of for my
own benefit
embezzl
i wrongfulli took s properti which had
been entrust to me and us it for my own
benefit
fraud
i knowingli told an untru statement
and heshethei reli on it
approxim date of offens
unless the exact date of the offens ar known the word approxim must preced ani
date of the offens if the confessor is unsur about the date languag to that effect
should be includ
approxim amount of loss
includ the approxim loss make sure thei ar label as such it is satisfactori to
state a rang probabl not less than or more than
approxim number of instanc
rang ar also satisfactori for the number of instanc the number is import becaus it
help establish intent by show a repeat pattern of activ
willing to cooper
it make it easier for the confessor when he perceiv that the statement includ languag
portrai him in a more favor light the confessor can convert that natur tendenc by
emphas cooper and willing to make amend
exampl
i am will to cooper in hel ping undo what i have done i promis that i will try to repai
whatev damag i caus by my action
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3921
excus claus
the confessor moral excus should be mention the interview should ensur the
excus claus word doe not diminish legal respons
exampl
wrong
i didnt mean to do thi thi impli a lack of intent
right
i wouldnt have done thi if it had not been for press financi problem i didnt mean to
hurt anyon
confessor read the statement
the confessor must acknowledg that he read the statement and he should initi all the
page of the statement it might be advis to insert intent error in the statement so
that the confessor will notic them the error ar cross out the correct inform is
insert and the confessor is ask to initi the chang whether thi step is advis
depend on the likelihood that the confessor will attempt to retract the statement or claim it
wa not read
truth of statement
the written statement should state specif that it is true thi add weight to it
howev the languag should also allow for mistak
exampl
thi statement is true and complet to the best of my current recollect
kei point in sign statement
there is no legal requir that a statement must be in the handwrit or word of the
declar becaus the examin usual know how to draft a valid statement to let a
confessor draft the statement is gener not a good idea a statement word should be
precis
declar should read and sign the statement without undu delai do not ask the
confessor to sign the statement instead sai pleas sign here although there is no legal
requir it is a good idea to have two peopl wit the sign of a statement
report standard investig
3922 2011 fraud examin manual
there should not be more than on written statement for each offens if fact ar inadvert
omit thei can later be ad to the origin statement as an addendum for legal
purpos prepar separ statement for unrel offens thi rule appli becaus the
target might be tri more than onceonc for each offens preserv all note taken dure
an interview especi those concern a confess have access to pertin note can
aid in a crossexamin regard the valid of a sign statement stenograph note if
ani also should be preserv onc a conf ession is obtain substanti it through
addit investig if necessari
