2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/REPORTING STANDARDS/Engagement Contracts


:


Investigation


:


Written Reports


:


Engagement Contracts 
Certified Fraud Examiners are sometimes hired for specific engagements. The examiner 
should always prepare an engagement letter so that he and the client have a clear 
understanding of the objectives of the assignment. If the terms of the engagement are 
defined in a contract, any later dispute becomes easier to resolve. 
 
According to the Code of Professional Ethics, a Certified Fraud Examiner: 
• Will only accept assignments for which there is a reasonable expectation that the work 
will be completed with professional competence. 
• Will obtain evidence or other documentation to establish a reasonable basis for any 
opinion rendered. 
• Will disclose all material matters discovered during the course of an examination that, if 
omitted, could cause a distortion of the facts. 
 
The engagement letter should be written with these standards in mind. The first question 
one must answer in preparing a contract is: Who is one’s client? Has one been engaged by 
the plaintiff, the defendant, or their counsel?  Often the engagement letter will be addressed 
to attorneys. This can be either corporate or outside counsel.  
 
There are two primary forms of engagement letters: the long form and the short form. The 
long form spells out the details of what examination techniques you intend to follow, while 
the short form does not. See the Sample Report in the Appendix to this section for examples 
of each type of engagement contracts. 
 
Elements of the Engagement Contract 
Engagement letters have four basic parts: ope ning, body (long or short), terms, and close. 
In the opening paragraph state the purpose of the engagement. Be specific as to whether the 
letter is an engagement or a proposal letter. The body of the letter will follow either the long 
form or the short form. 
 
Investigation  Reporting Standards 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.927 
The Long Form 
The long form is similar to an engagement letter prepared for specific-scope examinations 
performed by auditors. The examiner describes the procedures in detail and limits the scope 
of an examination to the procedures defined. It is not recommended for use in engagements 
requiring the investigation of fraud allegations and a concluding opinion on the existence  
of fraud. 
 
At the onset, the examiner might not know what procedures will be necessary to resolve the 
allegation. Consequently, it is difficult to describe, with any precision, the anticipated 
procedures before the examination begins. 
 
The Short Form 
The short-form engagement letter outlines the general scope of the engagement. For 
example, it might describe that the services will include an investigation of a fraud allegation 
received over the hotline, by an anonymous tip, or by an audit anomaly. 
 
The short form might also confirm if the examiner has access to any personnel or 
documentation deemed necessary to carry out the assignment. This type of engagement 
letter is best used for work that will ultimately require an opinion on a fraud allegation. 
Because the examiner will not know the nature of the alleged fraud at the onset, it is best to 
not limit the examination’s scope. 
 
Terms 
The terms paragraph includes the fee, either flat rate or hourly, and the method of payment. 
This is an excellent time to ask for a retainer and to describe the billing procedures. Also 
address the issue of out-of-pocket expenses. If travel is required, discuss the anticipated cost 
of travel and the number of trips. 
 
Close 
In the closing section, thank the addressee for the opportunity to work with him. Provide a 
phone number where you can be reached and any special instructions, such as cell phone 
and fax numbers. Ask the addressee to sign one copy, and return it in the envelope. Don’t 
forget to supply a signature plate for the returned letter and a self-addressed stamped 
envelope. 
 
Reporting Standards  Investigation 
3.928   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Opinions 
The Certified Fraud Examiner is often asked for an opinion about the existence of fraud. He 
might be engaged to perform fraud deterrence services or to resolve a fraud allegation.  
 
In the former instance, the opinion will address the strengths and weaknesses of the  
client’s current fraud deterrence system and include recommendations to strengthen that 
system. If specific instances of possible fraudulent conduct are uncovered, those should also 
be addressed. 
 
In the latter situation, the examiner must be attentive to the Certified Fraud Examiner’s 
Code of Professional Ethics, in that: 
 
“no opinion shall be expressed regarding the gu ilt or innocence of any person or party.” 
 
There are three possible outcomes of a fraud examination: evidence was obtained that 
supports the allegation of fraud; evidence was gathered that does not support such an 
allegation; and inconclusive evidence was ga thered. In the first outcome, the opinion will 
vary depending on whether the perpetrator confessed to the alleged crime. In the second 
outcome, the examiner can state that the evidence does not support the fraud charge. The 
examiner is not able to declare that there was no fraud. In the final outcome, the examiner 
can state that the evidence is inconclusive; it neither supports nor refutes the allegation. 
Examples of opinions appear in the Appendix. 
 
 



:


engag contract
certifi fraud examin ar sometim hire for specif engag the examin
should alwai prepar an engag letter so that he and the client have a clear
understand of the object of the assign if the term of the engag ar
defin in a contract ani later disput becom easier to resolv
accord to the code of profession ethic a certifi fraud examin
will onli accept assign for which there is a reason expect that the work
will be complet with profession compet
will obtain evid or other document to establish a reason basi for ani
opinion render
will disclos all materi matter discov dure the cours of an examin that if
omit could caus a distort of the fact
the engag letter should be written with these standard in mind the first question
on must answer in prepar a contract is who is on client ha on been engag by
the plaintiff the defend or their counsel often the engag letter will be address
to attornei thi can be either corpor or outsid counsel
there ar two primari form of engag letter the long form and the short form the
long form spell out the detail of what examin techniqu you intend to follow while
the short form doe not see the sampl report in the appendix to thi section for exampl
of each type of engag contract
element of the engag contract
engag letter have four basic part op ning bodi long or short term and close
in the open paragraph state the purpos of the engag be specif as to whether the
letter is an engag or a propos letter the bodi of the letter will follow either the long
form or the short form
investig report standard
2011 fraud examin manual 3927
the long form
the long form is similar to an engag letter prepar for specificscop examin
perform by auditor the examin describ the procedur in detail and limit the scope
of an examin to the procedur defin it is not recommend for us in engag
requir the investig of fraud alleg and a conclud opinion on the exist
of fraud
at the onset the examin might not know what procedur will be necessari to resolv the
alleg consequ it is difficult to describ with ani precis the anticip
procedur befor the examin begin
the short form
the shortform engag letter outlin the gener scope of the engag for
exampl it might describ that the servic will includ an investig of a fraud alleg
receiv over the hotlin by an anonym tip or by an audit anomali
the short form might also confirm if the examin ha access to ani personnel or
document deem necessari to carri out the assign thi type of engag
letter is best us for work that will ultim requir an opinion on a fraud alleg
becaus the examin will not know the natur of the alleg fraud at the onset it is best to
not limit the examin scope
term
the term paragraph includ the fee either flat rate or hourli and the method of payment
thi is an excel time to ask for a retain and to describ the bill procedur also
address the issu of outofpocket expens if travel is requir discuss the anticip cost
of travel and the number of trip
close
in the close section thank the addresse for the opportun to work with him provid a
phone number where you can be reach and ani special instruct such as cell phone
and fax number ask the addresse to sign on copi and return it in the envelop dont
forget to suppli a signatur plate for the return letter and a selfaddress stamp
envelop
report standard investig
3928 2011 fraud examin manual
opinion
the certifi fraud examin is often ask for an opinion about the exist of fraud he
might be engag to perform fraud deterr servic or to resolv a fraud alleg
in the former instanc the opinion will address the strength and weak of the
client current fraud deterr system and includ recommend to strengthen that
system if specif instanc of possibl fraudul conduct ar uncov those should also
be address
in the latter situat the examin must be attent to the certifi fraud examin
code of profession ethic in that
no opinion shall be express regard the gu ilt or innoc of ani person or parti
there ar three possibl outcom of a fraud examin evid wa obtain that
support the alleg of fraud evid wa gather that doe not support such an
alleg and inconclus evid wa ga there in the first outcom the opinion will
vari depend on whether the perpetr confess to the alleg crime in the second
outcom the examin can state that the evid doe not support the fraud charg the
examin is not abl to declar that there wa no fraud in the final outcom the examin
can state that the evid is inconclus it neither support nor refut the alleg
exampl of opinion appear in the appendix
