2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Fly and Buy


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Fly and Buy 
Some scams involve ventures such as vending machines, pay phones, and merchandise 
display racks. They often gain credibility by setting up a front operation and inviting 
investors for tours. This part of the ruse is known as the “fly and buy.” For example, the 
Securities Division of the State of Washington prosecuted a case on behalf of a woman who 
traveled to Colorado and met with a promoter. The promoter offered to let her in on a deal 
for video pool and video bowling games. Thrilled with the demonstration and her tour 
guide’s promises of quick profits, she paid $13,000 for machines that broke down in less 
than three months. When the woman complained to the promoter about the shoddiness of 
the machines, she was sent two new ones along with a bill. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1717 
Shoddy merchandise is a familiar element of the biz op scam. The scams are tailored for the 
targeted audience. A Maryland ring ran advertisements in Income Plus magazine and other 
investor-oriented publications for a solar-powered car battery recharger. “In seconds, you’re 
off and running,” the ad claimed. The offer stated that distributors were making over 
$200,000 a year with the revolutionary devices. But the machines were worthless. One 
investor took the recharger to an electrician, and was told it could recharge a battery but that 
it would take a few weeks.  
 



:


fly and bui
some scam involv ventur such as vend machin pai phone and merchandis
displai rack thei often gain credibl by set up a front oper and invit
investor for tour thi part of the ruse is known as the fly and bui for exampl the
secur divis of the state of washington prosecut a case on behalf of a woman who
travel to colorado and met with a promot the promot offer to let her in on a deal
for video pool and video bowl game thrill with the demonstr and her tour
guid promis of quick profit she paid 13000 for machin that broke down in less
than three month when the woman complain to the promot about the shoddi of
the machin she wa sent two new on along with a bill
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11717
shoddi merchandis is a familiar element of the biz op scam the scam ar tailor for the
target audienc a maryland ring ran advertis in incom plu magazin and other
investorori public for a solarpow car batteri recharg in second your
off and run the ad claim the offer state that distributor were make over
200000 a year with the revolutionari devic but the machin were worthless on
investor took the recharg to an electrician and wa told it could recharg a batteri but that
it would take a few week
