2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Inventions Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Inventions Schemes 
In order to crack down on operations that offer fraudulent invention promotions, the FTC 
recently launched “Project Mousetrap.” Using ads, these operations solicit inventors to 
submit their product ideas to the promotions firm, which supposedly specializes in bringing 
new products to the market. Inventions are supposedly evaluated and appraised, and nearly 
always endorsed. The firm offers to submit the product to manufacturers for a fee.  
 
The U.S. Federal Trade Commission charged the American Institute for Research and 
Development, Inc. (AIRD) and its predecessor, American Inventors Corporation (AIC), 
with running a deceptive inventions-promotion scheme that bilked consumers nationwide 
out of thousands of dollars each over a 20-year time span. Promoters used print ads, in-
 person, and telephone sales presentations to offer two basic services: (1) a “feasibility 
report,” priced from $250 to $495, to evaluate the patentability and marketability of the 
inventor’s product, and (2) a “representation ag reement” that promised to prepare, file, and 
prosecute a patent application, and to promote the product to industry representatives. The 
representation agreement cost from $5,490 to $11,990. The complaint alleged that the firms 
obtained design patents, which have little or no commercial value, instead of the utility 
patents they promised. Furthermore, people were told that only a select few inventions were 
accepted, when virtually every person who applied was brought into the program. AIRD and 
AIC also encouraged their customers to expect huge financial gains when, the Trade 
Commission charged, “in 20 years of business, perhaps no more than 13 customers have 
realized any financial gain at all” as a result of the companies’ services. 
 
Victims received a useless recommendation for their product and a coding from the U.S. 
Bureau of Standard Industrial Code (SIC). The code generates a list of manufacturers who 
make products similar to the inventors,’ but regulators say the “lists of manufacturers that 
come from classifying your idea with the SIC usually are of limited value.” Some victims 
thought they were securing a patent in their promotions deal, but instead received only a 
Disclosure Document from the U.S. Patent Office, available to the general public for $10. 
The document is not a patent but a statement of “evidence of the date of conception of the 
invention” and does not guarantee rights to any future products. 
 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1719 



:


invent scheme
in order to crack down on oper that offer fraudul invent promot the ftc
recent launch project mousetrap us ad these oper solicit inventor to
submit their product idea to the promot firm which supposedli special in bring
new product to the market invent ar supposedli evalu and apprais and nearli
alwai endors the firm offer to submit the product to manufactur for a fee
the us feder trade commiss charg the american institut for research and
develop inc aird and it predecessor american inventor corpor aic
with run a decept inventionspromot scheme that bilk consum nationwid
out of thousand of dollar each over a 20year time span promot us print ad in
person and telephon sale present to offer two basic servic 1 a feasibl
report price from 250 to 495 to evalu the patent and market of the
inventor product and 2 a represent ag reement that promis to prepar file and
prosecut a patent applic and to promot the product to industri repres the
represent agreement cost from 5490 to 11990 the complaint alleg that the firm
obtain design patent which have littl or no commerci valu instead of the util
patent thei promis furthermor peopl were told that onli a select few invent were
accept when virtual everi person who appli wa brought into the program aird and
aic also encourag their custom to expect huge financi gain when the trade
commiss charg in 20 year of busi perhap no more than 13 custom have
realiz ani financi gain at all as a result of the compani servic
victim receiv a useless recommend for their product and a code from the us
bureau of standard industri code sic the code gener a list of manufactur who
make product similar to the inventor but regul sai the list of manufactur that
come from classifi your idea with the sic usual ar of limit valu some victim
thought thei were secur a patent in their promot deal but instead receiv onli a
disclosur document from the us patent offic avail to the gener public for 10
the document is not a patent but a statement of evid of the date of concept of the
invent and doe not guarante right to ani futur product
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11719
