2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Scholarship Services


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Scholarship Services 
Maybe the most widely broadcast offering in the info racket is the college scholarship locator 
service. Student Aid Inc., a New York city firm, provides an example. SAI guaranteed 
students and their parents that for a $97 fee they would receive at least $1,000 in 
scholarships or grants. “In reality,” government  prosecutors showed, “the defendants almost 
never obtained scholarship money for consumers.” SAI used a common clause in its 
contracts to keep from paying refunds “requiring students [to] produce letters of rejection 
from every scholarship on their search list even though the list included scholarships whose 
deadlines had passed or for which the students did not qualify.”  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1726                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Whatever information scholarship services do provide is available for little or nothing (at 
most, a $5 or $10 fee) from legitimate institutions. The perpetrators imply that they have 
insider connections, or that they actually administer the dispersal of monies, when in reality 
they merely provide lists of scholarships offered by foundations and universities. 
  
In most cases, information scams sell freely available material. There is also a version that 
does offer the information for free but sticks a charge on anyway. The International Call 
scam promises “free information” on travel contests and discount fares. The information 
itself does not cost anything, but the call to get it costs from $3 to $6 a minute for a 15-
 minute call.  
 



:


scholarship servic
mayb the most wide broadcast offer in the info racket is the colleg scholarship locat
servic student aid inc a new york citi firm provid an exampl sai guarante
student and their parent that for a 97 fee thei would receiv at least 1000 in
scholarship or grant in realiti govern prosecutor show the defend almost
never obtain scholarship monei for consum sai us a common claus in it
contract to keep from pai refund requir student to produc letter of reject
from everi scholarship on their search list even though the list includ scholarship whose
deadlin had pass or for which the student did not qualifi
consum fraud financi transact
11726 2011 fraud examin manual
whatev inform scholarship servic do provid is avail for littl or noth at
most a 5 or 10 fee from legitim institut the perpetr impli that thei have
insid connect or that thei actual administ the dispers of moni when in realiti
thei mere provid list of scholarship offer by foundat and univers
in most case inform scam sell freeli avail materi there is also a version that
doe offer the inform for free but stick a charg on anywai the intern call
scam promis free inform on travel contest and discount fare the inform
itself doe not cost anyth but the call to get it cost from 3 to 6 a minut for a 15
minut call
