2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/What’s the Difference Between an Illegal Pyramid and a Ponzi Scheme?


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


What’s the Difference Between an Illegal Pyramid and a Ponzi Scheme? 
 
Illegal pyramids are promoted as pyramids. Ponzi schemes are promoted as investment 
opportunities. 
 
The key element in a Ponzi scheme is that initial investors are paid with subsequent 
investors’ money. There is litle or no legitimate commerce.  
 
The same thing occurs in an illegal pyramid. Nobody’s selling the beeswax supplements; 
they’re all coaxing new people to put up money. The original members of the pyramid get 
rich on subsequent investors’ money. So, a pyramid is a Ponzi scheme.  
 
How about the obverse? Is a Ponzi scheme a pyramid? The distinguishing factor of the 
illegal pyramid is the continual need for new investors. Each new member recruits two 
members, who each recruit two, and so forth.  
 
Ponzi schemes, like pyramids, require a steady march of new investor funds to pay 
dividends. This ever-growing pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graphed. So, in the 
sense that it requires exponential growth to avoid collapse, a Ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme.  
 
The difference between a Ponzi and a pyramid lies in how the operation is promoted.  
 
Illegal pyramids announce themselves as pyramids: they hype levels or stages in their literature. 
The pyramidal structure helps draw new players, each believing that they will rise through 
the ranks of the pyramid to become “golden,” or “fully vested”—whatever hokey titles the 
scammers have concocted. 
 
A Ponzi scheme, on the other hand, masquerades as some type of investment — in financial 
instruments, mineral rights, or some other form of speculation. The participants believe 
they’re buying mortgage-backed securities, or partial interest in an oil well. They have no idea 
they’re funneling money into a bottomless pit.  Certainly no one suggests moving on to the 
next level of the pyramid, because the pyramid isn’t part of the pitch. 
 
When an enterprise—Nu-Skin International, for example — promotes itself as an 
organization with levels or stages, and the only way to rise through the levels is to recruit 
new members, the promoters are running an illegal pyramid scheme. Before Tim and 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1743 
Melinda Rommel sued Nu-Skin, they were true believers, sprinkling Nu-Skin products across 
their bathrooms and kitchens, serving Splash, Nu-Skin’s answer to Tang, for breakfast every 
day, and even redecorating their house at the behest of Nu-Skin consultants, all for the 
purpose of snaring new recruits. The Rommels sued because they were misled about their 
opportunities inside the organization. They knew all along they were joining a pyramid, they 
just thought it was a legal one. 
 
When an enterprise promotes an investment opportunity that invests little or none of the 
participants’ money and that uses new investment dollars to make dividend payments, the 
promoters are running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Distinguishing between Ponzis and pyramids seems a bit academic. But the differences 
become significant when perpetrators are brought to justice. To prosecute an illegal pyramid, 
the enforcement team needs to show that the offenders generated revenue mainly through 
recruitment—the company’s pyramidal structure is an element of the charge. Pyramid 
schemes are sometimes charged as illegal lotteries because, prosecutors have successfully 
argued, the participants are totally dependent on the actions of others for any compensation.  
 
In another prosecution strategy, operators are charged with falsely representing potential 
earnings, since the mathematical limits of the pyramid make the promised $10,000 a month 
impossible or extremely against the odds. Again, the pyramidal structure itself is an issue in 
the case. 
 
In summary: 
 
If operators make the bulk of participants’ earnings dependent on recruiting, and 
emphasize levels and stages in their promotions, we call this an illegal pyramid. 
 
If operators claim they’re offering an investment opportunity, but conduct little or no 
commercial activity, we call this a Ponzi scheme. 
 



:


what the differ between an illeg pyramid and a ponzi scheme
illeg pyramid ar promot as pyramid ponzi scheme ar promot as invest
opportun
the kei element in a ponzi scheme is that initi investor ar paid with subsequ
investor monei there is litl or no legitim commerc
the same thing occur in an illeg pyramid nobodi sell the beeswax supplement
theyr all coax new peopl to put up monei the origin member of the pyramid get
rich on subsequ investor monei so a pyramid is a ponzi scheme
how about the obvers is a ponzi scheme a pyramid the distinguish factor of the
illeg pyramid is the continu need for new investor each new member recruit two
member who each recruit two and so forth
ponzi scheme like pyramid requir a steadi march of new investor fund to pai
dividend thi evergrow pile of loot might look like a pyramid when graph so in the
sens that it requir exponenti growth to avoid collaps a ponzi scheme is a pyramid scheme
the differ between a ponzi and a pyramid li in how the oper is promot
illeg pyramid announc themselv as pyramid thei hype level or stage in their literatur
the pyramid structur help draw new player each believ that thei will rise through
the rank of the pyramid to becom golden or fulli vestedwhatev hokei titl the
scammer have concoct
a ponzi scheme on the other hand masquerad as some type of invest in financi
instrument miner right or some other form of specul the particip believ
theyr bui mortgageback secur or partial interest in an oil well thei have no idea
theyr funnel monei into a bottomless pit certainli no on suggest move on to the
next level of the pyramid becaus the pyramid isnt part of the pitch
when an enterprisenuskin intern for exampl promot itself as an
organ with level or stage and the onli wai to rise through the level is to recruit
new member the promot ar run an illeg pyramid scheme befor tim and
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11743
melinda rommel su nuskin thei were true believ sprinkl nuskin product across
their bathroom and kitchen serv splash nuskin answer to tang for breakfast everi
dai and even redecor their hous at the behest of nuskin consult all for the
purpos of snare new recruit the rommel su becaus thei were misl about their
opportun insid the organ thei knew all along thei were join a pyramid thei
just thought it wa a legal on
when an enterpris promot an invest opportun that invest littl or none of the
particip monei and that us new invest dollar to make dividend payment the
promot ar run a ponzi scheme
distinguish between ponzi and pyramid seem a bit academ but the differ
becom signific when perpetr ar brought to justic to prosecut an illeg pyramid
the enforc team need to show that the offend gener revenu mainli through
recruitmentth compani pyramid structur is an element of the charg pyramid
scheme ar sometim charg as illeg lotteri becaus prosecutor have successfulli
argu the particip ar total depend on the action of other for ani compens
in anoth prosecut strategi oper ar charg with fals repres potenti
earn sinc the mathemat limit of the pyramid make the promis 10000 a month
imposs or extrem against the odd again the pyramid structur itself is an issu in
the case
in summari
if oper make the bulk of particip earn depend on recruit and
emphas level and stage in their promot we call thi an illeg pyramid
if oper claim theyr offer an invest opportun but conduct littl or no
commerci activ we call thi a ponzi scheme
