2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Spotting Pyramid Schemes


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Spotting Pyramid Schemes 
Almost everyone knows what a pyramid scheme is. People see them exposed on television 
and read about them constantly in magazines and newspapers. So, if everyone is so well 
informed about the pyramid, how does it survive? 
 
It could be that familiarity has lulled the public into a false sense of security. Pyramiders have 
several strong weapons at their disposal: 
• They do pay off. Unlike a simple con game in which the fraudster throws the ruse, grabs 
the cash, and exits, pyramiding builds up the take by paying initial investors. This makes 
for excellent testimonials. Early players circulate the word and bring in new marks. Initial 
payoffs also keep early players coming back. Payoffs make the enterprise look legitimate 
and fuel the expansion process. Charles Phillip Elliot ran his investment business 
pyramid-style for 16 years, taking in more than $60 million from 1,100 investors. When 
Elliot was busted, a business associate quipped, “Elliot paid like a slot machine. He lulled 
everyone to sleep.” 2   
• They operate mainly through preexisting affiliations. Community groups, religious 
organizations, and social clubs all make enticing targets for pyramiders. Any pyramid 
requires a healthy pool of participants, so a large group already gathered together is ideal. 
Besides that, pyramiders know how to manipulate the trust that people place in these 
groups.  
                                                          
2 Holzman, Todd. Business Dateline. October 1987. Pages 16ff.  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1749 
• They use ingenuity and false logic in their pitches. The product fronts available for 
pyramiding are myriad, from bath soap to electronics. Fronts in financial instruments 
and real estate are especially effective because most people don’t understand how those 
businesses work anyway. Pure cash games find clever metaphors—like a conceptual 
airplane, or a business executives’ hierarchy — to make themselves attractive.  
 
Pyramiders of every stripe use a seductive, though false, logic in their pitch: “Everybody has 
friends and associates; you only have to sign up three or four people below you.” Of course 
the laws of mathematics spell doom to this logic. There simply aren’t enough players to keep 
even a small pyramid running. Three people, each finding three people, will quickly play out 
their available friends and associates — if not mathematically, then socially. There’s also a 
reasonable limit on how quickly money can grow. 
 
The pyramid, then, is built to overcome people’s most common misgivings about investing. 
Promoters offer far more than an “undertaking of great advantage, nobody to know what it 
is.” They are very specific in their prospectus.  The offer sounds good and (within its own 
logic) makes sense. The “opportunity” is usually pitched by someone familiar to the victim, 
or at least by someone with an affinity the victim trusts. Most importantly, the pyramid does 
return people’s money, with the incredible profits attached as promised.  
 
Speed is another potent weapon in the pyramid arsenal. Cons say, “Get in now, or regret it 
forever.” They don’t have time — because of market demand, or commitments elsewhere —
 for the person to check out the deal. That’s because a moderate amount of due diligence 
research will expose the deal as a scheme.  
 
The final factor is greed. A recent poll quoted in Charles Whitlock’s Easy Money, revealed 
that when people received telephone calls from a bogus investment company, one in twenty 
took the bait. The victims had no prior contact with the salesperson or the company, but 
still, five percent of them bought. But there was a catch. The poll also reported that, 
considering all those stung by a telephone fraud, only two percent of those calling 
themselves trusting, and just two percent of those who called themselves open-minded, had 
been the victims of fraud. Simply put, persons with healthy lives, strong family ties, and an 
honest work ethic are not as likely to get burned as people who are lonely, desperate, and out 
to make a quick buck. Of course, as our examples have shown, the range of people caught in 
pyramid schemes has no bounds. Plenty of victims are experienced, careful professionals 
who have either let down their guard or become ensnared by the cleverest of shams.  
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1750                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


spot pyramid scheme
almost everyon know what a pyramid scheme is peopl see them expos on televis
and read about them constantli in magazin and newspap so if everyon is so well
inform about the pyramid how doe it surviv
it could be that familiar ha lull the public into a fals sens of secur pyramid have
sever strong weapon at their dispos
thei do pai off unlik a simpl con game in which the fraudster throw the ruse grab
the cash and exit pyramid build up the take by pai initi investor thi make
for excel testimoni earli player circul the word and bring in new mark initi
payoff also keep earli player come back payoff make the enterpris look legitim
and fuel the expans process charl phillip elliot ran hi invest busi
pyramidstyl for 16 year take in more than 60 million from 1100 investor when
elliot wa bust a busi associ quip elliot paid like a slot machin he lull
everyon to sleep 2
thei oper mainli through preexist affili commun group religi
organ and social club all make entic target for pyramid ani pyramid
requir a healthi pool of particip so a larg group alreadi gather togeth is ideal
besid that pyramid know how to manipul the trust that peopl place in these
group
2 holzman todd busi datelin octob 1987 page 16ff
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11749
thei us ingenu and fals logic in their pitch the product front avail for
pyramid ar myriad from bath soap to electron front in financi instrument
and real estat ar especi effect becaus most peopl dont understand how those
busi work anywai pure cash game find clever metaphorslik a conceptu
airplan or a busi execut hierarchi to make themselv attract
pyramid of everi stripe us a seduct though fals logic in their pitch everybodi ha
friend and associ you onli have to sign up three or four peopl below you of cours
the law of mathemat spell doom to thi logic there simpli arent enough player to keep
even a small pyramid run three peopl each find three peopl will quickli plai out
their avail friend and associ if not mathemat then social there also a
reason limit on how quickli monei can grow
the pyramid then is built to overcom peopl most common misgiv about invest
promot offer far more than an undertak of great advantag nobodi to know what it
is thei ar veri specif in their prospectu the offer sound good and within it own
logic make sens the opportun is usual pitch by someon familiar to the victim
or at least by someon with an affin the victim trust most importantli the pyramid doe
return peopl monei with the incred profit attach as promis
speed is anoth potent weapon in the pyramid arsen con sai get in now or regret it
forev thei dont have time becaus of market demand or commit elsewher
for the person to check out the deal that becaus a moder amount of due dilig
research will expos the deal as a scheme
the final factor is greed a recent poll quot in charl whitlock easi monei reveal
that when peopl receiv telephon call from a bogu invest compani on in twenti
took the bait the victim had no prior contact with the salesperson or the compani but
still five percent of them bought but there wa a catch the poll also report that
consid all those stung by a telephon fraud onli two percent of those call
themselv trust and just two percent of those who call themselv openmind had
been the victim of fraud simpli put person with healthi live strong famili ti and an
honest work ethic ar not as like to get burn as peopl who ar lone desper and out
to make a quick buck of cours as our exampl have shown the rang of peopl caught in
pyramid scheme ha no bound plenti of victim ar experienc care profession
who have either let down their guard or becom ensnar by the cleverest of sham
consum fraud financi transact
11750 2011 fraud examin manual
