2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Law/THE CIVIL JUSTICE SYSTEM/Civil Litigation/Requests for Admission


:


Law


:


Civil Justice System


:


Requests for Admission  
A request for admission is designed to assist in stipulating certain facts. Admission helps set 
what is and is not at issue in a suit. The request contains statements which are presented to 
the opposing party (witnesses and outside parties are not subject to requests for admission). 
To the declarative, “I, Daisy Miller, have discussed my company’s operations with 
individuals employed by our competition,” Daisy replies either “Admitted” or “Denied.” She 
may also “object to the question” if she feels it is inappropriate or impertinent to the 
proceedings. Alternatively, she can decline to answer since the issue is in dispute (she does 
not deny conversations, just the implication of the question), or because she does not have 
enough information to answer. Requests for admission often are used near the end of the 
discovery process to narrow the focus of the dispute. Any admissions established become 
part of the official record and can be produced during the trial. 
 
Requests for admission also are used to authenticate documents. For instance: 
• Exhibit A is a true and correct copy of check No. 3456. 
• Exhibit A was signed by you. 
• The signature shown on Exhibit A is your signature. 
Law  The Civil Justice System 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    2.607 



:


request for admiss
a request for admiss is design to assist in stipul certain fact admiss help set
what is and is not at issu in a suit the request contain statement which ar present to
the oppos parti wit and outsid parti ar not subject to request for admiss
to the declar i daisi miller have discuss my compani oper with
individu emploi by our competit daisi repli either admit or deni she
mai also object to the question if she feel it is inappropri or impertin to the
proceed altern she can declin to answer sinc the issu is in disput she doe
not deni convers just the implic of the question or becaus she doe not have
enough inform to answer request for admiss often ar us near the end of the
discoveri process to narrow the focu of the disput ani admiss establish becom
part of the offici record and can be produc dure the trial
request for admiss also ar us to authent document for instanc
exhibit a is a true and correct copi of check no 3456
exhibit a wa sign by you
the signatur shown on exhibit a is your signatur
law the civil justic system
2011 fraud examin manual 2607
