2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Direct Methods of Tracing Financial Transactions/Other Exchange Instruments/TRAVELER’S CHECKS


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


TRAVELER’S CHECKS 
Traveler’s checks are checks issued in predetermined amounts by the American Express 
Company and several large U.S. banks. Local banks purchase them from issuing companies 
of U.S. banks and then sell them to the public. Traveler’s checks require two signatures of 
the purchaser: one when purchased and the other when cashed. Traveler’s checks are traced 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.820   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
by their serial number. The issuing company usually keeps records of traveler’s checks sent 
to it by the selling bank. Traveler’s checks do not expire. 
 
The local bank that sold the checks might keep a copy of the sales order that lists the serial 
numbers. If the numbers are not available, the issuing bank might be able to supply the 
information if it is known when the checks were purchased. Canceled checks can be 
obtained from the American Express Company or from other issuing banks. A target can 
purchase large amounts of traveler’s checks from one bank and place them in another to 
avoid arousing suspicion by depositing cash. 
 
It is important to note, however, that traveler’s checks are declining in use. According to the 
Federal Reserve, usage of traveler’s checks has declined each year since their peak in the mid 
1990s.  
 



:


travel check
travel check ar check issu in predetermin amount by the american express
compani and sever larg us bank local bank purchas them from issu compani
of us bank and then sell them to the public travel check requir two signatur of
the purchas on when purchas and the other when cash travel check ar trace
trace illicit transact investig
3820 2011 fraud examin manual
by their serial number the issu compani usual keep record of travel check sent
to it by the sell bank travel check do not expir
the local bank that sold the check might keep a copi of the sale order that list the serial
number if the number ar not avail the issu bank might be abl to suppli the
inform if it is known when the check were purchas cancel check can be
obtain from the american express compani or from other issu bank a target can
purchas larg amount of travel check from on bank and place them in anoth to
avoid arous suspicion by deposit cash
it is import to note howev that travel check ar declin in us accord to the
feder reserv usag of travel check ha declin each year sinc their peak in the mid
1990
