2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Investigation/TRACING ILLICIT TRANSACTIONS/Locating Hidden Assets/Locating Assets Offshore


:


Investigation


:


Illicit Transactions


:


Locating Assets Offshore 
Some targets might try to hide their assets offshore, often in tax havens and secrecy 
jurisdictions. Historically, some of the most popular offshore jurisdictions have been 
Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, the Netherlands Antilles, and Panama. 
 
To locate offshore assets, fraud examiners should take all of the following steps: 
• Review domestic bank account records for wire transfers or other transactions involving 
offshore bank accounts. 
• Determine whether the subject personally traveled overseas. Overseas travel can often be 
documented from U.S. Customs records available through FinCEN. 
• Attempt to locate the subject’s travel agency. 
 
Attempt to identify means employed to move cash offshore by: 
• Use of multiple cashier’s checks 
• Overnight mail envelopes 
• Other methods 
 
Tracing Illicit Transactions  Investigation 
3.850   2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
After funds have been traced offshore, the examiner should look for transfers back to the 
United States. A sophisticated target might use a foreign attorney or bank officer as a trustee 
or front to purchase assets in the United States, or appoint the trustee as manager of a U.S. 
business. 
 
Subjects also might obtain access to their assets offshore by using foreign credit cards. Many 
international institutions now offer MasterCard or Visa accounts, and all account records are 
maintained in the foreign country.  
 
Sophisticated subjects might also obtain foreign passports (in a fictitious name, if requested). 
Some countries offer such passports to people who deposit $25,000 in the state-run financial 
institution. 
 
It may difficult to obtain information on foreign banks, but it is not impossible. D&B 
publishes several guides with information about businesses in Latin America, Europe, and 
other regions of the world. The U.S. Department of Commerce has foreign-country experts 
who can direct you to sources of business information on any country in the world. 
 
Also, with the expansion of the Internet as a means of global communication, information 
on foreign countries and businesses is available through the Internet or through a 
commercial database or online service. 
 
In his book Competitor Intelligence, Leonard Fuld provides a useful chapter on locating 
information on foreign businesses. He suggests the following resources as starting points: 
• Securities brokers with expertise in dealing with foreign businesses 
• The International Trade Commission 
• International trade shows 
• Foreign consulates 
• Foreign chambers of commerce 
• Foreign magazines and directories 
 
Fuld provides a list of consulates, chambers of commerce, magazines, and directories in his 
book. Fuld suggests checking Euromoney 500, which contains profiles of the world’s top 500 
banks, or the Europa World Year Book, which provides basic data on banks around the world. 
 
Investigation  Tracing Illicit Transactions 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual    3.851 
The text of newspapers, such as the New York Times  or the Washington Post, may be searched 
for articles on the foreign bank or the foreign country involved. The texts of these and other 
large newspapers are available through online services such as LexisNexis. 
 
If the subject engages in a mail-order or retail business, a simple way to get information 
about his bank accounts is to send him a check. Ronald L. Mendell, in his book How to Do 
Financial Asset Investigations, suggests buying a small item from the subject by using a check. 
When the canceled check is returned, it will provide the name and possibly the account 
number of the subject’s bank. He suggests that if the subject does not engage in mail-order 
sales, the same goal may be accomplished by sending the subject a small “refund” check. 
 



:


locat asset offshor
some target might try to hide their asset offshor often in tax haven and secreci
jurisdict histor some of the most popular offshor jurisdict have been
switzerland the cayman island the netherland antil and panama
to locat offshor asset fraud examin should take all of the follow step
review domest bank account record for wire transfer or other transact involv
offshor bank account
determin whether the subject person travel oversea oversea travel can often be
document from us custom record avail through fincen
attempt to locat the subject travel agenc
attempt to identifi mean emploi to move cash offshor by
us of multipl cashier check
overnight mail envelop
other method
trace illicit transact investig
3850 2011 fraud examin manual
after fund have been trace offshor the examin should look for transfer back to the
unit state a sophist target might us a foreign attornei or bank offic as a truste
or front to purchas asset in the unit state or appoint the truste as manag of a us
busi
subject also might obtain access to their asset offshor by us foreign credit card mani
intern institut now offer mastercard or visa account and all account record ar
maintain in the foreign countri
sophist subject might also obtain foreign passport in a fictiti name if request
some countri offer such passport to peopl who deposit 25000 in the staterun financi
institut
it mai difficult to obtain inform on foreign bank but it is not imposs db
publish sever guid with inform about busi in latin america europ and
other region of the world the us depart of commerc ha foreigncountri expert
who can direct you to sourc of busi inform on ani countri in the world
also with the expans of the internet as a mean of global commun inform
on foreign countri and busi is avail through the internet or through a
commerci databas or onlin servic
in hi book competitor intellig leonard fuld provid a us chapter on locat
inform on foreign busi he suggest the follow resourc as start point
secur broker with expertis in deal with foreign busi
the intern trade commiss
intern trade show
foreign consul
foreign chamber of commerc
foreign magazin and directori
fuld provid a list of consul chamber of commerc magazin and directori in hi
book fuld suggest check euromonei 500 which contain profil of the world top 500
bank or the europa world year book which provid basic data on bank around the world
investig trace illicit transact
2011 fraud examin manual 3851
the text of newspap such as the new york time or the washington post mai be search
for articl on the foreign bank or the foreign countri involv the text of these and other
larg newspap ar avail through onlin servic such as lexisnexi
if the subject engag in a mailord or retail busi a simpl wai to get inform
about hi bank account is to send him a check ronald l mendel in hi book how to do
financi asset investig suggest bui a small item from the subject by us a check
when the cancel check is return it will provid the name and possibl the account
number of the subject bank he suggest that if the subject doe not engag in mailord
sale the same goal mai be accomplish by send the subject a small refund check
