2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/900 Numbers/800 Numbers/International Calls


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


900 Numbers/800 Numbers/International Calls 
900 numbers are usually associated with psychic hotlines, phone sex lines, and other dubious 
enterprises. Using 900 numbers, customers can “dial a prayer” or even listen to the Easter 
Bunny. Some callers insist they did not know they were being charged for the service. By 
using a toll-free 800 number that then links the caller to the per-minute charges, promoters 
are able to surreptitiously begin charging customers for calls. 800 numbers are often used as 
a front in telemarketing operations to lead consumers to think that a call is free, when in fact 
there are hidden charges everywhere. A particularly vicious combination uses a toll-free 
number to make a presentation about communication services. Once the caller dials in, the 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1725 
computerized service automatically puts a monthly charge, sometimes labeled “voicemail,” 
on the caller’s phone bill.  
  
Many operations familiar to law enforcement as  traditional boiler rooms moved into the toll 
numbers when they became widely available in the 1980s. Victims dial in, thinking they will 
receive information on claiming funds from abandoned bank accounts or inheritances from 
long lost relatives. Credit repair offers and advance-fee loan services use 900 numbers 
extensively. Sweepstakes and prize give-aways are promoted this way, as are employment 
services, real estate education, information on government programs and auctions, and biz 
ops of every kind. The latest ruse uses a 900 number to convince people to invest in the 900 
number business.  
 



:


900 numbers800 numbersintern call
900 number ar usual associ with psychic hotlin phone sex line and other dubiou
enterpris us 900 number custom can dial a prayer or even listen to the easter
bunni some caller insist thei did not know thei were be charg for the servic by
us a tollfre 800 number that then link the caller to the perminut charg promot
ar abl to surreptiti begin charg custom for call 800 number ar often us as
a front in telemarket oper to lead consum to think that a call is free when in fact
there ar hidden charg everywher a particularli viciou combin us a tollfre
number to make a present about commun servic onc the caller dial in the
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11725
computer servic automat put a monthli charg sometim label voicemail
on the caller phone bill
mani oper familiar to law enforc as tradit boiler room move into the toll
number when thei becam wide avail in the 1980 victim dial in think thei will
receiv inform on claim fund from abandon bank account or inherit from
long lost rel credit repair offer and advancefe loan servic us 900 number
extens sweepstak and prize giveawai ar promot thi wai as ar employ
servic real estat educ inform on govern program and auction and biz
op of everi kind the latest ruse us a 900 number to convinc peopl to invest in the 900
number busi
