2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Telemarketing Fraud/Office and Household Supplies


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Office and Household Supplies 
A scam that has recently become prevalent involves copy machine toner. An invoice for 
toner is sent to a company. The cons have usually called beforehand, gotten the name of the 
employee in charge of supplies, and addressed the invoice to that person. Although the 
office never ordered or received any toner, the con men are relying on poor communication 
to cover their ruse. The invoice will most likely be sent to the accounting department and 
paid. If the proper controls are in place at every level of business operations, this scheme 
should be detected. Too many businesses, however, are vulnerable to this kind of scam. 
 
The caller may get the company’s representative to accept a trial or promotional shipping of 
the product. He may claim to be a supplier for the company or a new salesman from a 
regular supplier. The product arrives and an invoice follows a couple of weeks later. If the 
company tries to send the product back, it is returned to them. To avoid further 
complications, the company will normally pay the bill just to put an end to the situation. 
 
Any sort of office supply, from paper to shelving to cleaning products, can be part of a 
scam. Medical supplies shipped to doctor’s offices and clinics are pushed in a similar fashion. 
Individual households can be the target of these ploys, as well. Water purifiers are often used 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1728                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
in tandem with giveaway offers; the victim buys a filtering device, at an inflated cost, in order 
to qualify for the giveaway. Pyramid-style operations often use household products and 
health-related merchandise, such as vitamins or skin cream, as part of their machinations. 
 



:


offic and household suppli
a scam that ha recent becom preval involv copi machin toner an invoic for
toner is sent to a compani the con have usual call beforehand gotten the name of the
employe in charg of suppli and address the invoic to that person although the
offic never order or receiv ani toner the con men ar reli on poor commun
to cover their ruse the invoic will most like be sent to the account depart and
paid if the proper control ar in place at everi level of busi oper thi scheme
should be detect too mani busi howev ar vulner to thi kind of scam
the caller mai get the compani repres to accept a trial or promot ship of
the product he mai claim to be a supplier for the compani or a new salesman from a
regular supplier the product arriv and an invoic follow a coupl of week later if the
compani tri to send the product back it is return to them to avoid further
complic the compani will normal pai the bill just to put an end to the situat
ani sort of offic suppli from paper to shelv to clean product can be part of a
scam medic suppli ship to doctor offic and clinic ar push in a similar fashion
individu household can be the target of these ploi as well water purifi ar often us
consum fraud financi transact
11728 2011 fraud examin manual
in tandem with giveawai offer the victim bui a filter devic at an inflat cost in order
to qualifi for the giveawai pyramidstyl oper often us household product and
healthrel merchandis such as vitamin or skin cream as part of their machin
