2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Madoff and Stanford: Ponzi Rises Again


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Madoff and Stanford: Ponzi Rises Again 
In early 2009, Ponzi schemes became headline news when Bernard “Bernie” Madoff pleaded 
guilty to a $50 billion Ponzi scheme, the largest in U.S. history, and R. Allen Stanford was 
charged with running an $8 billion dollar Ponzi:  
 
 
Bernard “Bernie” Madoff 
 
Introduction 
On December 11, 2008, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents arrested Bernard 
“Bernie” Madoff, a 70-year-old businessman and former chairman of the NASDAQ 
stock market, and charged him on a single count of securities fraud. According to the 
charging document, the arrest came after Madoff told two senior employees — later identified 
as his sons — that his investment advisory business was “basically, a giant Ponzi scheme,” 
estimating that investors lost approximately $50 billion in his fraud. Federal prosecutors, 
however, put the amount at $64.8 billion.  
 
Background 
Before his arrest, Madoff enjoyed a sterling reputation, recognized as a financial 
mastermind. In 1960, Madoff founded his investment company, Bernard L. Madoff 
Investment Securities LLC, with $5,000 he earned from his jobs as a lifeguard and a 
sprinkler installer. The business eventually became one of the five broker/dealers that 
helped create the NASDAQ stock exchange, which Madoff later chaired, and established 
itself as one of the top market maker businesses on Wall Street (the sixth largest in 2008).  
Madoff was also a widely respected philanthropist, devoting his time and wealth to 
numerous charitable causes. He not only established his own multimillion-dollar private 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1732                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
foundation that donated money to educational, cultural, and health charities, he also served 
on the boards of several nonprofit institutions. 
 
Madoff’s Investment Scheme 
Even though it is not clear when Madoff’s investment fraud began (federal investigators 
believe the fraud may have begun in the 1970s while Madoff himself stated that it began in 
the 1990s), it is clear that Madoff’s unusually consistent returns, showing annualized 
returns from eight to twelve percent, were not the result of his investment strategy.    
 
Before his confession, Madoff claimed that he generated the steady returns by employing a 
“split-strike conversion” investment strategy, which is a fairly common approach that 
involves a combination of stocks and options. Under this strategy, an investor attempts to 
generate predicable returns and reduce volatility by holding a portfolio of stocks closely 
correlated to an index while concurrently selling options on a stock index and buying put 
options on the same index. 
 
In reality, however, Madoff did not invest any of his clients’ money. According to Irving 
Picard, the trustee overseeing the liquidation of Madoff’s assets, there was “no evidence to 
indicate securities were purchased for customer accounts.” Instead, Madoff simply deposited 
his clients’ money into his business account, which he then used to pay  clients who requested 
withdrawals. In other words, Madoff was running a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Unfortunately for Madoff, his scheme began to unravel in December 2008, when the 
financial crisis caused an increasing demand of cash withdrawals from his clients. The 
increase in redemptions caused his scheme to collapse when there were not enough funds from 
new investments to pay them off.   
 
How Madoff Made It Happen 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, which collapse in a few years as withdrawals exceed deposits, 
Madoff’s con lasted longer, spread farther, and caused more losses than any similar scheme 
in history. Understandably, the Madoff case raises the question, “How did Madoff fool so 
many people for so long?” Of course, there is  no single answer to explain the success of 
Madoff’s scheme, but there are several factors that contributed to its unusual prosperity, 
including his ability to attract new investors, maintain stability, and avoid detection. These 
are explored in the following sections. 
 
  
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1733 
Attracted New Investors  
Madoff’s ability to attract new investors is one reason for his scheme’s success. For years, 
Madoff’s scheme did not collapse because he successfully raised enough money from new 
investors to keep paying returns. Several factors contributed to Madoff ’s ability to entice 
new investors. Most significantly, reports of solid, long-term, and low-risk returns, 
regardless of the market environment, lured new investors through a false sense of security. 
Unlike most Ponzi schemes, Madoff did not promise extraordinary returns. Instead, he 
promised stability and long-term profits. In other words, Madoff attracted new investors by 
avoiding the appearance of risk.  
 
Similarly, his reputation and professional stature provided comfort to his investors. As a 
major figure in NASDAQ, a pioneering market maker, and a government advisor on 
market issues, Madoff’s résumé was exceptional. Madoff also enjoyed a longstanding 
reputation as a modest and humble individual, a man who put his family first and donated 
much of his time and money to several charitable causes. 
 
Moreover, Madoff lured new investors by promoting secrecy and exploiting the complexities 
inherent to the industry. Madoff emphasized secrecy by keeping his investors and investment 
strategies from the general public, which created a sense of exclusivity and an enigmatic 
enticement in his investment accounts. Additionally, Madoff understood that the complex 
and cryptic nature of the securities industry caused investors to feel that it is a discipline for 
people who are much smarter, and he exploited this by marketing his split-strike conversion 
investment method as “too complicated for outsiders to understand.” These characteristics 
allowed Madoff to shift investors’ fears from the risk of losing money to the risk that they 
might miss out on making money, creating an environment ripe for fraudulent practices. 
 
Maintained Stability  
In addition to attracting new investors, some experts suggest that Madoff successfully 
avoided large, unexpected withdrawals that would lead to the collapse of his scheme by 
targeting wealthy individuals and charities. Since the wealthy feel any economic downturn 
last and least, such investors provided Madoff with the money he needed to keep his scheme 
going. Similarly, Professor Mitchell Zuckoff, author of Ponzi’s Scheme: The True Story of 
a Financial Legend, argues that “[b]y targeting charities, Madoff could avoid the threat of 
sudden or unexpected withdrawals.” Zuckoff says that charitable foundations are legally 
required to spend only five percent of their funds each year and that this low rate of 
withdrawals allowed Madoff’s scheme to avoid detection as long as he attracted new 
investors.  
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1734                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
A voided Detection  
Despite multiple SEC investigations and allegations of fraud beginning as early as 1999, 
Madoff’s investment scheme continued without detection. There are several reasons for this. 
In particular, he constructed his investment business to avoid most regulatory oversight and 
other checks and balances. Although private investment pools, such as hedge funds, are 
subject to limited oversight, Madoff’s firm was a different kind of entity. Unlike private 
investment pools, which use an outside brokerage firm to execute their trades, Madoff’s firm 
was a broker/dealer with an asset-management division, allowing the firm to process all of 
its own trades. Similarly, while most private investment pools typically keep their client 
funds or securities with an external custodian, Madoff’s firm kept its funds in-house. 
Essentially, these practices helped keep his activities hidden from view.  
 
Madoff also avoided the obligation to use a PCAOB-registered auditor by structuring his 
firm as a privately held broker/dealer. This allowed his firm to use an unknown auditing 
firm with only three employees (one of whom was a 78-year-old living in Florida) and no 
other large Wall Street clients.  
 
Equally important is that Madoff avoided filing required disclosures of his firm’s holdings 
with the SEC. Madoff did this by saying that his firm sold all of its holdings for cash at 
the end of every reporting period.  
 
In addition to operating his business on the outskirts of regulation, Madoff avoided 
detection by discouraging the use of prudent investor tools like due diligence, audit 
statements, and understanding of investment strategy. Notably, evidence shows that Madoff 
kicked some investors out of his funds for asking too many questions. Likewise, Madoff 
reportedly shunned questions from investment media about his strategy, and, as noted 
above, Madoff conducted his investment business with great secrecy and even refused to 
provide clients with online access to their accounts.  
 
Red Flags 
With the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flags in Madoff’s investment advisory 
business, and if nothing else, the Madoff saga can provide some simple lessons to help 
identify and prevent similar Ponzi schemes. The most apparent red flags are discussed 
below.  
 
Steady Returns  
The most obvious red flag was that Madoff’s firm generated consistently steady, positive 
returns during his seventeen-year track record, with no down year and very few negative 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1735 
months, regardless of market conditions. And even though Madoff attributed this to his 
split-strike conversion investment strategy, a technique that can generate profits over many 
years, this type of strategy will generate some down months and exhibit more volatility than 
Madoff’s reported returns. In other words, Madoff’s profits were too good to be true. 
 
Extreme Secrecy and Lack of Transparency  
Madoff’s secrecy and lack of transparency in the operations of his business and investment 
process provided yet another red flag. As disc ussed above, reports indicate that Madoff was 
extremely secretive regarding his investment strategy. Specifically, Madoff never clearly 
defined his split-strike conversion strategy, which other traders could not duplicate, and he 
refused to answer questions ab out his investment strategies. In addition, Madoff did not 
provide his clients with a high level of detail  in their monthly statements and refused to 
provide online access to their accounts. 
 
Madoff also kept information from other employees at his firm. According to a senior 
employee, Madoff “kept the financial statements for the firm under lock and key” and was 
“cryptic” about his investment advisory busin ess, which he operated from a separate floor, 
when discussing it with other employees. 
 
Lack of Job Segregation  
The lack of job segregation was another red flag that should have raised concerns about 
Madoff’s operations. Unlike typical hedge funds that use a network of third-party service 
providers to perform certain functions, Madoff’s firm performed these operations internally 
and with no third-party oversight. A hedge fund’s network of third-party service providers 
typically includes an investment manager to manage the assets, a broker (or brokers) to 
manage the trades, a fund administrator, and a custodian/prime broker. These third 
parties provide essential checks and balances necessary to protect individuals and 
institutions. Madoff’s firm, on the other hand, performed these functions internally. Madoff 
not only traded his managed accounts in-house by operating as a broker/dealer, he also 
maintained custody of his clients’ assets, indicating that there was no independent custodian 
to verify the existence of assets.  
 
Small Accounting Firm  
One of the most significant red flags was the firm’s unknown auditor, Friehling & 
Horowitz, a firm that employed  only three people. Clearly, it seems inconceivable that a 
three-person operation could adequately audit a firm of Madoff’s size and complexity. 
Furthermore, the accounting firm had only one active accountant, David Friehling, who 
had not registered with the PCAOB, an independent agency that was created under the 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1736                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Sarbanes-Oxley Act to help detect fraud. Similarly, the firm was not peer reviewed, a 
process in which audit organizations assess each other for internal quality control. 
According to the AICPA, the accounting firm was not required to participate in any peer 
reviews because Friehling informed the group that the firm had not conducted audits for 15 
years.   
 
On March 18, 2009, Friehling became the second person charged in the fraud scandal. 
According to federal prosecutors, Friehling was charged with securities fraud, aiding and 
abetting investment-advisor fraud, and for filing false audit reports to the SEC.   
 
Unusual Fee Structure  
The structure of the firm’s compensation also raised red flags. Unlike most hedge funds, 
which charge management and performance fees, Madoff’s firm earned commissions on each 
trade. This unusual fee structure raised many  questions. Why would the firm not act like a 
hedge fund and profit from big gains? Why would it let third-party distributors get these 
fees? 
 
Tips from More than One Source  
Finally, outside analysts raised critical questions about Madoff’s firm for years. For 
example, in 2001, an article that appeared on the MARHedge website, titled “Madoff 
Tops Charts: Skeptics Ask How,” seriously  questioned Madoff’s ability to deliver 
incredibly consistent returns. A subsequent Barron’s article titled “Don’t Ask, Don’t 
Tell” raised the same concerns, noting that  “some on Wall Street remain skeptical about 
how Madoff achieves such stunning double-digit returns.”  
 
Still, the most notable critique came from independent fraud investigator Harry 
Markopolos, CFE, CFA. In 1999, Markopolos started a campaign to persuade the 
SEC that Madoff’s returns could not be legally generated using the investment strategies 
that he claimed to use. Despite receiving little attention, Markopolos continued to send 
SEC officials information about Madoff, and, in 2005, Markopolos presented the SEC 
with a 17-page memo titled “The world’s largest hedge fund is a fraud.” In the memo, 
Markopolos outlined 29 red flags in Madoff’s business dealings and argued that Madoff 
was either front-running client orders or operating “the world’s largest Ponzi scheme.” This 
time, the SEC responded to Markopolos’s tips and initiated an investigation. 
Unfortunately, the investigation did not uncover any evidence of a Ponzi scheme.  
 
Finally, several financial institutions, including Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Credit 
Suisse Group AG, either refused to do business with Madoff or advised their customers 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1737 
against it. In fact, Goldman Sachs blacklisted Madoff’s firm after it failed to pass their 
standards of due diligence.  
 
Conclusion 
In 2009, Madoff pleaded guilty to eleven felonies, including one count of securities fraud, 
one count of wire fraud, one count of mail fraud, and three counts of money laundering. He 
was sentenced to 150 years in prison. He has also been ordered to forfeit $170 billion 
dollars (the amount prosecutors say flowed through his business). Given the size, scope, and 
complexities involved in the fraud, the process of unraveling Madoff’s web of financial 
dealings could take years, and the full extent of the damage caused by his scheme may never 
be known.  
 
 
Securities and Exchange Commission v. Stanford International Bank, et al. 
R. Allen Stanford, a prominent financier, philanthropist, and sponsor of sports teams, had 
been on the radar of regulators for years thanks to the oddly stable and generous returns 
offered by his firm’s certificates of deposit. But recently, the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), perhaps inspired by Madoff’s alleged $50 billion Ponzi scheme, took 
a renewed interest in Stanford and his operations. On February 27, 2009, the SEC filed 
a complaint alleging that Stanford, three of his companies, and two of his executives carried 
out a “massive Ponzi scheme” for at least a decade, involving billions of dollars of investor 
funds. 
 
The Parties  
Plaintiff  
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
 
Defendants  
Stanford International Bank, Ltd. (SIB) 
Stanford Group Company (SGC)—Investment adviser to SIB 
Stanford Capital Management, LLC ( SCG)—Investment adviser to SIB 
R. Allen Stanford (Stanford)—Chairman, chief executive officer, and sole shareholder of 
the Stanford operations 
James M. Davis (Davis)—Director and chief financial officer of SFG and SIB 
Laura Pendergest-Holt (Pendergest-Holt)—C hief investment officer of SFG and a 
member of SIB’s investment committee 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1738                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
Relief Defendants  
Stanford Financial Group (SFG) 
The Stanford Financial Gr oup Bldg Inc. (SFGB) 
 
The Allegations 
The Securities and Exchange Commission filed a number of allegations against the 
defendants in its First Amended Complaint filed on February 27, 2009 with the U.S. 
District Court for the Northern District of Texas, Dallas Division. These allegations 
include: 
 
• Stanford and Davis misappropriated billions of dollars of investor funds and 
falsified SIB’s financial statements in an effort to conceal their Ponzi scheme. 
• Pendergest-Holt facilitated the scheme by misrepresenting to investors that she 
managed SIB’s multi-billion investment portfolio of assets and employed a sizable 
team of analysts to monitor the portfolio. 
• SIB sold approximately $8 billion of certificates of deposit (CDs) through 
deceiving investors about the security of the CDs and the assets in which the bank 
was investing. 
• Stanford and Davis “invested” an undetermined amount of investor funds in 
speculative, unprofitable private businesses controlled by Stanford. 
• Stanford and Davis fabricated the performance of SIB’s investment portfolio in 
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor funds flowing in; the fabricated 
financial information in no way revealed the true performance of the bank’s 
investment portfolio. 
• SGC and SCM advisers used materially false and misleading historical 
performance data to sell more than $1 billion of a proprietary mutual fund wrap 
program, generating fees for SGC and SCM in excess of $25 million. 
• The Defendants violated or aided and abetted violations of the Securities Act of 
1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Investment Advisors Act of 
1940, and the Investment Company Act of 1940. 
 
The Red Flags 
Despite being such an opaque operation, operating in a minimally regulated jurisdiction, 
and offering suspiciously stable returns on its investments, SIB did an excellent job of 
attracting investors and fielding regulators for quite some time. And whether or not 
Stanford is guilty of running the alleged $8 billion Ponzi scheme remains to be seen. But 
regardless of the outcome of the case, one cannot deny the existence of a number of warning 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1739 
signs indicative of a Ponzi scheme or other investment fraud. The red flags discussed below 
should have had investors and regulators intrigued, if not downright apprehensive. 
 
Impressive, Yet Oddly Stable, Returns  
SIB purported to achieve double-digit returns on its investments for the past 15 years. Not 
only were the returns oddly stable, but they were quite impressive, especially for such a 
“liquid” investment, often more than double the returns offered by big banks. For example, 
the interest rate offered by SIB in February 2009 on a one-year CD (requiring a $50,000 
minimum investment in the United States) was approximately 4.5%, according to the 
bank’s website, while Bankrate.com reported the average interest rate offered by U.S. 
banks to be about 2%. Even more interesting is that despite massive losses in the stock 
market and hedge funds in 2008, SIB claimed to experience a loss of only 1.3% for that 
period and continued to pay out above-average returns.  
 
Opaque Investment Strategy  
There was a stunning lack of transparency into the investment strategy used by SIB. The 
bank claimed to generate its impressive returns by investing the CD money largely in 
corporate stocks, real estate, hedge funds, and precious metals, but offered few specifics, even 
in its annual report. SIB’s strategy is a bit unusual, as most issuers of CDs invest CD 
money in higher-yielding U.S. Treasury bonds or similarly conservative instruments. 
Marketing materials claimed that the bank was able to offer substantially higher returns as 
a result of investing in a “well-diversified portfolio of highly marketable securities issued by 
stable governments, strong multinational companies, and major international banks,” and 
also as a result of Antigua’s low taxes and moderate overhead costs. 
 
Incredibly Small Auditing Firm  
The 14-person Antigua-based accounting firm, C.A.S. Hewlett & Co., seemed grossly 
inadequate to audit the books of a bank that claims to manage and advise $50 billion in 
investor funds — but that’s who Stanford relied upon for his auditing needs. 
 
Inbred Governance Structure  
The independence and objectivity of the bank’s board of directors were questionable given 
that the seven-member board was dominated by Stanford insiders, family, and friends. 
 
Very High Level of Spending  
Although selling CDs is typically a low-margin business, Stanford was able to offer much 
higher than average compensation to brokers, including large bonuses, luxury cars, and 
expensive vacations. Stanford’s empire was also known to spend vast sums of money on its 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1740                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
many offices. Additionally, Stanford’s companies were a big corporate sponsor of 
professional sports teams and charitable causes, and they contributed heavily to political 
campaigns.  
 
Unusual Background of Chief Investment Officer  
The qualifications of Pendergest-Holt, the chief investment officer of SFG and a member of 
SIB’s investment committee, are insufficient to explain her meteoric rise to the top of 
Stanford’s empire. She did not have a business school degree, nor did she have any 
experience as an analyst at a Wall Street firm or large mutual fund company. All of her 
training was received on the job while working for Stanford. 
 
Concerns Voiced by a Number of Former Brokers/Employees  
Over the years, there have been a number of  grievances (including lawsuits and public 
arbitration cases) aired against SFG and SIB by former employees and brokers, including 
claims that the firms were running a Ponzi or pyramid scheme, claims that 
employees/brokers were dismissed for objecting to and raising concerns about the legality of 
the firms’ practices, claims that the firms used  investor money to finance its brokerage arm, 
and claims that the firms misled investors by offering artificially high yields on their CDs.  
 
Revocation of Banking License in Montserrat  
Prior to Stanford International Bank, Stanford operated Guardian International Bank 
(which also issued questionable CDs) in the British territory of Montserrat in the 
Caribbean. But in 1991, after the local government moved to revoke Guardian’s banking 
license under hazy circumstances, Stanford relocated to Antigua and renamed his bank 
Stanford International Bank.  
 
At the time of this writing, the only charges against Stanford and Davis were civil fraud 
charges. Pendergest-Holt, however, had been arrested by federal prosecutors and charged 
with criminal obstruction of justice (to which she pleaded innocent) for giving misleading 
statements to SEC investigators. Perhaps prosecutors hope to secure a quick guilty plea 
from her, so that, with a plea deal in hand, they can use her as a witness against Stanford 
and Davis. Regardless of the outcome of the case, investors should be wary any time they 
come across a yield far higher than average with no clear, plausible, and legal explanation. 
 



:


madoff and stanford ponzi rise again
in earli 2009 ponzi scheme becam headlin new when bernard berni madoff plead
guilti to a 50 billion ponzi scheme the largest in us histori and r allen stanford wa
charg with run an 8 billion dollar ponzi
bernard berni madoff
introduct
on decemb 11 2008 feder bureau of investig agent arrest bernard
berni madoff a 70yearold businessman and former chairman of the nasdaq
stock market and charg him on a singl count of secur fraud accord to the
charg document the arrest came after madoff told two senior employe later identifi
as hi son that hi invest advisori busi wa basic a giant ponzi scheme
estim that investor lost approxim 50 billion in hi fraud feder prosecutor
howev put the amount at 648 billion
background
befor hi arrest madoff enjoi a sterl reput recogn as a financi
mastermind in 1960 madoff found hi invest compani bernard l madoff
invest secur llc with 5000 he earn from hi job as a lifeguard and a
sprinkler instal the busi eventu becam on of the five brokerdeal that
help creat the nasdaq stock exchang which madoff later chair and establish
itself as on of the top market maker busi on wall street the sixth largest in 2008
madoff wa also a wide respect philanthropist devot hi time and wealth to
numer charit caus he not onli establish hi own multimilliondollar privat
consum fraud financi transact
11732 2011 fraud examin manual
foundat that donat monei to educ cultur and health chariti he also serv
on the board of sever nonprofit institut
madoff invest scheme
even though it is not clear when madoff invest fraud began feder investig
believ the fraud mai have begun in the 1970 while madoff himself state that it began in
the 1990 it is clear that madoff unusu consist return show annual
return from eight to twelv percent were not the result of hi invest strategi
befor hi confess madoff claim that he gener the steadi return by emploi a
splitstrik convers invest strategi which is a fairli common approach that
involv a combin of stock and option under thi strategi an investor attempt to
gener predic return and reduc volatil by hold a portfolio of stock close
correl to an index while concurr sell option on a stock index and bui put
option on the same index
in realiti howev madoff did not invest ani of hi client monei accord to irv
picard the truste overse the liquid of madoff asset there wa no evid to
indic secur were purchas for custom account instead madoff simpli deposit
hi client monei into hi busi account which he then us to pai client who request
withdraw in other word madoff wa run a ponzi scheme
unfortun for madoff hi scheme began to unravel in decemb 2008 when the
financi crisi caus an increas demand of cash withdraw from hi client the
increas in redempt caus hi scheme to collaps when there were not enough fund from
new invest to pai them off
how madoff made it happen
unlik most ponzi scheme which collaps in a few year as withdraw exce deposit
madoff con last longer spread farther and caus more loss than ani similar scheme
in histori understand the madoff case rais the question how did madoff fool so
mani peopl for so long of cours there is no singl answer to explain the success of
madoff scheme but there ar sever factor that contribut to it unusu prosper
includ hi abil to attract new investor maintain stabil and avoid detect these
ar explor in the follow section
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11733
attract new investor
madoff abil to attract new investor is on reason for hi scheme success for year
madoff scheme did not collaps becaus he successfulli rais enough monei from new
investor to keep pai return sever factor contribut to madoff s abil to entic
new investor most significantli report of solid longterm and lowrisk return
regardless of the market environ lure new investor through a fals sens of secur
unlik most ponzi scheme madoff did not promis extraordinari return instead he
promis stabil and longterm profit in other word madoff attract new investor by
avoid the appear of risk
similarli hi reput and profession statur provid comfort to hi investor as a
major figur in nasdaq a pioneer market maker and a govern advisor on
market issu madoff rsum wa except madoff also enjoi a longstand
reput as a modest and humbl individu a man who put hi famili first and donat
much of hi time and monei to sever charit caus
moreov madoff lure new investor by promot secreci and exploit the complex
inher to the industri madoff emphas secreci by keep hi investor and invest
strategi from the gener public which creat a sens of exclus and an enigmat
entic in hi invest account addition madoff understood that the complex
and cryptic natur of the secur industri caus investor to feel that it is a disciplin for
peopl who ar much smarter and he exploit thi by market hi splitstrik convers
invest method as too complic for outsid to understand these characterist
allow madoff to shift investor fear from the risk of lose monei to the risk that thei
might miss out on make monei creat an environ ripe for fraudul practic
maintain stabil
in addit to attract new investor some expert suggest that madoff successfulli
avoid larg unexpect withdraw that would lead to the collaps of hi scheme by
target wealthi individu and chariti sinc the wealthi feel ani econom downturn
last and least such investor provid madoff with the monei he need to keep hi scheme
go similarli professor mitchel zuckoff author of ponzi scheme the true stori of
a financi legend argu that by target chariti madoff could avoid the threat of
sudden or unexpect withdraw zuckoff sai that charit foundat ar legal
requir to spend onli five percent of their fund each year and that thi low rate of
withdraw allow madoff scheme to avoid detect as long as he attract new
investor
consum fraud financi transact
11734 2011 fraud examin manual
a void detect
despit multipl sec investig and alleg of fraud begin as earli as 1999
madoff invest scheme continu without detect there ar sever reason for thi
in particular he construct hi invest busi to avoid most regulatori oversight and
other check and balanc although privat invest pool such as hedg fund ar
subject to limit oversight madoff firm wa a differ kind of entiti unlik privat
invest pool which us an outsid brokerag firm to execut their trade madoff firm
wa a brokerdeal with an assetmanag divis allow the firm to process all of
it own trade similarli while most privat invest pool typic keep their client
fund or secur with an extern custodian madoff firm kept it fund inhous
essenti these practic help keep hi activ hidden from view
madoff also avoid the oblig to us a pcaobregist auditor by structur hi
firm as a privat held brokerdeal thi allow hi firm to us an unknown audit
firm with onli three employe on of whom wa a 78yearold live in florida and no
other larg wall street client
equal import is that madoff avoid file requir disclosur of hi firm hold
with the sec madoff did thi by sai that hi firm sold all of it hold for cash at
the end of everi report period
in addit to oper hi busi on the outskirt of regul madoff avoid
detect by discourag the us of prudent investor tool like due dilig audit
statement and understand of invest strategi notabl evid show that madoff
kick some investor out of hi fund for ask too mani question likewis madoff
reportedli shun question from invest media about hi strategi and as note
abov madoff conduct hi invest busi with great secreci and even refus to
provid client with onlin access to their account
red flag
with the benefit of hindsight it is easier to see the red flag in madoff invest advisori
busi and if noth els the madoff saga can provid some simpl lesson to help
identifi and prevent similar ponzi scheme the most appar red flag ar discuss
below
steadi return
the most obviou red flag wa that madoff firm gener consist steadi posit
return dure hi seventeenyear track record with no down year and veri few neg
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11735
month regardless of market condit and even though madoff attribut thi to hi
splitstrik convers invest strategi a techniqu that can gener profit over mani
year thi type of strategi will gener some down month and exhibit more volatil than
madoff report return in other word madoff profit were too good to be true
extrem secreci and lack of transpar
madoff secreci and lack of transpar in the oper of hi busi and invest
process provid yet anoth red flag as disc uss abov report indic that madoff wa
extrem secret regard hi invest strategi specif madoff never clearli
defin hi splitstrik convers strategi which other trader could not duplic and he
refus to answer question ab out hi invest strategi in addit madoff did not
provid hi client with a high level of detail in their monthli statement and refus to
provid onlin access to their account
madoff also kept inform from other employe at hi firm accord to a senior
employe madoff kept the financi statement for the firm under lock and kei and wa
cryptic about hi invest advisori busin ess which he oper from a separ floor
when discuss it with other employe
lack of job segreg
the lack of job segreg wa anoth red flag that should have rais concern about
madoff oper unlik typic hedg fund that us a network of thirdparti servic
provid to perform certain function madoff firm perform these oper intern
and with no thirdparti oversight a hedg fund network of thirdparti servic provid
typic includ an invest manag to manag the asset a broker or broker to
manag the trade a fund administr and a custodianprim broker these third
parti provid essenti check and balanc necessari to protect individu and
institut madoff firm on the other hand perform these function intern madoff
not onli trade hi manag account inhous by oper as a brokerdeal he also
maintain custodi of hi client asset indic that there wa no independ custodian
to verifi the exist of asset
small account firm
on of the most signific red flag wa the firm unknown auditor friehl
horowitz a firm that emploi onli three peopl clearli it seem inconceiv that a
threeperson oper could adequ audit a firm of madoff size and complex
furthermor the account firm had onli on activ account david friehl who
had not regist with the pcaob an independ agenc that wa creat under the
consum fraud financi transact
11736 2011 fraud examin manual
sarbanesoxlei act to help detect fraud similarli the firm wa not peer review a
process in which audit organ assess each other for intern qualiti control
accord to the aicpa the account firm wa not requir to particip in ani peer
review becaus friehl inform the group that the firm had not conduct audit for 15
year
on march 18 2009 friehl becam the second person charg in the fraud scandal
accord to feder prosecutor friehl wa charg with secur fraud aid and
abet investmentadvisor fraud and for file fals audit report to the sec
unusu fee structur
the structur of the firm compens also rais red flag unlik most hedg fund
which charg manag and perform fee madoff firm earn commiss on each
trade thi unusu fee structur rais mani question why would the firm not act like a
hedg fund and profit from big gain why would it let thirdparti distributor get these
fee
tip from more than on sourc
final outsid analyst rais critic question about madoff firm for year for
exampl in 2001 an articl that appear on the marhedg websit titl madoff
top chart skeptic ask how serious question madoff abil to deliv
incred consist return a subsequ barron articl titl dont ask dont
tell rais the same concern note that some on wall street remain skeptic about
how madoff achiev such stun doubledigit return
still the most notabl critiqu came from independ fraud investig harri
markopolo cfe cfa in 1999 markopolo start a campaign to persuad the
sec that madoff return could not be legal gener us the invest strategi
that he claim to us despit receiv littl attent markopolo continu to send
sec offici inform about madoff and in 2005 markopolo present the sec
with a 17page memo titl the world largest hedg fund is a fraud in the memo
markopolo outlin 29 red flag in madoff busi deal and argu that madoff
wa either frontrun client order or oper the world largest ponzi scheme thi
time the sec respond to markopoloss tip and initi an investig
unfortun the investig did not uncov ani evid of a ponzi scheme
final sever financi institut includ goldman sach group inc and credit
suiss group ag either refus to do busi with madoff or advis their custom
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11737
against it in fact goldman sach blacklist madoff firm after it fail to pass their
standard of due dilig
conclus
in 2009 madoff plead guilti to eleven feloni includ on count of secur fraud
on count of wire fraud on count of mail fraud and three count of monei launder he
wa sentenc to 150 year in prison he ha also been order to forfeit 170 billion
dollar the amount prosecutor sai flow through hi busi given the size scope and
complex involv in the fraud the process of unravel madoff web of financi
deal could take year and the full extent of the damag caus by hi scheme mai never
be known
secur and exchang commiss v stanford intern bank et al
r allen stanford a promin financi philanthropist and sponsor of sport team had
been on the radar of regul for year thank to the oddli stabl and gener return
offer by hi firm certif of deposit but recent the secur and exchang
commiss sec perhap inspir by madoff alleg 50 billion ponzi scheme took
a renew interest in stanford and hi oper on februari 27 2009 the sec file
a complaint alleg that stanford three of hi compani and two of hi execut carri
out a massiv ponzi scheme for at least a decad involv billion of dollar of investor
fund
the parti
plaintiff
secur and exchang commiss sec
defend
stanford intern bank ltd sib
stanford group compani sgcinvest advis to sib
stanford capit manag llc scginvest advis to sib
r allen stanford stanfordchairman chief execut offic and sole sharehold of
the stanford oper
jame m davi davisdirector and chief financi offic of sfg and sib
laura pendergestholt pendergestholtc hief invest offic of sfg and a
member of sib invest committe
consum fraud financi transact
11738 2011 fraud examin manual
relief defend
stanford financi group sfg
the stanford financi gr oup bldg inc sfgb
the alleg
the secur and exchang commiss file a number of alleg against the
defend in it first amend complaint file on februari 27 2009 with the us
district court for the northern district of texa dalla divis these alleg
includ
stanford and davi misappropri billion of dollar of investor fund and
falsifi sib financi statement in an effort to conceal their ponzi scheme
pendergestholt facilit the scheme by misrepres to investor that she
manag sib multibillion invest portfolio of asset and emploi a sizabl
team of analyst to monitor the portfolio
sib sold approxim 8 billion of certif of deposit cd through
deceiv investor about the secur of the cd and the asset in which the bank
wa invest
stanford and davi invest an undetermin amount of investor fund in
specul unprofit privat busi control by stanford
stanford and davi fabric the perform of sib invest portfolio in
order to cover up their scheme and to keep investor fund flow in the fabric
financi inform in no wai reveal the true perform of the bank
invest portfolio
sgc and scm advis us materi fals and mislead histor
perform data to sell more than 1 billion of a proprietari mutual fund wrap
program gener fee for sgc and scm in excess of 25 million
the defend violat or aid and abet violat of the secur act of
1933 the secur exchang act of 1934 the invest advisor act of
1940 and the invest compani act of 1940
the red flag
despit be such an opaqu oper oper in a minim regul jurisdict
and offer suspici stabl return on it invest sib did an excel job of
attract investor and field regul for quit some time and whether or not
stanford is guilti of run the alleg 8 billion ponzi scheme remain to be seen but
regardless of the outcom of the case on cannot deni the exist of a number of warn
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11739
sign indic of a ponzi scheme or other invest fraud the red flag discuss below
should have had investor and regul intrigu if not downright apprehens
impress yet oddli stabl return
sib purport to achiev doubledigit return on it invest for the past 15 year not
onli were the return oddli stabl but thei were quit impress especi for such a
liquid invest often more than doubl the return offer by big bank for exampl
the interest rate offer by sib in februari 2009 on a oneyear cd requir a 50000
minimum invest in the unit state wa approxim 45 accord to the
bank websit while bankratecom report the averag interest rate offer by us
bank to be about 2 even more interest is that despit massiv loss in the stock
market and hedg fund in 2008 sib claim to experi a loss of onli 13 for that
period and continu to pai out aboveaverag return
opaqu invest strategi
there wa a stun lack of transpar into the invest strategi us by sib the
bank claim to gener it impress return by invest the cd monei larg in
corpor stock real estat hedg fund and preciou metal but offer few specif even
in it annual report sib strategi is a bit unusu as most issuer of cd invest cd
monei in higheryield us treasuri bond or similarli conserv instrument
market materi claim that the bank wa abl to offer substanti higher return as
a result of invest in a welldiversifi portfolio of highli market secur issu by
stabl govern strong multin compani and major intern bank and
also as a result of antigua low tax and moder overhead cost
incred small audit firm
the 14person antiguabas account firm ca hewlett co seem grossli
inadequ to audit the book of a bank that claim to manag and advis 50 billion in
investor fund but that who stanford reli upon for hi audit need
inbr govern structur
the independ and object of the bank board of director were question given
that the sevenmemb board wa domin by stanford insid famili and friend
veri high level of spend
although sell cd is typic a lowmargin busi stanford wa abl to offer much
higher than averag compens to broker includ larg bonus luxuri car and
expens vacat stanford empir wa also known to spend vast sum of monei on it
consum fraud financi transact
11740 2011 fraud examin manual
mani offic addition stanford compani were a big corpor sponsor of
profession sport team and charit caus and thei contribut heavili to polit
campaign
unusu background of chief invest offic
the qualif of pendergestholt the chief invest offic of sfg and a member of
sib invest committe ar insuffici to explain her meteor rise to the top of
stanford empir she did not have a busi school degre nor did she have ani
experi as an analyst at a wall street firm or larg mutual fund compani all of her
train wa receiv on the job while work for stanford
concern voic by a number of former brokersemploye
over the year there have been a number of grievanc includ lawsuit and public
arbitr case air against sfg and sib by former employe and broker includ
claim that the firm were run a ponzi or pyramid scheme claim that
employeesbrok were dismiss for object to and rais concern about the legal of
the firm practic claim that the firm us investor monei to financ it brokerag arm
and claim that the firm misl investor by offer artifici high yield on their cd
revoc of bank licens in montserrat
prior to stanford intern bank stanford oper guardian intern bank
which also issu question cd in the british territori of montserrat in the
caribbean but in 1991 after the local govern move to revok guardian bank
licens under hazi circumst stanford reloc to antigua and renam hi bank
stanford intern bank
at the time of thi write the onli charg against stanford and davi were civil fraud
charg pendergestholt howev had been arrest by feder prosecutor and charg
with crimin obstruct of justic to which she plead innoc for give mislead
statement to sec investig perhap prosecutor hope to secur a quick guilti plea
from her so that with a plea deal in hand thei can us her as a wit against stanford
and davi regardless of the outcom of the case investor should be wari ani time thei
come across a yield far higher than averag with no clear plausibl and legal explan
