2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Pyramid Schemes, Legal and Illegal


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Pyramid Schemes, Legal and Illegal 
 
Illegal pyramids generate revenue by continually recruiting new members. These operations 
may offer merchandise or services for sale, but the only significant revenues come from 
recruitment. 
 
Some legitimate merchandising companies use a pyramid structure to rank their employee-owners 
and to determine those people’s compensation. But a pyramid structure becomes a 
pyramid scheme when the company makes its money by recruiting people. Instead of selling 
a product or service, the group deals primarily in new memberships. Joining the group allows 
the new member to profit by signing up new members. The process continues until the 
available pool of new members is drained, which happens sooner than one might think.  
 
Usually there’s a product or a cause that fronts the illegal pyramid scheme as a legitimate 
enterprise. Promoters shill beeswax supplements, or claim they’re working to prevent youth 
crime. A favorite product front offers “courses” in areas like “investor education” or “self 
esteem.” These materials usually convey very little pertinent information; in fact, they’re 
nothing more than motivational tracts designed to make the victim a more enthusiastic 
participant in the pyramid.  
 
In any case, regardless of the product front, an illegal pyramid emphasizes recruiting first and 
foremost. The product or service takes a back seat to getting new suckers signed up. 
 
As a rule of thumb most courts apply the 70 Percent Rule. This requires that at least 70 
percent of distributor’s profits come from retail sales. Of course this figure can be hard to 
verify. Distributors routinely sign falsified compliance statements because if they don’t, 
promoters warn, the authorities will shut the whole thing down and everyone loses. 
 
In the final assessment, legality rests on what the operators emphasize. If the company 
emphasizes the recruitment of new members over the sales of products, and if the only way 
to recognize promised riches is through recruitment, then the operation will likely be 
classified as an illegal pyramid. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1742                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  



:


pyramid scheme legal and illeg
illeg pyramid gener revenu by continu recruit new member these oper
mai offer merchandis or servic for sale but the onli signific revenu come from
recruit
some legitim merchandis compani us a pyramid structur to rank their employeeown
and to determin those peopl compens but a pyramid structur becom a
pyramid scheme when the compani make it monei by recruit peopl instead of sell
a product or servic the group deal primarili in new membership join the group allow
the new member to profit by sign up new member the process continu until the
avail pool of new member is drain which happen sooner than on might think
usual there a product or a caus that front the illeg pyramid scheme as a legitim
enterpris promot shill beeswax supplement or claim theyr work to prevent youth
crime a favorit product front offer cours in area like investor educ or self
esteem these materi usual convei veri littl pertin inform in fact theyr
noth more than motiv tract design to make the victim a more enthusiast
particip in the pyramid
in ani case regardless of the product front an illeg pyramid emphas recruit first and
foremost the product or servic take a back seat to get new sucker sign up
as a rule of thumb most court appli the 70 percent rule thi requir that at least 70
percent of distributor profit come from retail sale of cours thi figur can be hard to
verifi distributor routin sign falsifi complianc statement becaus if thei dont
promot warn the author will shut the whole thing down and everyon lose
in the final assess legal rest on what the oper emphas if the compani
emphas the recruit of new member over the sale of product and if the onli wai
to recogn promis rich is through recruit then the oper will like be
classifi as an illeg pyramid
consum fraud financi transact
11742 2011 fraud examin manual
