2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Ponzi and Pyramid Schemes/Product Fronts/MULTILEVEL MARKETING


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


MULTILEVEL MARKETING 
When most people hear about a pyramid scheme, they think multilevel marketing, or MLM 
as it’s often abbreviated. These organizations hawk nutrition supplements, household goods, 
cosmetics, television antennas, insurance, long distance phone service, everything from 
antiques to zinc. Also among the offerings might be copies of How to Make a Million Dollars in 
an MLM. One of the industry’s monster money makers is a string of “training materials” 
designed to pump the sales force into ever higher feats of huckstership.  
 
Math remains the great enemy, as well as the prime tool, of MLMs. Promoters scratch 
matrices (never pyramids) on a chalkboard, and compute what 20 people mailing money to a 
distributor’s house every month would amount to in a year’s time. These shillers ignore 
other aspects of the equation. First, the market for any product outside those owned by large 
national brands is extremely small. Cashing in on a submarket requires an excess of savvy, 
finance, and luck, which most MLM-ers lack in spades. Then there’s pyramidal 
mathematics — after a couple of levels, you ru n out of people willing to hear your spiel 
Financial Transactions  Consumer Fraud 
2011 Fraud Examiners Manual   1.1747 
(which was already less than 5 percent of any area’s population). In fact, between 90 and 95 
percent of MLM operations fail in their first two years (compared to a 70-80 percent failure 
rate for small businesses in general).  
 
As a rule of thumb, any organization that recruits distributors into a pyramid-style 
compensation plan, offers big payoffs for recruiting (say, more than $100 per recruit), and 
spends more time trumpeting its distributor levels than its product lines, is probably illegal.  
 



:


multilevel market
when most peopl hear about a pyramid scheme thei think multilevel market or mlm
as it often abbrevi these organ hawk nutrit supplement household good
cosmet televis antenna insur long distanc phone servic everyth from
antiqu to zinc also among the offer might be copi of how to make a million dollar in
an mlm on of the industri monster monei maker is a string of train materi
design to pump the sale forc into ever higher feat of huckstership
math remain the great enemi as well as the prime tool of mlm promot scratch
matric never pyramid on a chalkboard and comput what 20 peopl mail monei to a
distributor hous everi month would amount to in a year time these shiller ignor
other aspect of the equat first the market for ani product outsid those own by larg
nation brand is extrem small cash in on a submarket requir an excess of savvi
financ and luck which most mlmer lack in spade then there pyramid
mathemat after a coupl of level you ru n out of peopl will to hear your spiel
financi transact consum fraud
2011 fraud examin manual 11747
which wa alreadi less than 5 percent of ani area popul in fact between 90 and 95
percent of mlm oper fail in their first two year compar to a 7080 percent failur
rate for small busi in gener
as a rule of thumb ani organ that recruit distributor into a pyramidstyl
compens plan offer big payoff for recruit sai more than 100 per recruit and
spend more time trumpet it distributor level than it product line is probabl illeg
