2011 Fraud Examiners Manual/Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes/CONSUMER FRAUD/Identity Theft/Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act


:


Financial Transactions and Fraud Schemes


:


Consumer Fraud


:


Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act 
In August 2004, Congress passed the Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act (18, U.S.C., § 
1028A). This Act strengthens federal law on identity theft by creating a crime of “aggravated 
identity theft.” Aggravated identity theft occurs when an individual uses a stolen identity to 
commit other crimes. Specifically, this law provides that where one “knowingly transfers, 
possesses, or uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of another” during and 
in relation to any felony violation of/or relating to fraud, embezzlement, false statements, 
and the like, an additional term of imprisonment of two years will be imposed on the 
individual. In April 2005, the United States Sentencing Commission went an extra step to 
impose consecutive mandatory minimum sentences of two and five years depending on the 
underlying offense of misusing a stolen identification. The guideline became effective 
November 1, 2005. 
 
Consumer Fraud  Financial Transactions   
1.1764                           2011 Fraud Examiners Manual  
See the chapter on “The Law Related to Fraud” in the Legal Section for more information 
about this Act. 
 
EXAMPLE 
A Wisconsin man was sentenced to 21 months imprisonment and three years supervised 
release after pleading guilty to identity theft. The defendant was also ordered to pay 
restitution totaling $62,850. 
 
The perpetrator pled guilty to using another man’s identity to obtain employment with a 
cleaning company, then using that employment to commit a burglary. 
  
Through his job at the cleaning company, the fraudster gained access to the offices of the 
Wisconsin Supreme Court where he took six computer monitors owned by the State of 
Wisconsin. The monitors were recovered almost immediately following the burglary after the 
thief abandoned the vehicle that he was driving.  
 



:


ident theft penalti enhanc act
in august 2004 congress pass the ident theft penalti enhanc act 18 usc
1028a thi act strengthen feder law on ident theft by creat a crime of aggrav
ident theft aggrav ident theft occur when an individu us a stolen ident to
commit other crime specif thi law provid that where on knowingli transfer
possess or us without law author a mean of identif of anoth dure and
in relat to ani feloni violat ofor relat to fraud embezzl fals statement
and the like an addit term of imprison of two year will be impos on the
individu in april 2005 the unit state sentenc commiss went an extra step to
impos consecut mandatori minimum sentenc of two and five year depend on the
underli offens of misus a stolen identif the guidelin becam effect
novemb 1 2005
consum fraud financi transact
11764 2011 fraud examin manual
see the chapter on the law relat to fraud in the legal section for more inform
about thi act
exampl
a wisconsin man wa sentenc to 21 month imprison and three year supervis
releas after plead guilti to ident theft the defend wa also order to pai
restitut total 62850
the perpetr pled guilti to us anoth man ident to obtain employ with a
clean compani then us that employ to commit a burglari
through hi job at the clean compani the fraudster gain access to the offic of the
wisconsin suprem court where he took six comput monitor own by the state of
wisconsin the monitor were recov almost immedi follow the burglari after the
thief abandon the vehicl that he wa drive
